Title       : Development of Research-Oriented Undergraduate Physiology and Neurobiology
               Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9972451

Award Number: 9972451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75187              (Estimated)
Investigator: Corey L. Cleland clelancl@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The teaching of biology has been undergoing a paradigm shift; from rote
              memorization in lecture to collaborative problem solving; from "cook-book"
              laboratories to inquiry-based laboratory experiences. The goal of this grant is
              to develop two upper-level undergraduate Biology courses the University -
              Animal Physiology and Neurobiology - that use concepts and paradigms from
              experimental research to improve student understanding of and ability to solve
              physiological problems, and to enhance student understanding about research.
              Each course will integrate the design and interpretation of experimental
              research into laboratory, lecture and problems sets, making appropriate use of
              both recent technology and traditional approaches. In laboratory the guiding
              principle will be to reproduce all aspects of research with an appropriate
              level of direction, including selection of experimental problem, hypothesis
              formation, experimental design, data collection and analysis, and communication
              of results. The number of laboratories, both human and animal, will be limited
              to three to allow necessary time to explore both the experimental process and
              the scientific content. A feature of the laboratories will be complementary use
              of computer simulations and "hands on" experiments. Students will first use
              computer simulations to test their hypotheses and acquaint themselves with
              underlying physiological content and then conduct similar "hands on"
              experiments, in which their experience with simulations will allow them to
              focus on technical success. In lecture, both the principles and their
              underlying experimental basis will be taught, using computer animation to
              illustrate experimental design and methods. Problem sets will reinforce and
              integrate concepts from lecture and laboratory, using experimental design as a
              setting for collaborative problem solving. These courses may help bridge the
              gap between introductory biology courses lacking in research and problem
              solving, and original independent student research in faculty
              laboratories.




