Title       : Interfacing Optimization and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9972372

Award Number: 9972372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266683             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Ferris ferris@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Modeling languages are heavily used in practice and therefore supply a critical
              vehicle for collaborative research in optimization.  This project will
              faciliate this interaction by broadening the usage of optimization tools and
              environments in application areas.  Due to the increasing demands in the size
              and complexity of applications, it has become vitally important for
              mathematical programmers to develop algorithms and tools within a modeling
              framework in order to advance the state-of-the-art in both applications and
              optimization.  The thrust of the research will be in providing explicit
              examples of optimization technology, within targeted projects, and will address
              computational and tlieoretical aspects of large scale optimization in a
              practical setting.
The new tools, environments, and algorithms of this
              proposal will enable an interactive approach to modeling with direct input from
              application and optimization experts during model development.  The proposal
              will demonstrate such interactions within four application areas, namely the
              architectural design of video on-demand systems, cancer treatment plans in the
              context of tomotherapy, mathematical programming approaches to data mining, and
              the solution of complementarity problems arising in economics.  A pivotal need
              is for visualization of optimization results within the application; a link
              between modeling languages and MATLAB will be provided for this purpose.  An
              additional benefit of this link is the provision of a sophisticated
              mathematical programming capability to the MATLAB programniing environment.
To
              address important issues and facets identified by domain experts, the resulting
              optimization problems are very large and require vast amounts of computing
              resources.  Several new tools to enable the formulation and solution of such
              optimization problems on a metacomputer will be generated, all utilizing a pool
              of pre-existing, "off-the-shelf" workstations via Condor.  A key component of
              the research will derive new algorithms that work within the proposed framework
              and exploit the metacomptiting resources.  These include several new solvers
              for large scale complementarity problems and a fault tolerant parallel mixed
              integer programming solver.
A fundamental goal of this effort is to educate
              researchers in other disciplines, primarily senior level undergraduates and
              graduate students, on the utility, use and power of these tools.  Several of
              the application collaborations detailed in this proposal are direct
              consequences of interactions with colleagues and students during the first
              teaching of a course based on the topics of this project.

