Title       : Investigation of Polarization Effects in Nitride Semiconductors and
               Heterointerfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9972732

Award Number: 9972732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hadis Morkoc hmorkoc@vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison A. Baski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Carlisle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the determination and control of GaN film polarity. Due
              to the lack of native substrates, nitrides are typically grown on foreign
              substrates such as sapphire. This substrate limitation coupled with the polar
              nature of nitride growth leads to two possible surface terminations, Ga or N. A
              mixture of these two terminations leads to the presence of inversion domains,
              which cause polarization effects. These effects arise from two sources:
              spontaneous polarization at heterointerfaces due to the ionic nitride bonds,
              and strain-induced piezoelectric polarization caused by lattice misfit or
              thermal strain. Inversion domains can adversely affect transport properties,
              band alignments, and carrier concentrations in heterojunction devices. In this
              research, fundamental materials science phenomena associated with domain
              structure and film polarization will be investigated for greater understanding
              and control. The approach is to study the influence of substrate surface and
              growth initiation on film polarity, the role of spontaneous polarization and
              layer ordering on band discontinuities, and the effect of piezoelectric
              polarization on electrical and optical properties. The goal is to achieve
              fundamental understanding and thereby be able to produce single-domain films,
              and to grow heterostructures, e.g., quantum wells whose properties depend on
              the relative magnitudes of spontaneous and piezoelectric polarization effects.
              Growth techniques including Molecular Beam Epitaxy with in-situ monitoring and
              Organometallic Vapor Phase Epitaxy will be used. Analysis techniques such as
              in-situ reflection high energy electron diffraction, ex-situ atomic force
              microscopy/scanning tunneling microscopy, high-resolution x-ray diffraction,
              photoemission, and CW/time-resolved luminescence will be employed to
              investigate film morphology, strain, band discontinuities, and emission
              energies.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area
              of materials science having high potential technological relevance. Once a
              fundamental understanding of the polarization fields in heterostructure devices
              is obtained, it will be possible to design structures that more completely
              realize the potential of GaN-based electronic/photonic devices and circuits. An
              important feature of this collaborative, interdisciplinary program is the
              integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area.  
***

