Title       : The Physiological Basis of Polarity Formation in Pelvetia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9972975

Award Number: 9972975
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Robinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              There are aspects of development that cannot be understood solely by the study
              of the temporal progression of differential gene activity and the sequential
              effects of one gene's product on the next gene in a cascade.  The emergence of
              spatial pattern in the embryo must, at some point, arise from the asymmetric
              influence of an external agent.  The polarizing influences may be the
              asymmetrical location of accessory cells in the ovary, such as the nurse cells
              of the insect follicle.  The result of external asymmetries is the non-random
              distribution of proteins and mRNA within the egg so that these molecules may be
              differentially distributed to the daughter cells at first division.  This motif
              is replayed at later stages of development.
	The details of the primary
              polarization events described above are difficult to study. The cells involved
              are often small or inaccessible.  It may not be possible to control the
              external gradients that influence polarity, even it the identity of the
              important agents are known.  The eggs of the brown algae, Fucus and Pelvetia,
              have long been used as a model system for these studies, and recent work has
              led to a remarkable convergence of mechanisms between the algal eggs and other
              developmental systems.  The initially apolar zygotes convert a light gradient
              into a developmental gradient over a period of hours, eventually germinating at
              one locus to express the rhizoid-thallus axis. First cell division is
              perpendicular to this axis with the result that two cells with different fates
              are formed. Recent studies in this laboratory have demonstrated the formation
              of light-induced cytoplasmic Ca2+ gradients that proceed germination by hours,
              with high Ca2+ on the future rhizoidal side.  There is also an obligatory
              increase in cGMP and there is evidence that the photoreceptor may be an
              opsin-like protein.  
	The proposed research aims to exploit the ability to
              detect cytoplasmic Ca2+ gradients to rigorously test the hypothesis that the
              gradient directs the formation of an axis.  For example, does a gradient form
              in the predicted way when the cells are polarized by external gradients other
              than light?  Does the gradient re-form in the expected way when an imposed
              polarity is reversed by reversing the light direction?  Is the source of the
              Ca2+ extracellular or is some released from intracellular stores? 
	Aequorin
              will be used as a Ca2+ sensor to give improved temporal resolution.  The method
              used in the experiments described above has poor temporal resolution. 
              Preliminary results with aequorin indicate that important details of process
              are thus missed.  A new method has been devised to permit the measurement of
              aequorin light with excellent temporal resolution and a degree of spatial
              resolution.
	Self-referencing ion specific electrodes will be used to
              determine the localized net influx and efflux of ions  (especially Ca2+, but
              also H+ and K+) during the polarization process.  The details of how Ca2+
              fluxes change with respect to the formation of a Ca2+ gradient may make it
              possible to distinguish among alternate possibilities of how light leads to
              formation of gradients.
	The hypothesis that the photoreceptor is an
              opsin-like protein will be challenged.  The ability of retinal to restore
              photosensitivity to blinded cells will be tested.  Extracted membrane proteins
              will be screened with a variety of anti-opsin antibodies.  Radioactive retinal
              will be employed in an effort to label the putative opsin.  A Fucus cDNA
              library will be screened with oligonucleotides designed from conserved regions
              of opsins in an effort to demonstrate the existence of an opsin gene via
              PCR.
	

