Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of Reproductive Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9972674

Award Number: 9972674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8121               (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry M. Wilbur hmw3q@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              When studying the evolution of reproductive strategies, or the collection of
              traits that contribute to reproduction, it is necessary to study how correlated
              traits respond to the same selective regime.  In addition, maternal traits
              respond to selection.  This study is designed to measure the adaptive nature of
              reproductive traits in a model oranism, the redbacked salamander Plethodon
              cinereus, with consideration of maternal effects.  Plethodon cinereus exhibits
              the most derived reproductive strategy among amphibians, characterized by small
              clutch sizes, large egg sizes, solitary terrestrial nest sites, and maternal
              care of eggs.  These traits were necessary adaptations for amphibians to become
              the first terrestrial vertebrates.  This study is designed to determine
              correlations between reproductive traits and fitness (number of offspring
              produced) through the use of field studies and experimentation.  Clutch sizes,
              egg sizes, egg-laying dates, and fitness will be recorded in an natural
              population, where maternal effects cannot be measured.  Experiments will also
              be controlling for two important maternal traits, bosy size and nest site.  By
              comparing the interrelationships among reproductive traits and fitness from
              these analyses, the strength and direction of selection acting on these can be
              assessed, and the way in which maternal traits mediate selection can be
              determined.  It is this understanding of the physiological and ecological
              correlates among reproductive traits that will allow predictions of how
              organisms will respond to changes in their environment, which may be caused by
              global warning, habitat degradation, or human distrubance.
