Title       : Model Theory and Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9972613

Award Number: 9972613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61229              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivo Herzog   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972613
Herzog
     Let L be a finite dimensional simple Lie algebra over an
              algebraically
closed field of characteristic zero.  The classification of the
              finite
dimensional simple representations of L is one of the fundamental
              results in
representation theory.  Herzog's project is to extend the
              classification to
the simple pseudo-finite dimensional representations of L --
              a representation
is called pseudo-finite dimensional if in the language of
              L-modules it
satisfies the axioms for a finite dimensional representation. 
              The project
involves describing the topology induced by the Ziegler spectrum
              on the space
of simple pseudo-finite dimensional representations of L.  For
              the Lie
algebra of two-by-two matrices of trace zero, it is a compact Hausdorf
              space
the cardinality of the continuum, of which the finite dimensional
              simple
representations form an open, dense and discrete subspace.
     A
              group is the mathematical concept used to study the structure of
symmetries of
              an object that may occur in physics or the other natural
sciences.  In the
              mathematical theory of representations, the goal is to
study a group G by
              classifying all the objects -- the representations of G
--- of which G is a
              symmetry group.  For many groups, this program has met
with stunning success
              by associating to G a Lie algebra L whose
representations mirror those of G,
              and then classifying the representations.
The objective of L. Herzog's project
              is to study the finite dimensional
representations of certain Lie algebras L,
              using the methods of mathematical
logic.  The project focuses on the infinite
              dimensional representations X of
L that are called pseudo-finite dimensional. 
              These representations are
virtually finite dimensional, in the sense that the
              limited power of
expression of the language being used cannot distinguish X
              from the finite
dimensional representations.  In previous work, Herzog has
              applied the
Compactness Theorem of Goedel to show that there exist uncountably
              many
``simple'' pseudo-finite dimensional representations.  However, a single
              such
representation has yet to be discovered, and part of Herzog's project is
              to
construct a concrete example.
***


