Title       : Robust Nonlinear Control: Feedback Passivation and Input Saturation Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9972045

Award Number: 9972045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117048             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Lin linwei@nonlinear.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972045
Lin

Nonlinear feedback designs offer the potential to take advantage
              of 
genuinely nonlinear effects, for instance, to induce large effects using
              
small controls. The objective of this proposal is to develop
              theoretically-
sound, practically-useful passivity-based low-gain and
              low-and-high gain 
control methods for designing feedback controllers that
              achieve global 
asymptotic stability, performance robustness against modeling
              uncertainty, 
and disturbance attenuation, for a large class of nonlinear
              systems which 
cannot be adequately controlled by existing methods. A unique
              thread in 
our theoretical development would be the systematic use of small
              controls 
and feedback passivation, which focus on ways to exploit the
              inherently 
dominant nonlinearities of the dynamic system in the feedback
              design, 
rather than to design controllers by canceling the nonlinearities via
              
feedback linearization. The purpose of a feedback control is to stabilize or
              
regulate the system globally and do so in a robust fashion, that is, in a
              
manner that is not sensitive to various perturbations and structural
              
uncertainties in the system. A unified, passivity-based theory of robust
              
nonlinear control would contribute to our ability to design high
              
performance nonlinear controllers capable of attenuating disturbances and
              
tracking desired trajectories, without relying as much on an accurate
              
description of the system model or model parameters and on explicit
              
descriptions of the disturbance signals as does conventional modern 
control
              theory.

Many dynamic systems of practical importance (e.g. robotics,
              electrically 
stimulated muscles, rotating machines, induction motors, power
              systems, 
aerospace vehicles, aircraft, missiles and so on) have essentially
              inherent 
nonlinear characteristics that cannot be ignored in feedback design.
              More 
importantly, control systems that exploit their genuine nonlinearities
              are 
likely to achieve better performance than those that do not.  Because
              most 
engineering systems involve highly nonlinear actuators, sensors and
              
process elements, a goal of active research is to transform a nonlinear
              
system into a linear system for which well-defined linear control
              
techniques are readily applicable. This approach has serious limitations,
              
e.g. the requirement of high energy actuators and the lack of robustness of
              
such schemes to parameter variations and disturbances. Consequently, 
these
              techniques have had relatively little successful in solving real-world
              
problems.  The research plan in this proposal addresses the needs called
              
for in feedback design, and it proposes approaches to tackle some of the
              
most important issues that we believe are critical to the advancement and
              
application of nonlinear control theory. The main outcome of the proposed
              
research will be new, systematic design methodologies for the control of
              
nonlinear dynamic systems, which are not available in the existing
              
literature. The significance of this proposal is that it identifies the main
              
barriers that hamper the advance and application of nonlinear control
              
theory, but also delineates concrete problems for the control of inherently
              
nonlinear systems, and suggests theoretically innovative and practically
              
feasible methods to resolve them. A number of important and challenging
              
open problems will be solved. In the long term, it will provide insight and
              
thrust for future investigations into several theoretical and practical
              issues. 
It is believed that the benefits to a systematic approach towards
              using low 
energy control will be becoming more widely appreciated,
              particularly in 
industries (e.g. manufacturing, aerospace, power and
              biomedical 
engineering) where many applications of nonlinear control with
              actuator 
saturation can be found. It is also expected that the nonlinear
              control 
schemes to be developed in this program will find much broader
              
applications in other branches of engineering than traditional control
              
theory, due to their significant features and the inclusion of realistic
              
assumptions.

