Title       : Fully Convex and Nonlinear Control Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9972241

Award Number: 9972241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Wolenski wolenski@math.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972241
Wolenski

The linear-quadratic model in control theory is the
              originator of many of 
the powerful methods in engineering design, and it is
              still widely used in 
many other disciplines as well.  This is mainly because
              a solution to the 
problem can be produced in a relatively easy way in a
              highly desirable 
form.  Two major drawbacks are that (1) not all systems can
              be adequately 
approximated by linear-quadratic models and (2) the state space
              must be 
relatively small for efficient implementation of the results.  The
              fully 
convex model featured in this proposal significantly broadens the
              
applicable scope of the linear-quadratic paradigm while still maintaining
              
many of its attractive features.  In particular, the fully convex problem
              
permits hard constraints on the control variables, a situation often present
              
in applications but not accounted for in the traditional framework, and thus
              
will partly appease the drawback (1).  The proposal seeks to unite modern
              
trends in Hamilton-Jacobi theory with the fully convex control model both
              
theoretically and computationally.  To alleviate (2), the proposal seeks to
              
develop efficient algorithms based on the rich convex duality structure.  A
              
secondary objective involves a detailed analysis on aspects of asymptotic
              
stability of nonlinear systems, in particular the construction and use of
              
Lyapunov functions.

Optimal control theory is a mathematical discipline
              with far reaching 
applications throughout science, engineering, economics,
              and industry.  
The existing theory is constantly being challenged by these
              applications, 
which subsequently provides motivation for the development of
              more 
sophisticated mathematical tools.  This proposal aims at making
              
theoretical and computational progress in a mathematical model that is
              
widely used in applications but which has by no means reached its full
              
potential.  The applicability of the proposed goals would be an increase in
              
the efficiency and a broadening of the scope of an important standard
              
modeling tool.

