Title       : Disorder and Correlations in Novel Low Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9972151

Award Number: 9972151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip W. Adams adams@rouge.phys.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972151
Adams

The project investigates the electronic properties of
              ultra-thin, low atomic mass, metal films and wires.  This work is of interest
              to a widespread condensed matter community studying the roles of disorder,
              correlations, and dimensionality in quantum transport phenomena.  The project
              is focused on two areas. The first is parallel magnetic field studies of thin
              film superconductors where coupling of the magnetic field to the electronic
              spins drives the system into the normal state via a first-order phase
              transition.  Associated with this transition are some novel and as of yet
              poorly understood non-equilibrium behavior such as avalanches, state memory and
              reentrance.  The goal of this part of the project is to more fully investigate
              the roles of disorder and dimensionality on the non-equilibrium behavior and to
              look for possible applications of the state memory effect.  The second area of
              study involves magneto-transport and density of states measurements of very
              high resistance metal films.  The ultimate goal is to make the first
              measurements of the Coulomb gap (Efros-Shklovskii gap) in a 2D system and then
              correlate the gap behavior with the observed magneto-transport behavior in the
              insulating phase.  Ultra-thin, homogeneously disordered Be films will be used
              for these studies.  These projects afford excellent opportunities for training
              of undergraduate students, graduate students, and post-docs.  This research, in
              fact, bridges a gap between esoteric quantum physics and more technologically
              oriented material science.
%%%
This research project investigates the
              electronic properties of ultra-thin, low atomic mass, metal films and wires in
              extreme environments.  Since the project involves both the fabrication of
              samples and measurements on those samples, it offers unusually broad
              educational and research opportunities for students and post-docs. Two projects
              will be pursued: One involves the behavior of thin film superconductivity in
              very high parallel (to the film surface) magnetic fields. This transition is
              fundamentally quantum in nature and displays unusual quasi-static
              non-equilibrium behavior such as avalanches and memory effects.  The
              microscopic origin of these effects is still not understood but is expected to
              impact the general field of quantum phase transitions. The other concerns the
              role of electron-electron interactions in the electron transport properties of
              very high resistance Be films. It is believed that the non-granular character
              of the Be films will allow progress to be made on this very important problem
              that is now known to be relevant to a wide variety of condensed matter
              problems.
***



