Title       : Electron Diffraction Methods for Systems Involving Very Large Unit Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a9972958

Award Number: 9972958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dilano K. Saldin dksaldin@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S.Y. Tong  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972958
Tong
This grant supports theoretical research which pursues a
              quantitative understanding of the structure of surfaces and interfaces, a field
              of research which is fundamental to the understanding of a host of important
              scientific questions in materials research.  The research will use multiple
              scattering theories to analyze data from surface spectroscopies sensitive to
              the short-range or long-range order of materials.

An important research
              thrust is to use a new N2-scaling iterative multiple scattering theory,
              developed in the last grant period, to analyze photoelectron diffraction (PD)
              and low-energy electron diffraction (LEED) data.  The new method is orders of
              magnitude faster than existing "exact" methods, but just as accurate.  By being
              able to include up to 700 atoms/unit-cell in a supercell slab calculation - the
              current limit with exact methods is approximately 50 atoms/unit-cell - the new
              method can address quantitatively a host of interesting problems relating to
              layer growth and epitaxy, or commensurate-incommensurate transitions, etc. 
              

A second area of focus is the development of direct methods for structural
              determination.  An important goal of surface structural analysis is to be able
              to invert electron diffraction data to directly produce atomic coordinates in
              real space.  This goal has eluded solution for over 40 years.  The PI and
              others have demonstrated that inversion of measured electron diffraction
              spectra can produce direct atomic positions in the surface region.  In close
              collaboration with experimental groups, the holographic inversion method will
              be applied to solve structures of unknown surfaces and interfaces.     
              

Finally, a third focus of this research is to develop a multiple scattering
              theory to accurately analyze reflection high energy electron diffraction
              (RHEED) intensity oscillations and rocking curves.  RHEED is the technique of
              choice in most MBE chambers to study growth modes and transitional or
              high-temperature structures.  At energies of 10 KeV or above, the methods
              developed for LEED or PD are no longer practical.  A multiple scattering theory
              of RHEED will be developed capable of handling unit cells containing 100 atoms
              or more.  With this new method, simulations of large terrace-sized RHEED
              intensity oscillations will be undertaken and compared to RHEED measurements
              and observations of island sizes by in situ STM.  The aim is to establish
              optimal scattering conditions for the quantitative usage of RHEED oscillations
              as an indicator of layer completion.
%%%
This grant supports theoretical
              research which pursues a quantitative understanding of the structure of
              surfaces and interfaces, a field of research which is fundamental to the
              understanding of a host of important scientific questions in materials
              research.  The research will use multiple scattering theories to analyze data
              from surface spectroscopies sensitive to the short-range or long-range order of
              materials.  These newly developed techniques will then be applied to a number
              of important problems involving the physics of surface structure and its growth
              and evolution.
***

