Title       : IGMS: Research and Studies in Digital Signal and Image Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9972866

Award Number: 9972866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prem K. Goel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Gold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigator, a Professor of Statistics, will engage in an
              intensive study program in the areas of digital signal and image processing and
              automatic object recognition in remotely sensed images.  Some of the key
              mathematical tools in these areas, namely, Bayesian hierarchical analysis,
              spatial modeling, statistical pattern recognition, and information theory, are
              within the realm of the PI's expertise.  However, a 
productive
              interdisciplinary research collaboration between any two disciplines requires
              each researcher to have a basic knowledge of the other area. This grant will
              allow the PI to attend courses and symposia to
better understand signal
              measurement processes (radar systems, GPS systems and other remote-sensing
              technologies), and to learn technical terminology in these areas. The PI will
              conduct regular discussions with faculty in the Information Processing Systems
              (IPS) Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, in order to develop a
              long-term interdisciplinary research agenda for Automatic Target Recognition
              technologies. The PI will also interact regularly with researchers at the Ohio
              State University's Center for Mapping (CFM) in order to develop an
              understanding of technical issues in automatic interpretation of geographic
              images. This IGMS grant is expected to prepare the PI to be a highly effective
              interdisciplinary
researcher in these areas, all of which are critical inputs
              to future high tech developments. The PI considers the long-term involvement
              with Engineering faculty as an opportunity to identify problems related
              to
probability/statistics education for undergraduate and graduate students in
              engineering, and vice-versa. He plans to work with the IPS faculty to develop
              relevant courses in order to facilitate interdisciplinary research between
              future researchers in these two disciplines.  This IGMS project is jointly
              supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the
              Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
