Title       : Adaptive Wavelet Element Methods for Highly Parallel Computations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9972251

Award Number: 9972251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322146             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Cai wcai@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Adaptive Wavelet element method is a new mathematical method which is
              fundamentally more appropriate for highly parallel computing than existing
              methods.  This project studies scalable parallel algorithms and simulations
              based on adaptive wavelet methods for the investigation of combustion flow
              problems.  The project isa driven by the need for large scale simulation
              capability required by the intrinsic physical property of industrial
              applications.

The focus of this research is on parallel wavelet simulation
              of combustion flow problems, which includes the associated
              algorithmic/mathematical development and software implementation.  A new method
              - the Wavelet Element Method - is introduced based on wavelet and domain
              decomposition methods.  The new method extends the applicability of wavelet
              methods to combustion problems and other viscous flow problems in more complex
              geometries and provides a coarse grain parallelism based on domain
              decomposition.  It is efficient, stable, highly accurate, and highly parallel,
              and it has good data locality.  Wavelets support localization in both space and
              frequency domain which makes adaptive grid generation possible.  Wavelet
              coefficients uniquely indicate the workload variation across subdomains, and
              parallelism in the wavelet element method comes from two levels - the level of
              domain decomposition and the level of parallel solution of Spline Wavelet ADI
              in each subdomain.

Four main tasks will be performed: 1) Develop a two level
              parallelized wavelet element method, which combines the domain decomposition
              and wavelet ADI methods, to maximize parallelism, locality, and scalability. 2)
              Investigate interface conditions among elements (subdomains) in the context of
              wavelet element and investigate their effects on solution accuracy, workload
              balance, and communication cost. 3) Study dynamic workload balance based on
              wavelet coefficients on both domain decomposition level and on ADI wavelet
              solution in each subdomain. 4) Test the scalable parallel adaptive wavelet
              element methods on the Deflagration to Detonation Transition Problems for
              multidimensional premixed flames.


