Title       : Evolution of Obliquely Interacting Wavetrains in Deep Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a9972210

Award Number: 9972210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane M. Henderson DMH@MATH.PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Hammack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972210

The investigators conduct analytical, numerical, and experimental
              studies of three-dimensional water waves.  They construct a state-of-the-art,
              precisely controlled, experimental facility that will enable the generation of
              nonlinear, three-dimensional wavefields and the direct measurement of their
              surface patterns.  The goal is to use experiments to test and guide development
              of theoretical models and thereby obtain a unified experimental, theoretical,
              and numerical understanding of the evolution of nonlinear, three-dimensional
              surface waves over deep water.  In particular they study (1) the dynamics of
              two obliquely interacting Stokes wavetrains, and (2) the dynamics of many
              obliquely interacting Stokes wavetrains that form resonantly interacting
              quartets.

The investigators are building a precision facility in which to
              generate three-dimensional water waves with any desired shape, speed and
              complexity.  One reason for these experiments is that an understanding of the
              fundamental physics of such waves greatly enhances the ability to model ocean
              waves.  Models of ocean waves are necessary for a variety of applications,
              including shipping, construction, and defense.  Models presently in use rest
              upon some mathematical assumptions that have never been tested and are possibly
              incorrect.  The experiments of this project are designed to test these
              assumptions.  A second reason for these experiments is that water waves are a
              physical application of the solutions to a special class of partial
              differential equations.  These equations arise in many fields: oceanography,
              meteorology, plasma physics, and optics.  Water waves provide a manageable
              experiment in which to study the application of the mathematics and to test the
              underlying assumptions and regimes of validity.  If these equations model well
              the water wave experiments, then investigators in many fields have more
              confidence in applying them to other fields and in developing more such models.
               The project is supported by the Applied Mathematics and Computational
              Mathematics programs in the Division of Mathematical Sciences and by the
              Physical Oceanography program in the Division of Ocean Sciences.

