Title       : An Inquiry-Based Simulation Learning Environment for the Ecology of Forest
               Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9972486

Award Number: 9972486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240406             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Murray tmurray@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil A. Stillings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence J. Winship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer-based simulations of natural phenomena are particularly effective
              educational tools, especially when integrated into field and laboratory-based
              experiences. The investigators propose to build and evaluate educational
              software that simulates tree and forest growth and the effects of natural and
              human-created environmental disturbances on forest growth. We hope to further
              advance inquiry-based science teaching practices throughout Western
              Massachusetts. An inquiry-based educational philosophy is already deeply
              embedded into the academic structure, as well as in the faculty's teaching
              methods. To this institutional foundation we add collaboration with the
              NSF-funded Five-College PALMS and STEMTEC programs. These programs have built
              relationships between researchers, teacher education programs, and practicing
              teachers at local K-12 schools, and will allow us to have significant impact in
              local undergraduate as well as high school education. An innovative
              contribution in the area of evaluation will be to combine evaluation
              methodology and teacher education.

Pre-service and in-service science
              teachers will carry out some of the classroom-based testing. The student
              teachers will serve as vectors for introducing both the simulation technology
              and the inquiry-based teaching methods into existing classrooms. The results of
              the research, including software, student and teacher support materials, and
              evaluation results, will be distributed via a dedicated web site. One of the
              contributions of this work will be in developing an approach to representing
              simulation formulas that is applicable to educational simulations in any
              subject area. While most educational simulations are 'black boxes' that do not
              allow students to inspect or manipulate the underlying formulas, our software
              will include a Formula Inspector that will allow students to more deeply
              address four types of inquiry questions: 'what if,' 'relationship,' 'why,' and
              'modeling.' DUE themes addressed: teacher preparation, integration of
              technology with education, faculty development.


