Title       : A Mathematical Control Theory for the Partial Differential Equations of
               Thermal/Structure and Structural Acoustic Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9972349

Award Number: 9972349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80946              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Avalos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972349
Avalos

This project entails the mathematical analysis of control
              problems for 
those systems of coupled partial differential equations (PDE's)
              known to 
govern structural acoustic and thermal/structure interactions. In
              the first 
part of our work, we will study the coupled hyperbolic and
              parabolic--like 
PDE's which model structural acoustic systems under the
              action of 
unbounded pointwise observation and control, with a focus here upon
              
issues of optimization and exact boundary controllability. In a particular
              
structural acoustic, control design application, pointwise boundary control
              
is implemented for the purpose of attenuating external noise in an acoustic
              
chamber. Moreover, the efficacy of the point boundary control is 
measured
              by point observations of the acoustic pressure. Accordingly, the 
governing
              PDE model involves highly unbounded control and observation 
operators. Before
              one can consider the optimal control of the controlled 
and observed
              structural acoustic PDE, wellposedness of the dynamics 
under the influence of
              these point observations and control must first be 
established. This effort
              to establish regularity will require new techniques 
of pseudodifferential
              analysis to establish microlocal PDE estimates that 
cannot be obtained
              globally. Moreover, before optimization of the PDE 
system can proceed, there
              must be an identification and characterization of 
a state space which allows
              pointwise observations of the acoustic pressure. 
This effort to properly
              characterize the state space will also have a heavy 
microlocal component.
              Subsequently, we will consider various quadratic 
optimization schemes for the
              structural acoustic PDE's under such point 
control and observation, with a
              view toward developing a characterizing 
Riccati Equation and finite element
              approximation of the optimal control 
laws. The second phase of the project
              involves a continuation of our 
previous studies on controllability and
              stability properties of a now 
classical system of thermoelasticity. In
              particular, we attempt to extend a 
recent result of exact--approximate
              controllability to the case where the 
coefficient of thermal volume expansion
              is allowed to vary with the 
properties of the plate material. In addition, we
              will study the longstanding 
problem of null controllability for the linear
              system of thermoelasticity. 
Both these controllability investigations will
              employ novel Carleman and 
pseudodifferential multipliers and techniques, as
              opposed to standard 
differential multiplier methods. Nonlinear stabilization
              problems for 
systems of thermoelasticity in the absence of rotational
              inertial will also be 
considered.

The motivation for this project is drawn
              from the fact that the classes of 
coupled PDE's to be considered frequently
              arise in the development and 
application of smart materials technology.
              Loosely speaking, a "smart" 
material or structure is that which has a
              miniaturized control system 
embedded within one or more of its components, so
              as to induce a desired 
result or physical state. For instance, this control
              system might function in 
such a way so as to negate unwanted external
              influences, or to assist the 
material in attaining an optimal shape (optimal
              with respect to some 
predetermined design specification). Examples of such
              smart materials---
these comprising both sensor and actuator---may be found in
              structural, 
structural acoustic, thermal/structure and fluid/structure
              interaction 
systems. The mathematical modeling of these composite structures
              will 
often culminate in the appearance of the aforementioned coupled systems
              
of PDE's. Moreover, inasmuch as the various components of the control
              
mechanism are typically affixed to the structure's boundary, or embedded
              
within its medium, and/or in collocation at specified points of the
              
structure, the associated system of PDE's which describes the particular
              
interaction will have a control input term present therein. The principal
              
intent of this project then is to obtain a better understanding and foresight
              
concerning the effect of active control on composite materials by 
analyzing
              the behavior of their corresponding governing equations. In 
addition, by
              performing rigorous numerical simulations on these PDE 
models, it is our
              intent to generate approximate control laws that can be 
implemented for
              "real--time" engineering control design.

