Title       : Biomolecular Materials: Structure, Phase Behavior and Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2001     
File        : a9972246

Award Number: 9972246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cyrus R. Safinya safinya@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip A. Pincus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972246
Safinya

This project investigates the properties of biomolecular
              materials consisting of biological polymers (e.g. DNA; components of the cell
              cytoskeleton which consists of the filamental proteins: microtubules,
              intermediate filaments, and filamental-actin) condensed with oppositely charged
              chemical species such as multivalent counter-ions.  These materials are useful
              models for statistical theories of polyelectrolytes. For example, the studies
              should shed light on the nature of the molecular forces in the condensation of
              DNA in vivo (i.e. the DNA packing problem). The project provides excellent
              training for graduate students within a diverse, interdisciplinary program
              enabling them to acquire skills that are currently in great demand in Industry,
              National Laboratories, and Universities. Advanced miniaturized materials will
              be produced from biological molecules self-assembled on patterned surfaces. The
              biological-semiconductor hybrid materials should be utilized in the next
              century in pharmaceutical, biomedical, and semiconductor industries emphasizing
              miniaturized materials (e.g. nano-conduits and nano-wires).
%%%
This project
              offers excellent research and education opportunities for graduate students
              within a diverse, interdisciplinary program, focused on biomolecular materials,
              in particulal biological materials that self-assembled on patterned surfaces.
              Potential uses of these processed materials include chemical and biological
              sensors, micro-machine elements, and molecular sieves. The graduate students
              will acquire skills that are currently in great demand in a broad range of
              industries including those which combine nanometer scale fabrication systems
              with biomolecular materials in chemicals, pharmaceutical and biotechnology, and
              semiconductors.  They will be trained in state-of the-art techniques which
              include, methods for preparing biomolecular self-assemblies, fabrication of
              micron and nanometer scale patterns on semiconducting surfaces, direct imaging
              with Atomic Force Microscopes and optical light microscopes, and structural
              measurements using quantitative x-ray diffraction methods at the National
              Synchrotron Facilities at Stanford and Argonne National Laboratories.
***


