Title       : Desorption and Spatial Nonlocalities in Polymer-Penetrant Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9972013

Award Number: 9972013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76033              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Edwards edwards@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
DMS-9972013

This award will support research on two main problems. The
              first is a study of 
mathematical models for polymer desorption.  In
              particular, the goal is 
to model such anomalous behavior as skinning, where
              the penetrant substance
can become trapped inside the polymer matrix.  The
              second part of 
the proposal is a study of the spatial nature of the nonlocal
              effects in 
polymer diffusion, which is caused by the disparate length scales
              in the 
polymer network.  The common problem in describing diffusion in
              polymers is that
the diffusion of the penetrant molecules in a polymer
              
entanglement network cannot be described by the usual models (Fick's Law)
              alone.
Rather, one must incorporate other nonlocal effects, using hereditary
              integral kernels.
This results in a model that contains a nonlinear partial
              integrodifferential equation.  
This problem is perhaps best described as a
              moving boundary-value problem where
two distinct operators govern the
              phenomena on the two sides of the boundary.  
In this work, existing models
              will be refined, and studies of diffusion and dissolution 
will performed and
              compared with experiments.  Different geometries and the effects 
of swelling
              on the system will also be considered. 
	
Because of their unusual, yet
              useful, properties, polymers have become invaluable 
in industrial production.
               Diffusion in polymers does not follow the standard physical 
laws as
              diffusion in other media, and hence a new mathematical approach is needed. 
              
In particular, the penetrant molecules diffuse through interconnected polymer
              "pockets", 
which leads to nonlocal effects.  A mathematical model
              incorporating these effects 
will be formulated and solved.  One area where
              polymers are used is in pharmaceutical 
applications, where the polymer is
              often saturated with a penetrant (such as a medicine), 
and then allowed to
              release the penetrant slowly.  Several mathematical studies in various
              
configurations, such as cylindrical devices, will be undertaken to analyze
              these phenomena.  
Thus the research will have direct impact on
              nonmathematical areas, such as materials science 
and pharmaceuticals. 



