Title       : Adaptation and Adoption of Novel Applications of Optical Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9972360

Award Number: 9972360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Federici federici@adm.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Barat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norbert Elliot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Optical Science and Engineering (OPSE) is recognized as an enabling technology:
              a technology with applications to many scientific disciplines and with the
              potential to contribute in significant ways to those disciplines. In this
              project, four of Texas A&M's bio-optics laboratory modules are adopted and
              adapted into NJIT's existing OPSE curriculum. Adaptation/ Implementation of
              these laboratory modules into various courses demonstrates the enabling
              capabilities of bio-optics. The four laboratory modules, which were developed
              by S. Rastegar and G. Cote (Biomedical Engineering) under their own CRCD
              program, are Simulated Laser surgery, Polarimetric Quantification of Chiral
              Substances, Measurement of Tissue Optical Properties, Fluorescence Spectroscopy
              of Physiological Fluorophores. These laboratory modules are adapted and
              implemented into the upper division undergraduate level (OPSE I and II,
              Physical Chemistry) and the lower division level courses (Modern Physics
              Laboratory and Freshman Engineering). In general, the challenge is to adapt and
              Implement these laboratory modules into a curriculum which is predominantly
              engineering and science oriented with very little presence in biological
              sciences. In particular, the Fluorescence Spectroscopy laboratory module is
              modified to simulate biological cellular transport without the use of live
              animals. The polarimetric laboratory module replaces an existing NJIT module on
              polarization rotation. In adapting this lab to NJIT, the students measure the
              degree of light rotation due to chiral substances such as D-Glucose. In
              adapting the Tissue Optical Properties laboratory to NJIT, the module is
              divided into two components: a simulated tissue samples component (absorbing
              dye and scattering spheres) which is adapted to freshman through junior level
              and a biological samples component (beef, liver, chicken breast) which is
              adapted to senior level courses. 
