Title       : An Asynchronous Learning Network Tool For Improving CS Education and Retention
               Rates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1999      
File        : a9972436

Award Number: 9972436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473915             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Arnow arnow@sci.brooklyn.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer science education suffers from a serious crisis- a large number of
              students planning a CS major drop the subject within the first two semesters of
              study.  Much of this is attributed to the differences in backgrounds and
              computer experience of incoming students. The retention crisis is even worse
              for female and minority students thereby constraining the diversity of the CS
              population.

To address these problems this project is developing self-paced,
              highly interactive and focused programming projects that do not replace, but
              augment, the traditional whole program assignments to help attenuate the
              differences in background of incoming computer science students. To make this
              approach feasible, current web technology is being integrated into the CS
              pedagogy through WebToTeach, a web-based automatic homework checking tool that
              enables faculty to develop lab exercises and track student progress. For
              students, WebToTeach provides a self-paced experience with the fundamental
              elements of programming, giving immediate feedback and hints at
              problem-solving.

This project enhances the capabilities of the WebToTeach
              prototype by scaling it up to deliver thousands of exercises to hundreds of
              classes. Libraries of exercises, suitable for a wide variety of undergraduate
              computer science courses using different languages, are being developed so that
              faculty around the country can immediately make this system available to
              students in their classes. A variety of faculty from 4-year municipal colleges,
              a religious liberal arts college, a community college, a state university, and
              a high school will engage in the development and evaluation of the exercises to
              demonstrate that this material is useful in a broad range of domains. Faculty
              development will be an important aspect of this project through presentations
              at national conferences and  web-based tutorials. 

Another primary objective
              of this project is teacher preparation to develop WebToTeach courseware for
              courses used by students preparing for or currently involved in secondary
              education careers.   By working with college of education faculty and high
              school teachers,  WebToTeach is being incorporated into the preservice teacher
              technology curriculum to prepare future high school teachers to utilize this
              technology at the high school level. It will also be used in inservice training
              courses with current high school teachers.  The anticipated result is a
              better-prepared cohort of entering students at the college level and ultimate
              improvement in the diversity of computer science majors.

Evaluation of this
              project is being conducted at multiple sites using a clinical trial data
              collection protocol in an attempt to measure the effectiveness of the web-based
              exercises and assessment in increasing student retention.


