Title       : Neutron Scattering Studies of Ferromagnetic Semiconductor Superlattices Based on
               III-V and IV-VI Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a9972586

Award Number: 9972586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomasz M. Giebultowicz tgiebult@physics.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972586
Giebultowicz

This is a condensed matter physics project that uses
              neutron diffractometry and reflectometry to investigate novel heterostructures
              and superlattices (SLs) composed of ferromagnetic (FM) and nonmagnetic
              semiconductors.  Diffraction measurements provide detailed information about
              the spin structures and about the interlayer magnetic correlations in the SLs.
              Semiconducting nanos-tructures containing  FM constituents are the most
              attractive ones for practical applications. However, until recently only
              multilayers prepared from materials with strongly antiferromagnetic (AFM)
              interactions were available. A break-through in this area has been the
              preparation of new epitaxial FM films and heterostructures based on the Ill-V
              semiconducting compounds. These GaAsMn heterostructures and additional
              materials with potential to exhibit ferromagnetic couplings will be
              investigated as part of this project. All diffraction and reflectivity
              measurements will be carried out at the Center for Neutron Research at NIST,
              Gaithersburg., MD. The research will provide excellent education training for
              the post-doctoral associate and the graduate students associated with the
              project.
%%%
Magnetic semiconductors show a range of unusual properties that
              are of great fundamental interest as well as of potential use in future
              technologies. This project will use neutron scattering as a powerful tool to
              investigating magnetic superlattices composed of semiconducting and magnetic
              materials. The neutron technique allows a determination of the magnetic
              interactions and spin structures in the atomic layers composing the
              superlattices. The work will focus on materials where the interactions are
              ferromagnetic, lead to large magnetic moments in the materials, and hence show
              potential for practical applications. The practical applications or spintronics
              field depend on the fact that the electrical transport in the materials is
              modulated by the magnetic interactions, as in the phenomenon of giant magneto
              resistance. Some of the materials to be studied, the GaAsMn ferromagnet, are
              compatible with existing semiconductor technologies, and may lead to practical
              devices. The students and post-doc involved in this work obtain excellent
              training in an exciting area of fundamental physics, which has great potential
              for future practical applications. All diffraction and reflectivity
              measurements will be carried out at the Center for Neutron Research at NIST,
              Gaithersburg., MD. 

