Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal: Training Program in Neuro-mechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9972747

Award Number: 9972747
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2671105            (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy E. Ritzmann rer3@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Kirsch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick E. Crago  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of
              education and research merging four existing research groups into a new entity
              with broad technical expertise yet still sharing a focus on Neuro-mechanical
              systems. Each existing group has a history of collaboration between various
              engineering fields and the biological sciences. However, meaningful
              interactions only came after considerable effort to overcome barriers. The
              training program will provide a formal process to help graduate students
              proceed through that process quickly and efficiently. Students in the training
              program will participate in cross-disciplinary courses and rotate through
              laboratories in all four fields. A multidisciplinary seminar featuring extended
              visits from leaders in each field will draw students together. Funds will
              permit travel to scientific meetings and workshops in each field. A common
              computer facility and office area will maintain interactions beyond the
              classroom. Internships in clinical and industrial settings will also be
              available as options. We have also planned an aggressive recruitment program
              emphasizing institutions committed to training students in underrepresented
              groups. Our trainees will graduate with appropriate tools and background
              necessary to work efficiently in teams. We believe that such an experience will
              pay great dividends to both the students and the disciplines in which they
              choose to work.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the
              establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs that will train a
              diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage
              of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT provides doctoral institutions
              with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate
              programs that transcend organizational boundaries and unite faculty from
              several departments or institutions to establish a highly interactive,
              collaborative environment for both training and research. In this second year
              of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs
              that collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.
              This specific award is supported by funds from the Directorates for Biological
              Sciences, for Engineering, for Computer and Information Science and
              Engineering, and for Education and Human Resources.

