Title       : A Telescope and Planetarium for Undergraduate Astronomy Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1991    
File        : a9151141

Award Number: 9151141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14444              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Burchfield mbfield@kopower.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luther T. Boggan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Holmes Comm College
	      Hill Street
	      Goodman, MS  39079    601/472-2312

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Science and Mathematics department of Holmes Community                     
              College is improving its astronomy laboratory curriculum by                    
              acquiring instrumentation which will allow students to collect                 
              scientifically valuable data.  The department is using a 14-                   
              inch Schmidt-Cassegrain telescope, photometer, CCD imaging                     
              camera, video camera and conventional photography equipment.                   
              In addition, a planetarium and computers are being used for                    
              preparation for outdoor observations.  The photometer is used                  
              to determine the lightcurves of variable stars.  The                           
              astrometric capabilities of the CCD imaging camera allow                       
              students to determine the angular separation between objects.                  
              Students can also use the CCD imaging camera to plot the                       
              movement of objects (such as comets and asteroids) relative to                 
              the stars.  The CCD camera also has photometric capability and                 
              allows students to measure changes in the brightness and                       
              structure of comets.  The video camera is used to record and                   
              time occultations.  The video camera also makes the telescope                  
              more accessible to visually and physically handicapped                         
              students.  The college is housing the instruments in an                        
              existing domed observatory.The instruments allow students to                   
              participate in the entire scientific process, from the                         
              development of an observing program to the reduction and                       
              analysis of data.  The department plans its observing programs                 
              in association with several amateur astronomical societies to                  
              which students may submit data and publications.
