Title       : Laboratory for Introductory Computer Science Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1991      
File        : a9151985

Award Number: 9151985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47201              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrah P. Chavey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beloit College
	      
	      Beloit, WI  53511    608/365-3391

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project establishs a laboratory of microcomputers to                      
              expand use of directed laboratory periods in introductory and                  
              intermediate computer science courses.  Experimental laboratory                
              periods in two introductory computer science classes are being                 
              introduced, and this is expanded and introduced into one                       
              additional course.  The new laboratory complements the small                   
              Macintosh Lab, which is shared by all of the sciences.  The new                
              lab makes possible the regular scheduling of directed                          
              laboratory periods in the target courses under directed faculty                
              supervision.Networking of the computers to the faculty network                 
              aids faculty in integrating computing resources into                           
              coursework.  It enables simplified distribution of instructor-                 
              prepared data files and software, the efficient shared use of                  
              certain commercial software (in accordance with licensing), and                
              improved communication between faculty and students regarding                  
              problems in using the course software.  Although the use of                    
              laboratories in intermediate and advanced computer science                     
              courses is becoming widespread, the use of directed                            
              laboratories in the introductory computer science curriculum                   
              appears to be a newly emerging trend.  Most current efforts in                 
              these areas are tool-oriented: teaching the programming                        
              environment, debugging tools etc.  Use of these labs to teach                  
              structured programming and software engineering topics appears                 
              to be a valuable innovatIon.  Student response to the                          
              experimental lab periods has been highly positive, and course                  
              success rates have been enhanced, especially with non-majors.
