Title       : A Research Laboratory to Improve an Undergraduate PsychologyCurriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1991      
File        : a9151979

Award Number: 9151979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8849               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Sibicky sibickym@marietta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marietta College
	      
	      Marietta, OH  45750    614/373-4643

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The requested video equipment, lap-top computers, and software                 
              will improve the curriculum of the Department of Psychology.                   
              Last year the psychology department developed a computer                       
              laboratory facility that exposes introductory level students to                
              quantitative methods used in psychological research.  Building                 
              upon this foundation, the department will develop a                            
              comprehensive student research facility and incorporate student                
              research projects into the majority of it's core courses.  The                 
              research equipment requested in this proposal will allow                       
              undergraduate (both major and non-major) students to receive                   
              experience conducting psychological research.  Each research                   
              project is based on a published study, and is designed to                      
              coincide with lecture material.  The research projects will                    
              highlight important empirical methods used within the area of                  
              the core course.  Because of the designs of these projects,                    
              many of which will be conducted in field settings, the                         
              equipment must be flexible, portable, and capable of capturing                 
              a range of complex human behaviors.  For these reasons the                     
              department believes the requested video camera/editing system,                 
              lap-top computers and software is the most pedagogically                       
              effective means of meeting the department's needs.
