Title       : Undergraduate Training Facility for Land and Atmospheric Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1991     
File        : a9151669

Award Number: 9151669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32027              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Wikle   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Gregory  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Stadler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at implementing a multipurpose geo-                      
              techniques training facility for instructing undergraduate                     
              students in methods used to integrate and display land resource                
              and atmospheric information.  Geography majors and students                    
              from other natural resource programs taking courses in Computer                
              Cartography, Remote Sensing, Physical Geography, Meteorology,                  
              and Geographic Information Systems will utilize the laboratory.                
              The integrated approach planned stresses compatibility and data                
              interchange between software and hardware providing                            
              undergraduates with opportunities to exchange data among                       
              previously incompatible formats.  The requested equipment                      
              includes microcomputers, software, networking, and hard copy                   
              generation capabilities which can support a variety of computer                
              mapping, remote sensing, geographic information systems, and                   
              real-time weather analysis activities within a common                          
              laboratory.  The creation of this lab will greatly increase the                
              amount of "hands-on" time available to undergraduates.  In                     
              addition to providing a unique and valuable service to campus                  
              programs which stress the measurement and analysis of natural                  
              resources, the lab provides a facility for undergraduate                       
              students to participate in supervised research activities.  The                
              proposed undergraduate laboratory will serve as a prototype to                 
              test new curricula and as a model for other geography programs                 
              wishing to develop geo-techniques laboratories which take                      
              advantage of convergent technologies.
