Title       : Integrating Method and Theory in Introductory Science Through Multimedia
               Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1991      
File        : a9151873

Award Number: 9151873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63979              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Whisnant whisnantdm@wofford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry A. Ferguson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wofford College
	      North Church Street
	      Spartanburg, SC  29301    803/585-4821

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project is creating a multimedia computer network with                    
              interactive hypermedia courseware that integrates lectures and                 
              laboratories in introductory chemistry and geology courses.  This              
              courseware complements current laboratory experiences and                      
              encourages students to critically study the context and content of             
              their experiments.  The project is equipping a multimedia                      
              laboratory with eight computer workstations interfaced with                    
              videodisc players, networked to a fileserver computer.  The project            
              utilizes two additional computer workstations and video recording              
              equipment for courseware development.  Using hypermedia authoring              
              software, sets of exercises are being produced which students will             
              use after completion of laboratory experiments.  These                         
              computer-based exercises feature text, computer graphics, still                
              images captured from live video of laboratory experiments, image               
              sequences from videodiscs, and simulations.  In doing these                    
              exercises, students are required to interactively solve problems               
              relating to the laboratory.  As students work with these exercises             
              they use a hypertext database of information within an expert                  
              system context, to logically blend information from lectures and               
              readings with laboratory observations and procedures.NSF grant                 
              funds are being matched with funds from non-Federal sources.
