Title       : An Undergraduate Computer Graphics - Image Processing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1991     
File        : a9151203

Award Number: 9151203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37593              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cary Laxer cary.laxer@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. McInerney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              An interdisciplinary computer graphics and image processing                    
              laboratory is being developed by the Departments of Computer                   
              Science, and Physics and Applied Optics.  Laboratory facilities                
              permit undergraduate students to investigate the effects of                    
              hidden surface removal, color, shading, and lighting on                        
              computer graphics images.  Students also study edge detection                  
              algorithms, image reconstruction, and holographic                              
              interferometry.  Animation sequences are generated in the                      
              laboratory in real time or frame by frame and stored on                        
              videotape.  The equipment allows students to undertake senior                  
              projects that investigate graphical display methods for                        
              scientific and engineering data.  The laboratory supports a                    
              new, team-taught interdisciplinary course in medical image                     
              processing.  As part of the course, students learn about                       
              graphical display methods for medical data.  This significantly                
              enhances the preparation of Rose-Hulman students participating                 
              in the Research Experiences for Undergraduates program at the                  
              NSF sponsored Engineering Research Center at Duke University,                  
              where graphical display methods for cardiovascular data are                    
              being studied.  Computer science and applied optics students                   
              interact with each other in the laboratory, consulting on each                 
              other's projects as well as doing joint, interdisciplinary                     
              projects.  Students are strongly encouraged to pursue                          
              undergraduate research in computer graphics and image                          
              processing with the laboratory equipment, and to publish the                   
              results of their work.
