Title       : Computer Integration into the Undergraduate Physics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1992     
File        : a9151784

Award Number: 9151784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45641              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace L. Freeman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis W. Whitson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project is integrating computer use into the intermediate                 
              and upper-level undergraduate physics curriculum through use of                
              a local-area network.  The specific courses affected by the                    
              project are Intermediate Experimental Physics, Computer                        
              Applications to Physics Laboratories, and Computational                        
              Physics. However, the proposed network also provides a                         
              framework to later serve the undergraduate core sequence and                   
              newly implemented Applied Physics Program. The grant provides                  
              funding for a network consisting of a file server, a                           
              computational server, and eight relatively modest workstations                 
              linked by Ethernet. The computers in laboratories make                         
              practical the upgrading of existing experiments, the teaching                  
              of modern methods of computer interfacing, and the future                      
              introduction of contemporary new experiments into the                          
              undergraduate curriculum. A key component of the network is the                
              computational server which provides high-performance computing                 
              to each network workstation. This allows undergraduate students                
              to perform simulations of complex physical systems and                         
              processes, large-scale data analysis, and 2D and 3D graphical                  
              renderings for animations not feasible on modest workstations                  
              alone. It also enables students to develop detailed physical                   
              intuition not possible from hand-waving arguments that                         
              ordinarily are the only means to discuss these problems in                     
              undergraduate courses. Most significantly, the project enables                 
              the department to better prepare students for what is expected                 
              of them in graduate study, industrial positions, and secondary                 
              school teaching.NSF grant funds are being matched with funds                   
              from non-federal sources.
