Title       : Instrumentation for the Introductory and Advanced Optics Laboratories at
               Southern Illinois University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1991     
File        : a9151748

Award Number: 9151748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29948              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald J. Pogatshnik jpogats@siue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Edwardsvill
	      Campus Box 20
	      Edwardsville, IL  620250020    618/692-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Funds from this program are being used to acquire laboratory                   
              equipment and computers for use in an introductory and advanced                
              optics laboratory course for physics and engineering majors.                   
              The laboratory courses are a part of a new optics program being                
              instituted at Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville. The                   
              introductory laboratories are designed to use computers both as                
              an aid to the collection of data, and for data analysis and                    
              modeling of optical systems. The advanced laboratory is                        
              designed to introduce students to lasers, fiber optics, and                    
              holography, and to provide them with a suitable background for                 
              conducting research in optics. While the field of optics has                   
              grown tremendously in terms of its technological importance, it                
              is significant that there are no established optics programs at                
              public institutions of higher education in the state of                        
              Illinois. The objective of the program is to use faculty                       
              expertise in the field of optics to develop a model optics                     
              curriculum that provides students with a marketable                            
              specialization in optics. Major instrumentation purchased under                
              this program includes computers and data acquisition hardware,                 
              along with optical components for student use in experiments in                
              holography, fiber-optics, spectroscopy, and thin-film physics.                 
              In addition, the equipment is being used in an annual series of                
              workshops for high-school science students throughout the St.                  
              Louis area.NSF grant funds are being matched with funds from                   
              non-federal sources.
