Title       : A Microcomputer Based Introductory Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9151230

Award Number: 9151230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25756              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cindy B. Schwarz schwarz@vassar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Challey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey B. Norman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Stearns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel G. Lawrence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project is interfacing computers with laboratory equipment                
              in the introductory physics laboratory at Vassar College.  The                 
              result is a more effective teaching and learning environment.                  
              When data are acquired quickly and displayed visually, there is                
              more time for understanding the physical concepts, and the                     
              resulting flexibility allows for more spontaneous learning                     
              experiences.  Nine computer stations, each with an interface,                  
              associated probes and software, as well as one laser printer,                  
              and one liquid crystal overhead display are being acquired.                    
              The equipment is being used with new curricula developed around                
              a new pedagogical approach to the introductory laboratory.  The                
              project is incorporating ideas from previous microcomputer-                    
              based laboratories and is developing many new experimental                     
              protocols. In particular, Supercard is being used to develop an                
              integrated learning environment incorporating text, tutorials,                 
              graphics, and animations on the computer.  This is a departure                 
              from the traditional approach, where lab instructions were                     
              followed in a rote manner.  This project is creating an                        
              interactive learning environment, where students are                           
              experimenting with variables, tracking the results, and                        
              exploring cause and effect relationships that underscore                       
              fundamental physical laws.  NSF grant funds are being matched                  
              with funds from non-federal sources.
