Title       : Development of Undergraduate Biochemical Engineering Laboratory at Tri-State
               University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1991 
File        : a9151155

Award Number: 9151155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24660              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian S. Hooker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tri-State University
	      1 University Avenue
	      Angola, IN  46703    219/665-4100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project develops a laboratory which provides the                          
              foundation for a course in biochemical engineering.  The                       
              biochemical engineering laboratory is comprised of four                        
              separate experimental modules providing direct experience with                 
              (1) Plant Tissue Cultivation, (2) Enzymatic Conversion of                      
              Biomass, (3) Microbial Fermentation and (4) Biological                         
              Wastewater Treatment.  In order to give students exposure to                   
              "long-term" project work, they are assigned to specific modules                
              for the duration of each instructional quarter.  This addition                 
              significantly enhances the chemical engineering and science                    
              curricula by exposing students to topics within Biotechnology,                 
              providing cross-disciplinary instruction involving programs in                 
              chemistry and biology, and developing laboratory                               
              research/design projects.  Major pieces of equipment in the                    
              laboratory include gyratory shaker units, 5 L fermenters, large                
              incubators and a laminar flow hood to be utilized for both                     
              microbial and plant tissue cultivation.  A biological                          
              film/activated sludge pilot plant unit is also provided for the                
              wastewater treatment module in addition to circulating water                   
              baths for enzymatic hydrolysis experiments.Individual modules                  
              are also utilized in other laboratory coursework within the                    
              biology and chemistry programs.  Specifically, biology and                     
              chemistry laboratory curricula are being enhanced by                           
              fermentation and tissue cultivation capabilities afforded by                   
              the laboratory.  Biology coursework directed towards                           
              environmental science benefits from the biological wastewater                  
              treatment unit.  In addition, the biochemical engineering                      
              laboratory provides independent research projects for                          
              undergraduate students from both chemical engineering and                      
              science departments.
