Title       : Compuer Control of Experimental and Cognitive Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1991        
File        : a9151304

Award Number: 9151304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21518              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Erickson erickson@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ira H. Bernstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Baerwaldt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond L. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Psychology at UTA requests support to                        
              initiate a laboratory course in Artificial Intelligence and to                 
              improve laboratories in Experimental Psychology, Cognitive                     
              Processes, and Sensory and Perceptual Processes. Much modern                   
              psychological research uses computers for measurement and                      
              control of response and event times, and to generate stimulus                  
              displays. We currently use Commodore C-64 computers in existing                
              laboratory courses for these functions.  The C-64s were once                   
              cost-effective but are now obsolete, with modest memory and                    
              limited graphics. We propose to replace them with IBM-                         
              compatible computers with VGA monitors and the capacity to                     
              store programs, graphic and other displays, data, and system                   
              and language files for the various courses.  We propose to                     
              purchase Micro Experimental Laboratory software and                            
              pcSTEREOSCOPE hard and software to perform experiments, and to                 
              purchase LISP for the new Al laboratory course. This will                      
              improve laboratory instruction by at least an order of                         
              magnitude, enabling us to perform many experiments that cannot                 
              currently be conducted. It will increase the diversity of                      
              laboratory courses and enable students to conduct more                         
              significant and creative final projects in each course. At non-                
              classroom times the equipment will be used for independent                     
              study and honors projects, providing enhanced research                         
              opportunities to our most able students.
