Title       : Development of Laboratory for Distributed Computation and System Programming at
               Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1991      
File        : a9151595

Award Number: 9151595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24289              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chong-wei Xu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard M. Waxman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Edwardsvill
	      Campus Box 20
	      Edwardsville, IL  620250020    618/692-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This award provides an experimental network to serve as a test-                
              bed for student projects, including both class projects and                    
              undergraduate research projects.  These projects include the                   
              design and testing of protocols, the development of network                    
              applications, the management of networks, and the development                  
              of distributed systems.  Students, through the use of this                     
              network, gain hands on experience in network system programming                
              and the development of applications for local area networks.                   
              The School of Sciences at SIUE supports two summer research                    
              projects:  the junior year summer year research program and the                
              minority summer research program.  Many of the projects have                   
              been designed with these programs in mind.  The network                        
              consists of six UNIX based workstations that are connected by                  
              a complete point-to-point topology as well as through an                       
              Ethernet bus.  This innovative connection scheme allows for a                  
              wide variety of projects and laboratory exercises, including                   
              the study of multipoint routing.  In addition, the network is                  
              connected to the department's existing Ethernet through a                      
              gateway allowing students to develop projects without                          
              interfering with the operation of the existing network by                      
              disconnecting the gateway from the department's network.                       
              Later, after a student's project has been thoroughly tested, it                
              can be run on a larger network by reconnecting the gateway.
