Title       : Laser Physics and Modern Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1991     
File        : a9151532

Award Number: 9151532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16197              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Larry Robinson lrobinson@austic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Austin College
	      900 North Grand
	      Sherman, TX  750904440    214/892-9101

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project is enabling the Physics Department at Austin                      
              College to place significant emphasis on laser physics and                     
              other modern optics topics in a new course, Modern Optics.                     
              This course was created in a recent evaluation and revision of                 
              the physics curriculum at the College.  Major equipment being                  
              purchased include an optical spectrum analyzer to study the                    
              longitudinal mode structure of lasers, laser systems                           
              (constructed locally) with helium-neon discharge tubes and,                    
              external optical cavities to study cavity stability and                        
              transverse mode structures, and an acousto-optic cell with                     
              driver to be used for communications (over a laser beam or                     
              through an optical fiber) experiments and speed of light                       
              measurements.   A sophisticated computer system with powerful                  
              software for data acquisition and analysis is being purchased                  
              which will allow building on students' experience with other                   
              simpler computer systems.   This system allows students who are                
              not expert programmers to build "virtual instruments" which                    
              perform specialized tasks such as recording diffraction                        
              patterns using a linear CCD sensor.   A group of lasers,                       
              optical breadboards, and additional optical components, e.g.,                  
              a variable beamsplitter, are being acquired to carry out these                 
              and other experiments.   These studies are being conducted in                  
              a specific course, but simplified versions of some experiments                 
              are being used in lower level courses, and the equipment is                    
              also available for upper level physics students doing                          
              independent work.NSF grant funds are being matched with funds                  
              from non-federal sources.
