Title       : Mechanical Measurements for Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1991       
File        : a9151683

Award Number: 9151683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Devdas M. Pai pai@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Craft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Behrooz Fallahi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven H. Y-Lai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project proposes to educate undergraduate students in the                 
              selection, installation and use of mechanical sensors and                      
              transducers interfaced with a microcomputer, accomplished                      
              through the modernization and enhancement of an existing                       
              sophomore Manufacturing Processes Laboratory.  The project                     
              focuses on the fundamental mechanical quantities of importance                 
              to the manufacturing processes of milling, turning, drilling                   
              and grinding.  Through a series of four new experiments,                       
              students learn about mechanical transducers and specifically                   
              the use of force and torque transducers with computerized data                 
              acquisition for the monitoring of forces, torques and                          
              vibrations.  They visualize the difference between static and                  
              dynamic loading and are able to corroborate the related lecture                
              material on cutting forces, energy and chatter.  The major                     
              equipment includes two piezoelectric load rings for experiments                
              on static and dynamic force measurements, a piezoelectric                      
              dynamometer suitable for milling, turning and grinding for                     
              applied experiments on cutting forces and energy, a                            
              piezoelectric dynamometer suitable for drilling for applied                    
              experiments on cutting torques and energy, four charge                         
              amplifiers to support the piezoelectric transducers, a                         
              microcomputer-based data acquisition system and software for                   
              real-time monitoring of the data.
