Title       : NYI: Surface Splines Over Irregular Meshes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9457806

Award Number: 9457806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorg Peters   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9146,9216,9251,9297,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
               Models of die casts in manufacturing, level sets of   functions, deposition
              fronts in simulation, pleasing shapes   in  animation, fast  prototyping, and
              visualization of interactions in  a virtual   world have one  thing in common: 
              the need for efficient  representations of   smooth surfaces.  At present, some
              of our  understanding and use of scientific   results is  handicapped by the 
              fact that the standard representation   used for the task,  tensor-product
              B-splines, can only model a small subset of   these  surfaces  naturally and
              efficiently, namely surfaces that allow  for a   regular,  checker-board
              arrangement of its pieces.    Free-form surface   splines extend the  spline
              paradigm and  techniques to cover also irregular   arrangements.  In 
              extending,  they preserve the intuitive generation of the   surface from the 
              control mesh by a process of cutting with hyperplanes, also   known  as corner 
              cutting or subdivision.  So far only first-order,  tangent   continuous surface
               splines exist.  Extension to higher-order continuity is both   of fundamental 
              and practical interest.    The  fundamental  aspect consists of a new theory
              that arises when   surfaces from pieces using massive computing power in  
              contrast to  analyzing  surfaces as in classical Gaussian differential 
              geometry.      The goal of this  research is to develop a general framework for
               surface   splines and to use the  representation to optimize the  shape of
              surfaces with   respect to various cost  functions.  The  immediate goal is the
              derivation of   surface  splines and to find tools to adjust the variation of  
              curvature,  an  important quality criterion for surfaces.  Since the  
              challenge  is considerably  greater than the definition of first-order  surface
              splines   over irregular  meshes, progress requires heavy  use of symbolic
              computation   and graphics for  quality assessment.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
