Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Structure of the Interstellar Medium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9457456

Award Number: 9457456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alyssa A. Goodman agoodman@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1207,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9457456  Goodman      Dr. Goodman will carry out research to seek to explore the
              question  of which physical processes are most important in determining the 
              structure and evolution of interstellar clouds in our Galaxy.   These 
              "clouds", as they are known, are just local density enhancements in  the
              lower-density interstellar medium (ISM), but they are  nonetheless the object
              of intense study, primarily because they are  the birthplaces of new stars in
              our Galaxy.  Without a clear  physical picture of these clouds, it is very
              difficult, if not  impossible, to develop and refine a physically realistic
              scenario  for the star formation process itself.    Dr. Goodman, in carrying
              out the research, will specifically seek  to explore the relationship between
              magnetic fields, density  structure, and velocity structure in the interstellar
              medium (ISM).    Prior research carried out by Dr. Goodman and collaborators
              has  shown that the magnetic and kinetic energies measured in the  gaseous ISM
              are usually similar, so it is reasonable to hypothesize  that the magnetic
              fields pervading the gas and velocity structure  in the gas are related.    One
              of the biggest pieces missing from the picture of the  interaction between
              magnetic fields and gas in the ISM is a clear  view of magnetic field structure
              in the dense gas where stars form.    The observation of the polarization of
              optical and near-infrared  background starlight can be used to map field
              structure in  low-density gas, but Dr. Goodman's recent research has shown that
               this technique cannot trace the field accurately in denser gas.   Dr. Goodman
              and collaborators will therefore carry out far-infrared  and sub-millimeter
              wavelength observations of the polarized  emission from magnetically aligned
              dust in dense regions of the  ISM.  The results of the research should provide
              a clearer view of  the field structure there.  The observations will be carried
              out  through several international collaborations, one of which will  seek to
              use the new infrared  satellite observatory (ISO).  Velocity  structure of the
              ISM will be investigated with new spectral-line  mapping of gas in the
              interstellar medium and through theoretical  modeling of new and existing data.
               Dr. Goodman's current students  and research assistants will be primarily
              working on this line of  inquiry.  Early results of the research have shown
              that "dense  cores", which are the dense knots of gas associated with the 
              formation of individual stars, may represent "eddies" in a more 
              turbulent/wavelike velocity field which characterizes the  lower-density
              surrounding ISM.  The new studies will focus on  relating the velocity
              structure deduced from spectral-line mapping  to realistic views of the
              magnetic field in the ISM obtained from  far-infrared and sub-mm polarimetry.  
               This award is to recognize an outstanding young faculty member in  science and
              engineering.  The award will enhance the career of the  faculty member by
              providing flexible support for research and  educational activities. 
              Cooperation with industry and institutions  that support research and education
              is encouraged.
