Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Evolution of Planetary Atmospheres
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9457457

Award Number: 9457457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caitlin A. Griffith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1207,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9457457  Griffith    The origin and evolution of planetary atmospheres will be 
              investigated by focusing initially on two processes: cometary  impacts and the
              greenhouse effect.    Collisions of comets and asteroids with planets have
              recently been  found to significantly shape the nature of the solar system. 
              These  impacts provide the best explanation for the existence of the moon, 
              Uranus' tilt and the KT extinction.  Pioneering work by Zahnle et  al (1992)
              suggests that cometary impact explains the reason why  Titan has an atmosphere
              and the Galilean satellites have none.  The  idea is that, because of Jupiter's
              greater mass, impact velocities  are larger on the Galilean satellites than on
              Titan, and thus more  efficient at eroding the atmospheres.  Monte Carlo
              calculations  that address the stochastic nature of the problem will be used to
               investigate this effect more rigorously. This technique will also  be used to
              investigate the capability of Mars to retain volatiles.   The ultimate goal is
              to determine the effect that planetary rubble  has on a planetary atmosphere as
              a function of a planet's size and  its context within a solar system.  This
              research will address the  following question: for a given planetary system, on
              which bodies  might one expect to find an atmosphere?      Dr. Griffith will
              pursue complementary work, at NASA's Infrared  Telescope Facility, as a member
              of the science team that will  observe comet Shoemaker-Levy's collision with
              Jupiter.  The aim  here is, in part, to investigate how the impact energy  is 
              partitioned into chemical energy and kinetic energy to the  atmosphere.  The
              partitioning into kinetic energy determines the  efficiency with which comets
              erode planetary atmsopheres.    The temperature at Venus' surface is 7500 K,
              almost 4000 K warmer  than the Earth.  The great efficiency with which the
              greenhouse  effect warms Venus'atmosphere suggests that warm atmospheres would 
              exist at large distances from the Sun, if greenhouse gases were  present.  This
              ra ises an interesting possibility for the ecosphere  of the Solar System, that
              is, the region where liquid water exists,  a necessary ingredient for life. 
              Greenhouse gases, if present on  a planetary body, may extend the ecosphere out
              to large distances  from the Sun.  This possibility will be investigated by
              focusing on  Titan's organic-rich atmosphere.  Titan's atmosphere may have 
              originally consisted of ammonia (NH3 ultra violet radiation, a  strong
              greenhouse gas) and subsequently been dissociated by solar  on the nitrogen gas
              (N2) we presently observe.  In collaboration  with Chris McKay, Kevin Zahnle
              and Jim Pollack (NASA Ames Research  Center), the possibility that Titan's
              atmosphere was warm enough to  have had liquid water in the past will be
              investigated.  This  effort will be extended to consider the greenhouse
              efficiency of  the highly abundant volatiles in the solar system (of which, 
              governed by cosmic abundances, there are few).  The larger aim of  this project
              is to understand the thermal properties of atmospheres    as a function of
              their composition.    This award is to recognize an outstanding young faculty
              member in  science and engineering.  The award will enhance the career of the 
              faculty member by providing flexible support for research and  educational
              activities.  Cooperation with industry and institutions  that support research
              and education is encouraged.
