Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Solvation and Chemical Dynamics at Immiscible Liquid
               Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9457700

Award Number: 9457700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369618             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Levinger levinger@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nancy E. Levinger is supported by an NSF Young Investigator Grant from   the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to perform   experimental
              studies of polar solvation and chemical reactions at the   interface between
              immiscible liquids.  She will use surface second   harmonic generation (SSHG) 
              to perform initial studies on coumarin 153, a   classic probe of solvation
              dynamics, at the liquid/liquid interface.    SSHG is an ideal technique for
              studying interfacial chemistry because the   signals arise solely from the
              interface without interference from the   bulk medium.  Information regarding
              molecular rotational reorientation   and electron transfer reactions at
              interfaces can be examined by this   method.  A variety of liquid/liquid
              interfaces will be probed including   the octanol/water interface which is an
              important model system for drug   modeling of membrane solubility.  Electron
              transfer and isomerization   reactions will be studied at the liquid/liquid
              interface in a variety of   immiscible liquid solvent systems including real
              membrane bound   biologically important proteins.    A wide range of chemistry
              occurs at interfacial boundaries.  Examples   range from biological and
              medicinal interfacial problems, such as   chemistry of anesthesia, to
              industrial scale separations of metal ores   across interfaces, to the
              relatively new investigations into self   assembled monolayers and
              Langmuir-Blodgett films for nanoelectronics and   nonlinear optical materials. 
              These problems are based not only on   structure and composition of the
              interface but also on kinetic processes   that occur at interfaces.  As such,
              there is considerable interest in   chemical dynamics at interfaces.  Levinger
              has developed a tool to   directly probe the chemical dynamics occurring at
              such interfaces, and   will apply this technique to a variety of important and
              technologically   relevant problems.
