Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Advanced Materials Synthesis and Manufacturing
               Techniques Using Controlled Droplet Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9457205

Award Number: 9457205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa E. Orme melissao@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9102,9146,9161,9297,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9457205  Orme       The award is for research focused on the union of nanophase 
              materials synthesis and net-form manufacturing with controlled  molten metal
              droplet deposition.  Novel methods of droplet  generation form capillary stream
              break-up enable higher levels of  control and  manipulation of the droplet
              characteristics (e.g.,  droplet sizes and separations) than could be obtained
              with  conventional methods of droplet generation.  Precise control of the 
              droplets trajectories (angular dispersion of the order of 1 micro-  radian) is
              the basis for the net-form manufacturing claims.   Control of the droplet sizes
              and trajectories leads to control of  the solidification characteristics of the
              deposited droplets.  As  the droplets impinge onto a temperature controlled
              substrate, they  "splat" and rapidly solidify.  Rapid solidification leads to
              the  synthesis of materials with refined micro/nano-structures.   Preliminary
              experiments have demonstrated the synthesis of   nanophase materials composed
              of low-melting point bismuthtin  alloys.  Technical issues to be investigated
              include heat transfer  and phase change, fluid dynamics of droplet impact, and 
              characterization of control parameters for optimization of net-form 
              manufacturing and nanophase materials synthesis with higher  melting-point
              materials.       Application of novel research in droplet generation and 
              control to the manufacturing discipline of rapid prototyping or  net-form
              manufacturing opens the door to a novel and efficient  manufacturing process
              that could likely increase the  competitiveness of the nation's industrial
              base.  The impact of the  research is three-fold.  Fist, net-form manufacturing
              has  significant economic benefits since the engineering part is made  from the
              raw stock in one integrated operation, thereby eliminating  many machining
              steps.  Second, noncrystalline materials synthesis  is known to produce
              materials with enhanced mechanical and magnetic  properties.  Third, due to
              rapid solidification of the dr oplets,  the synthesis of new alloys which could
              not be made by conventional  methods due to macroscopic segregation is now a
              likely possibility  which would have significant impact on industry and
              society.
