Title       : MPWG: GENDERWISE: Concerning Women in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1993 
File        : a9353808

Award Number: 9353808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lola E. Rogers                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103079             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlene Morrow cmorrow@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Morrow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,9252,
Abstract    :
              9353808  Morrow    The purpose of project GenderWise is to facilitate the
              development and implementation of new  mathematics intervention programs
              modeled after SummerMath.  For eleven years, SummerMath  has been providing
              young women in high school with new opportunities in mathematics.  Each 
              summer, as a result of participating in SummerMath, young women return to
              schools with  increased confidence, problem solving skills, and independence. 
              The SummerMath curriculum  will be revised and expanded, teacher guides for
              that curriculum will be developed, classroom  videotapes will be produced, and
              a workshop for intervention program developers will be  conducted at Mount
              Holyoke College.  Among the modifications of SummerMath curriculum  are the
              addition of geometry units incorporating the use of Geometer's Sketchpad
              software,  expansion the algebra units, incorporating the use of Function Probe
              software, and revision of  existing curriculum, including the integration of
              more extensive calculator-based problems.     Teacher guides to the curriculum
              will be written that outline equity considerations for young  women, as well as
              supportive strategies for many types of effective classroom interactions.  
              They will also include the goals and objectives of each unit, mathematical
              connections between  units, and assessment activities for each unit.  The set
              of videotapes developed will demonstrate  "learning in action":  teachers
              interactions with students, and student interactions with  mathematical
              materials and with each other, including student presentations to other
              students.   Finally, a five day intensive workshop for teams of intervention
              program developers will be held  in the summer of 1994 at Mount Holyoke
              College.  This workshop will be a training session for  the materials and
              pedagogy that have been developed.  Workshop participants will learn 
              strategies for teacher feedback and student self-evaluation.  Programs
              developed by the workshop  participants will enable many young women to exp
              erience the positive effects of a gender  equitable mathematics learning
              community.  The curricular materials produced will have  significance for the
              larger mathematics education community as an example of rich and  stimulating
              mathematics and teaching practices that are connected to the lives of young
              women.  ***
