Title       : SimCalc: Simulations for Calculus Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  1996  
File        : a9353507

Award Number: 9353507
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2452090            (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Kaput jkaput@umassd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9353507  Kaput    They prose to build, test and perform close clinical analyses
              of  students working with a series of engaging simulations and  activities
              designed to link students' real experience with motion,  fluid flow and other
              continuously variable quantities, first to  graphical and then to more formal
              representations.  the ultimate  intent is to help democratize access to the
              central idea of  calculus by providing the conceptual and technological
              foundation  for a global reorganization of the core quantitative mathematics 
              curriculum from the middle school onward.  We aim to treat calculus  not as a
              capstone course for the intellectual and professional  elite that follows upon
              a long series of prerequisites, but as a  mainstream strand in the curriculum
              for ALL students.  While we  initially design for and work with those students
              who are now  alienated from mathematics in unacceptably high numbers, we plan
              to  create exciting activities appropriate for all students beginning  in the
              middle grades and continuing into university calculus, where  versions of our
              materials can serve as a front-end.  For students  will be able to drive a
              "MathCars" simulation to create position  and velocity (vs. time) graphs that
              can then be downloaded to an  inexpensive hand-held device to do further
              analysis, e.g., curve-  fitting, slope or area approximating, etc.  They will
              also be able  to recreate their school bus trip home by inputting velocity
              data,  for example, estimated during the actual trip.  They could then  specify
              the motion of one of two simulated vehicles to be that of  the bus and 'follow;
              the bus in the second, using only position  graphs, say, instead of the usual
              windshield view.  Or they could  follow the bus displaying its position graph
              while getting feedback  only on their own velocity.  They will also be able to
              run a  variety of experiments with 'ToyCars' on a two lane track,  specifying
              their motion algebraically, and eventually examine other  regular motion,
              including harmonic  and other periodic motion.   Using clinical research
              methods we plan to examine in considerable  detail the relations between
              simulation-based learning and learning  involving physical MBL devices,
              differences in conceptual impact of  different concrete contexts such as motion
              vs. fluid flow, and the  gradual process of transforming understandings
              mediated by concrete  and graphical representations to understandings encoded
              in formal  algebraic representations.  We will integrate our work with the 
              Memirovsky Change and Variation Project at TERC, which is  investigating
              learning in physical contexts.  A second level of  classroom based testing with
              underrepresented populations at  several sites in the last 18 months of the
              project will follow the  research with individuals and pairs, using enrichment
              modules in  both middle and high school classes at all levels, as well as 
              university precalculus and calculus classes.  ***
