Title       : SSC: Pre-College Community Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9353281

Award Number: 9353281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193055             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dolores Jaquez   (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor Gee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Bay Consortium of Edu
	      314 East 10th St
	      Oakland, CA  946062302    510/836-8367

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9353281  East Bay Consortium of Educ.  Oakland, CA    Jaquez, Dolores and
              Gee, Victor    "Pre-Collegiate Community Laboratory"    This summer science
              camp, to be operated by the East Bay Consortium  of Education Institutions,
              Inc., and interagency collaboration of  19 Oakland-area schools, colleges, and
              universities, will serve 50  Black and Hispanic seventh and eighth graders who
              attend seven  schools in a severely educationally and economically
              disadvantaged  area of Southeast Oakland (CA).  The project site will be
              Merritt  College (Peralta Colleges).  Learning experiences will be offered  for
              five weeks per summer, with 12 Saturday follow-up activities  scheduled during
              the following academic year.    Classroom instruction will follow an
              integrated, multidisciplinary,  thematically organized model.  Themes have been
              chosen which  highlight applications of science and mathematics to events, 
              issues, and past-times of interest to the young target population.   These
              include the Loma Prieta earthquake and the accompanying  collapse of the Nimitz
              Freeway, the recent Berkeley fire, issues  related to pollution, development,
              and economic potential of San  Francisco Bay; the physics of sports movement;
              and implications of  mathematics for strong and durable construction.    Each
              class section of 25 students will be under the care of an  instructional team
              composed of a fully credentialed teacher quali-  fied in both mathematics and
              science, an upper division mathematics  or science major planning to teach in
              the public schools, and an  older high school peer mentor/role model.  The
              instructional team  will themselves model appropriate individual responsibility
              and  cooperative problem solving.    Instruction will follow accepted research
              practice.  Participants  will first observe phenomena and gather data.  They
              will then  analyze this information in an effort to form explanatory/ 
              predictive hypotheses.  After testing their assumptions, they will  fine-tune
              their hypotheses and share their fi ndings with others.    Classroom activities
              will be supplemented by field study/research  throughout the greater Oakland
              area.  A culminating event of each  summer session will be a two and one-half
              day ecological camping  expedition at Pinnacles National Monument, jointly
              sponsored by  Naturalists at Large, who will provide onsite explanations and 
              guidance.  Additional field experiences will be offered in  academic-year
              follow-up sessions.
