Title       : Community College Physics Faculty Development Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1993  
File        : a9353998

Award Number: 9353998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth S. Krane                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219654             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis J. Hieggelke curth@jjc.cc.il.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. O'Kuma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Joliet Junior College
	      1215 Houbolt Road
	      Joliet, IL  60431    815/729-9020

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9353998  Hieggelke  This two-year national program, based on a successful pilot 
              project, will provide eight workshops (four each year) designed  for
              experienced community college physics teachers at several 
              geographically-dispersed community college campuses.  One set  of workshops
              acquaints participants with (1) the use of  microcomputer-based laboratories;
              (2) the construction of  physics simulations; or (3) the development of
              conceptual  exercises and overview case studies.  Another workshop provides  an
              update and an opportunity for more advanced experiences with 
              microcomputer-based lab technology for previous workshop  participants.  Each
              three-day workshop is being led by two  community college physics professors
              and two university/college  physics professor who play a major role in these
              areas.  These  workshops acquaint participants with the contemporary use of 
              the recent developments and findings of cognitive physics  research and
              participants are provided with extensive materials  based on these findings. 
              As a result of these intensive  workshops, participants are able to evaluate
              these developments  and they are able to return to their campus to start 
              implementing the workshop findings.  Thus, these workshops  facilitate the
              rapid incorporation of this knowledge and  technology at community colleges. 
              The impact of the workshop  is being reinforced by the establishment of a
              networking system  employing a telecommunications bulletin board system and a 
              newsletter.   The ultimate goal of this project is to help  community college
              students develop a stronger understanding of  classical and contemporary
              physics.  The task of updating  physics programs at community colleges is
              difficult but  essential for the nation and for science because of the large 
              number of students, particularly women and minorities,  attending community
              colleges.  ***
