Title       : Program to Increase University-Industry Interaction and Technology Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1993    
File        : a9353654

Award Number: 9353654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Anderson                     
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca W. Mahurin AVRRM@MSU.OSCS.MONTANA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mont Univ Sys Office
	      307 Montana Hall
	      Helena, MT  596014132    406/444-6570

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              93-53654    Mahurin  Program to Increase University-Industry Interaction and
              Technology  Transfer  "What we envision is transference of our University
              System's  valuable intellectual property into  the commercial market place
              thereby adding economic value to  Montana."  Montana Science and  Technology
              Action Agenda.    The purpose of this project is to team university faculty and
               students with industry researchers  who will work  closely together on a
              research project with real  technology transfer possibilities.   The industries
              will provide substantial matching funds for the  projects.    In 1990 the
              Governor of Montana ordered that the State develop a  Science and Technology 
              Policy and Plan for Montana.  Following the completion of this  Plan, over 200
              citizens from  diverse backgrounds, occupations and regions of the State were 
              mobilized to create the Montana  Science and Technology Action Agenda.  This
              Agenda outlines  mechanisms by which Montana   can fully capitalize on its
              present resources, develop its  infrastructure in science and technology  and
              be prepared to move competitively into the 21st century.      The Action Plan
              cites technology transfer as critical to the growth  and health of Montana  
              companies.  The University System possesses a wealth of new ideas,  products
              and technologies   which can spin-off new businesses and be instrumental in the
              growth  of existing businesses.  It  is recognized that in building science and
              engineering  infrastructure the private sector must grow   and build concurrent
              with the universities so that the two will  nurture each other.    The
              state-wide EPSCoR Committee has chosen four research projects  which join the
              resources   and efforts of the university and the private sector.  These are 
              priorities of the Science Action  Agenda and of EPSCoR in that they involve
              industries which are  critical to the technological  future of the State in
              research cluster areas of the NSF EPSCoR  Program.  Two of the projects  fit
              into the cluster area of  Biotechnology.  The other two projects  fit with the
              Advanced  Materials Center.  These efforts will be coordinated with the NSF 
              EPSCoR Systemic  Improvement Initiative.
