Title       : SSC: Ellamek Elicaraq (Yupik) "Learning About Our World"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1995  
File        : a9353255

Award Number: 9353255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edna Lamebull   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jim Bailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Anchorage Sch Dist
	      4600 DeBarr Ave
	      Anchorage, AK  995083126    907/333-9561

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9353255  Anchorage School District  Anchorage, AK    Lamebull, Edna and
              Bailey, Jim    "Ellamek Elicarag (Yupik) "Learning About Our World"    This
              three-year project is designed for seventh, eight, and ninth  grade Alaskan
              Eskimo and Indian children.  Its is strengthened by  links with Native American
              cultures and traditions.  Each year's  camp is a five-week hands-on exploration
              of science and math  applications to the Alaskan environment and major related
              careers.   Professional role models and mentors are important components.  
              School-year follow-up and mentoring is provided for each student.    The
              program's purpose is to provide students with basic tools to  choose science
              and math courses, stay with their studies, achieve  in their studies, and
              graduate to further science studies or  careers.  Summary objectives, methods,
              and significance:  (1)  Fifty middle-school age Alaska Native students each
              year will        remain in school and pursue appropriate science and math      
                   studies.  Methods: A five-week hands-on camp with highly motivating      
              interactive science and math experiences and extended on-site       field trips
              will prepare students for academic school-year       curriculum.  The project
              includes daily counseling, integrated       into science and career
              exploration, by full-time project       staff and mentors from the professions
              and Native community.        School-year follow-up includes training for school
              staff       working with Native students and ongoing counseling and      
              metering.  Significance: The model is designed to help Native students make    
                and keep making the choice to stay in school and stay with       science. 
              The ultimate significance is in preparing more       minority and
              underrepresented students for post-secondary       study in science, math, and
              engineering.  (2)  Students will gain experiential knowledge of Alaskan      
              environment, geology, climate, ecology, habitats, and       technologies
              coincident to Alaskan science careers .  Methods: Activities include extended,
              interactive field trips to       sites where Alaskan careers in these careers
              are based.        Exploration of these disciplines is carried out through high-
                    interest activities structured to build knowledge, inquiry,       and
              communication skills.  Significance: The model is designed so that students
              build a       scientific relationship with their world and actually      
              experience opportunities that await them in careers.    (3)  Students will
              develop skills and application of knowledge       embedded in the natural and
              cultural world which surrounds  them.  Methods: Each activity includes science,
              inquiry, math, and       communication skills objectives.  Methodologies are   
                 contextual; that is, they are practiced and applied in the       field, lab,
              and workplaces most central to the future of the       target population. 
              Significance: The model immerses students in the construction of      
              knowledge that is meaningful to them: they will gain a       personal base from
              which to form academic and career goals.   (4)  Each student will explore,
              assess, and write about at least       three self-chosen science-based careers.
               Each student will       receive ongoing guidance and career exposure for
              academic and       career preparation in Alaska-based science and engineering  
                  professions.  Methods: A culminating career research and goals activity
              follows       five intense weeks of daily interaction with trained high      
              school and college mentors on staff, teachers, and       professional role
              models and mentors.  During the year, school       staff and mentors will
              continue to work with students.  Significance: This model is based on a
              recognition that middle       school students do not arrive at or pursue
              long-term goals in       a vacuum, particularly if they are at risk.  It allows
              each       student to be nurtured and guided by several counselors and      
              role models, continually.  The ultimate significance lies in       the p
              otential for a much greater representation of Native       Americans in the
              nation's pool of science, math, and       engineering talent.  (5)  The summer
              camp experience will help students to see the real       connections among
              science, math, careers, and their lives.  Methods: Discipline knowledge, skills
              academic goals decisions, and       career exposure are interwoven through
              experiences that have       environmental and cultural meaning to the lives of
              these       students.    Significance: As students see, construct, and
              understand the       connections between their own lives and careers in
              science,       they begin to believe that such careers are within their      
              reach.  They construct goals and plans to achieve such       careers.
