Title       : SGER: What Intermediate Students Learn from Science Fairs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9353674

Award Number: 9353674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47624              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosalea Courtney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educational Testing Serv
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08541    /   -

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This exploratory study will investigate ways to document                       
              what children learn from their participation in local                          
              science fairs.  Students' understanding of the process and                     
              elements that make up a science fair project as well as                        
              direct learning of science content related to their science                    
              fair topic will be evaluated though several different                          
              methodologies.  Comparative analysis will be made of                           
              indicators of children's learning yielded by these different                   
              approaches.  This study will be conducted in fourth and                        
              fifth grade classrooms in both an urban and a suburban                         
              school district.  From 75 to 100 students at each grade                        
              level will participate in the study.  The sample will be                       
              balanced with equal numbers of boys and girls.                                 
                                                                                             
              The project is significant because it will utilize a variety of                
              assessment strategies to assess what children have learned                     
              from participation in a local science fair including who benefits              
              most.  The project should also begin to describe the student who               
              benefits most from science fair participation.  The assessment                 
              strategies are more informative to the instructional and evaluative            
              decisions that teachers must make regarding science learning and               
              assessment for upper elementary school students.
