Title       : Nova's Century of Discovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9353566

Award Number: 9353566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula S. Apsell paula apsell@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom Friedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jon Palfreman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9180,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              NOVA'S CENTURY OF DISCOVERY is a series of five prime-time                     
              documentary specials to be shown nationally over the Public                    
              Broadcasting Service(PBS) during late 1997 or early 1998.                      
              Altogether the programs will tell a sweeping story,                            
              celebrating the end of a remarkable century of discovery when                  
              science advance further than in all previous centuries                         
              combined, and when every scientific discipline underwent a                     
              revolution.  Yet the closing of the 20th century coincides                     
              with an ever-widening gap between what scientists know and                     
              what most of the public comprehends.  To increase public                       
              understanding of science, scientists, and scientific methods,                  
              the series will provide a dramatic retelling and                               
              interpretation of the century's most enduring scientific                       
              endeavors.  Each two-hour program will probe several related                   
              fields of investigation and application: views of the universe                 
              and of matter; origins of the planet and of life; health,                      
              medicine, and the human body; human nature and behavior; and                   
              technology and engineering.  A marriage of scholarship and                     
              entertainment,  NOVA'S CENTURY OF DISCOVERY will be created                    
              using all the tools at the command of its award winning                        
              production team including archival footage and stills;                         
              personal accounts; letters, dairies, and other primary                         
              sources; computer animation; and even dramatic re-creations.                   
              Indeed, the series will not only make a unique contribution to                 
              the public and historical record, but also offer viewers an                    
              unprecedented opportunity to view 100 years of scientific                      
              pursuits as a unified whole, to recast their perceptions of                    
              science and scientists, and to be intrigued, even inspired, by                 
              a view of science as a never-ending and very human quest for                   
              answers and solutions.  A special outreach and promotion                       
              campaign will increase audience awareness of the series,                       
              particularly among nontraditional PBS viewers.  In addition,                   
              carefully developed teaching and learning materials will                       
              extend the series' reach into formal and informal educational                  
              settings, including high school and college classrooms, and                    
              community and youth-serving organizations.
