Title       : MPWG: Female Role Models in Science: Out of the Periphery and Into the Core
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1995       
File        : a9353760

Award Number: 9353760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dawn M. Pickard                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Frank mfrank@aps.faseb.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marsha L. Matyas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Physiological Soc
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9353760  Frank       The goal of the project is to increase the curricular 
              resources available for improving the science education of both  females and
              males.  These curricular resources will help middle  school life sciences
              students and high school biology students to:    o    view science as an
              exploratory activity, done by real people,       and involving hands-on,
              inquiry approaches; and    o    expand their image of scientists to include
              women from diverse       groups and time periods.    Specifically, this
              short-term, highly-focused project will develop,  review, and test a set of
              instructional and motivational drop-in  modules for middle school life science
              and introductory high school  biology classes which will allow teachers to
              easily integrate  information about female science role models into the
              curriculum  while increasing the hands-on, inquiry approaches used in class.  
              These materials will be coordinated with curricular goals for  introductory
              biology and with the goals and methods proposed by  national standards
              projects, including the National Research  Council's Science Education
              Standards Project, AAAS' Project 2061,  and NSTA's Scope, Sequence, and
              Coordination.       The modules will be evaluated in middle and high school 
              classrooms for their usefulness and student impact.  Teachers  participating in
              this in-class evaluation will include participants  in the American
              Physiological Society's (APS) Summer Research  Program for High School Teachers
              and in the Ohio State Systemic  Initiative - Project Discovery.  In addition,
              the modules will be  evaluated by participants in a series of workshops for
              high school  and middle school teachers at meetings of the National Association
               of Biology Teachers, the National Science Teachers Association, the  American
              Association for the Advancement of Science, the  Association for Women in
              Science, and the American Physiological  Society.  Finally, the modules will be
              reviewed by the National  Association of Biology Teachers' Publica tions Review
              Team, the APS  Education Committee, and the APS Committee on Women in
              Physiology.       The materials will be disseminated widely through workshops 
              and notices from an alliance of professional associations,  including the APS,
              AAAS, AWIS, NABT, and NSTA.  In addition, the  APS will disseminate the
              materials via workshops with teachers at  each of its annual meetings in coming
              years.  ***
