Title       : Math Matters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1997     
File        : a9353427

Award Number: 9353427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathryn B. Chval                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5422649            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Lester   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calif State Dept of Educ
	      721 Capitol Mall
	      Sacramento, CA  958144702    916/324-7187

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ESI-93-53427  Kepner  Math Matters  Abstract   This program is a four-year
              collaborative mathematics teacher enhancement project of the California
              Department of Education and a network of universities, mathematics education,
              compensatory education and migrant education organizations in California.  The
              project goal is to enhance the mathematics instructional effectiveness of
              elementary educators working with compensatory education and migrant students
              and accelerate the rate of systemic school wide change in targeted schools. 
              Approximately 2,000 teachers, administrators, and paraprofessionals in 100
              elementary (K-6) schools, comprised predominantly of compensatory education and
              migrant students, will be served.    The project will use a
              teachers-teaching-teachers model starting with the selection and intense
              preparation of five Teacher Consultants.   They will work with the Project
              Director and staff to enhance their skills and prepare regional training
              programs.  Teacher Consultants will strengthen the curricular and instructional
              leadership skills of 25 regional Cluster Leaders selected from participating
              districts.   The Consultants will participate in 10 days of planning with the
              Project Director.  Then each will engage five Cluster Leaders in planning and
              providing nine days of in-service training to project participants in a
              different grade level each year.  The staff development will focus on
              strengthening mathematical knowledge and instructional expertise.  
              Participants will receive a minimum of nine days of follow-up activities the
              first year and five days in subsequent years designed by the Consultants and
              Cluster Leaders.  These will focus on modeling research-based instructional
              methodology, promoting teacher reflection using case studies, teaching
              replacement units, and  phasing in school-wide in-service activities.   Project
              activities will be based on participant evaluations and needs, local school
              requests and coordinated with state systemic initiatives.    Project evaluation
              w ill be conducted by an independent firm.  They will assess subject-matter
              knowledge change of teachers, paraprofessional, and administrators and
              teachers' instructional effectiveness.  Programmatic and schoolwide reform will
              be monitored.  The project's effectiveness will be measured by comparing
              student outcomes on the standardized California Assessment Program for grades
              three and six with student performance at comparable schools    in the targeted
              counties.
