Title       : MPWG: Career Development Intervention for Math/Science Talented At-Risk Young
               Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1996   
File        : a9353788

Award Number: 9353788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lola E. Rogers                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92088              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Kerr BKERR@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Robinson-Kurpius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,
Abstract    :
              9353788   Kerr    This project is a research-thorough-service effort aimed
              primarily at math/science talented at-risk  girls.  It involves the
              development, evaluation, and dissemination of guidance strategies for  helping
              girls to set and work toward career goals in math, science, and engineering. 
              Career  development interventions designed to encourage young women in math and
              science are often  ineffective.  Possible reasons for the failure of most
              interventions include the fact that they treat  career choices in isolation
              from relationship decisions; that they do not focus on girls' deeply  held
              values (especially social ones), and needs; and, that they do not use mentors
              and science  activities effectively.  This project proposes to create a career
              development intervention which  is relationship-oriented, values-based, and
              girl-friendly, and to test the intervention in an  experimental study with
              young women who have been identified by their counselors as  math/science
              talented young women at risk for giving up career goals.      The study will
              evaluate the effects of the career development intervention on goal-setting, 
              math/science self-efficacy, self-esteem, at-risk behaviors, and career-oriented
              behaviors.  The  results of the study and a description of the project will be
              disseminated through journal articles  and presentations for guidance
              counselors, as well as through direct experience of participating  pre-service
              and in-service counselors.  It has the potential for creation of  of an
              innovative  approach to career counseling for young women which may be
              effective in helping them to  choose meaningful career goals related to math,
              science, and eengineering, and to persist toward  those goals.  ***
