Title       : Urban Systemic Initiative for Reform in Science and Mathematics Education
               Jacksonville, Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1994  
File        : a9353078

Award Number: 9353078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Madeleine J. Long                       
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Zenke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duval County School Board
	      1701 Prudential Drive
	      Jacksonville, FL  322078152    904/390-2115

NSF Program : 7360      STATEWIDE SYSTEMIC INITIATIVES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9353078  Zenke    Collaborating Organizations:  City government, University of 
              North Florida, Jacksonville Chamber of Commerce, Florida  Comprehensive State
              Center for Minorities, Florida Department of  Education, National Center for
              Excellence in Science, Mathematics  and Technology Education, Florida SSI,
              Florida Institute of  Education.      The Jacksonville USI planning grant will
              coordinate resources and  solicit input from a broad based constituency to
              accomplish the  following objectives:         conduct a comprehensive
              self-study of the current status       of science and mathematics education in
              Duval County         achieve consensus on a shared vision for science and      
              mathematics education         develop a comprehensive systemic plan for
              improvement of       mathematics and science education         establish a
              dynamic system to evaluate and refine systemic       reform.    A Stakeholder
              Steering Committee will select recognized community  leaders to chair task
              forces that will meet and gather data. The  planning process will produce a
              self-analysis based on valid  data, a shared vision, and an USI implementation
              proposal for the  city of Jacksonville.    Using principles adapted from total
              quality management as the  basis for the self-study, representatives from the
              major city  stakeholders will form a Stakeholder Steering Committee. This 
              committee will select community leaders to chair self-study task  forces,
              acquire additional funding and resources to support the  self-study and gather
              data from their constituencies.    The task forces will gather data by
              observation, interviews,  surveys and focus groups. This information will be
              used to assess  the current state of mathematics and science education in 
              Jacksonville and to develop a collective vision for reform.    The planning
              effort will result in the development of an  implementation proposal based on
              information gathered during the  self-study process.  ***
