Title       : AMP: ALL-Nations Alliance for American Indians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1993  
File        : a9353199

Award Number: 9353199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. McHenry                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Young   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ken Pepion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Caesar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick Weaselhead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,
Abstract    :
                9353199  Young    American Indians are the least represented of all minorities
              in  Science, Engineering and Mathematics (SEM).  The overall goal of  this
              project is to develop a cohesive interactive American Indian  Alliance and
              network to increase substantially the quality and  quantity of American Indians
              receiving baccalaureate degrees and  graduate degrees in SEM.  The initial step
              in achieving this goal  will be to sponsor a special conference to seek input
              from both the  Indian community and the SEM community.  A major goal of the 
              conference will be to identify and select specific options to build  a cohesive
              alliance.  A key aspect will be the agreed upon  selection of a lead
              institution or institutions to administratively  manage the American Indian
              Alliance.  In addition, conference  attendees will provide valuable input
              regarding innovative programs  to enhance matriculation of American Indian
              students at the  following three critical transition points:  (1) high school
              to  college (tribal/community/four-year); (2) from two-year college 
              (tribal/community) to four-year SEM degree-granting institutions;  and (3) from
              four-year institutions to doctoral degree granting  programs in SEM fields. 
              Invitations to the conference will be sent  to no less than 45 participating
              post-secondary institutions in 14  western states with significant American
              Indian population.  Of the  45 post-secondary institutions, 23 are tribally
              controlled  community colleges.  A major goal of the alliance will be to 
              empower the network of tribal colleges to establish a central  office to
              administer SEM programs for Indian students.  Examples of  some of the project
              activities that will be considered to be  implemented by participating
              institutions in the alliance are as  follows:  pre-college summer bridge
              programs; summer research  enrichment experiences; faculty exchange programs
              between two-year  (i.e., tribal/community) college and four-year SEM
              institutions;  curriculum development; graduate school prepar ation; tribal
              college  adopt-a-school programs; and telecommunications networking.  Future 
              activities of the American Indian AMP project will impact American  Indians at
              the levels of pre-college, undergraduate, and graduate  education.  The
              American Indian Alliance is designed to capitalize  on the strengths of
              existing Indian programs, SEM education and  research programs, and NSF funded
              programs in the western states.
