Title       : MPWG: Summer Program for Women in Science, Engineering and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1993 
File        : a9353780

Award Number: 9353780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117735             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy D. Wall wallj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vicki Curby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nan Unklesbay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,
Abstract    :
              9353780  Wall    This proposal describes a summer internship program for 15
              undergraduate women in the fields  of science, engineering or mathematics
              (SEM), recruited from Missouri's colleges and  universities.  The program is
              designed to interest and involve the interns in SEM research, and  to serve as
              a transition from undergraduate to graduate study by preparing the interns for 
              admission and successful matriculation in graduate SEM education programs. 
              SPWSEM'94 will  provide the interns with an eight-week research experience
              designed to increase the interns' self-  confidence and their familiarity with
              the graduate school environment.  It will also provide  mentoring, counseling
              and networking opportunities.    SPWSEM'94 will complement our NSF and
              Department of Education sponsored programs which  include women students. 
              However, this effort will tailor these successful programs specifically  for
              women in SEM.  A research experience is the cornerstone of the summer program. 
               SPWSEM'94 interns will be paired with faculty and graduate student mentors
              from the students'  chosen disciplines.  In addition, SPWSEM'94 faculty and
              graduate student mentors will provide  encouragement and training for the
              interns to help them learn methods for persisting through the  difficulties of
              pursing graduate study in primarily male-dominated fields.  SPWSEM'94 is
              further  designed to create opportunities for informal personal interactions
              with faculty, graduate students  and interns, and to foster effective learning
              strategies and communication skills.  We will  provide a number of enrichment
              activities including panel discussions by research faculty,  discipline
              specific computer workshops, and panel discussions with university, government
              and  industry scientists, mathematicians and engineers regarding career
              opportunities and innovations  in three represented fields.  Interns also will
              received financial aid counseling and graduate  school admissions counseling. 
              At the end of the research experience, i nterns will present their  research
              papers at a research forum for evaluation by faculty members and their peers. 
              As an  extension of the summer activity, student interns will attend a local or
              regional professional  meeting with their mentors and will be encouraged to
              present a paper at that meeting.  Interns  will also receive a student
              membership in professional SEM organization for women to  encourage them to
              make professional contacts that can provide participants with support 
              throughout their graduate and professional careers.  The success of SPWSEM'94
              will be  evaluated by a two-year comparison study of students who did not
              participate in an intervention  program and of the SPWSEM'94 interns.    ***
