Title       : ASPIRA Mathematics and Science Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9353813

Award Number: 9353813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wayne Ransom                            
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice Petrovich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ASPIRA Association Inc
	      1112 16th Street NW - Suite 340
	      Washington, DC  200364823    202/835-3600

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The  ASPIRA Association, Inc., proposes to develop a national             
              applicable model of community-based model to increase the number of            
              Latino middle-school youths with adequate preparation in math and              
              science education.                                                             
                                                                                             
                   Latino community-based organizations are uniquely capable of              
              reaching youth that are often difficult to reach by non-Latino                 
              organizations.  The importance of out-of-school informal science               
              experiences for young people to reinforce their interest in science            
              and mathematics is of interest to the National Science Foundation,             
              and to the ASPIRA Association.  However, not enough is known about             
              what works in informal science in the Latino community and with the            
              Latino students.                                                               
                                                                                             
                   The ASPIRA Association is requesting support from the National            
              Science Foundation to undertake a project to answer the following              
              question:                                                                      
                                                                                             
                   How can informal science programs have a greater impact on                
                   Latino middle school youth in science and mathematics?                    
                                                                                             
              The perceived benefits of the project are:                                     
                                                                                             
                       Identification of exemplary informal science education               
                        efforts undertaken by organizations in working with                  
                        Latino youths.                                                       
                                                                                             
                       Identification of effective curriculum models in informal            
                        science education for reaching Latino youths.                        
                                                                                             
                       Identification of characteristics of successful programs.            
                                                                                             
                       Encouraging partnerships among CBOs, educators, schools              
                        and family.                                                          
                                                                                             
                       Identification of supplemental resources for supporting              
                        informal science education programs.                                 
                                                                                             
                   ASPIRA is the only national nonprofit organization devoted to             
              serving Puerto Rican and other Latino youth through leadership                 
              development and education.  With a thirty-one year old track record            
              of proven effectiveness, ASPIRA's work with Latino youths is based             
              on the belief that all youths can succeed.
