Title       : MPWG: Women in Science Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1995    
File        : a9353764

Award Number: 9353764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lola E. Rogers                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Pavone mary.pavone@darthmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol B. Muller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen E. Wetterhahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,
Abstract    :
              9353764   Pavone    The Women in Science Project is an innovative program at
              Dartmouth College designed to  encourage women who enter college with high
              interests in science (including math and  engineering) to retain their
              interests and consider careers in these fields.  The effort invites them  to
              participate in a program of science research internships, seminars, discussion
              groups, peer  mentoring with upper division women in science, industrial site
              visits, and a regular electronic  newsletter that provides project
              cohesiveness.  The overall goal of the project is to increase the  number of
              women majoring in the sciences, math, and engineering at Dartmouth.  An 
              accompanying objective is to effect a general increase in the number of women
              enrolled in  science and engineering courses, measured by enrollments in
              classes typically taken by second  and third year students.  This grant will
              fund a portion of the primary activity of this  comprehensive model
              project--research internships for first year women.  Research internships  in
              the natural and physical sciences, math, and engineering offer:  1) an
              opportunity to work in  scientific research during the first year; 2)
              one-on-one work with a faculty member, who can  serve as a present and future
              mentor and role model; 3) "hands on" laboratory work and  firsthand experience
              with scientific inquiry; 4) an important scientific experience complementary 
              to introductory science classes; 5) an experience which de-mystifies and
              de-mythologies science;  and 6) stipends to ensure the full participation of
              economically disadvantaged students.   Objectives for the research internship
              program during 1993-94 are 1) to maintain the number  of 2-quarter internship
              opportunities supported per year at approximately 70 and, 2) to evaluate  the
              internship experience to better articulate and document why and how it operates
              as an  effective retention strategy within the overall project.      The Women
              In Science Project represents a very important initiative in hi gher education
              and  addresses a significant problem, the under-representation of women in the
              pursuit of science.   The project's research internship offer first-year women
              an unusual opportunity to experience  the process and methods of scientific
              inquiry.  The project has been enthusiastically received by  students and
              faculty, and is readily replicable.  Through careful evaluation and
              documentation  of the internship process, this strategy can be readied for
              dissemination.  Research and literature  support the soundness of the project's
              design.  A comprehensive understanding and  documentation of the value,
              effectiveness, limitations, and complexity of the internship program  and
              process, gleaned from the evaluation component, will have three major types of
              beneficial  outcomes.  First, it will provide information to guide how the
              internship model might be  improved, revised, and enhanced at Dartmouth. 
              Second, it will facilitate replication of the  model at other institutions
              interested in encouraging and sustaining the interest of women in the 
              sciences.  Third, it will contribute to a knowledge base of what factors and
              program components  can best support women's participation and retention in the
              sciences, to assist other research and  implementation efforts in this area. 
              NSF will support stipends and materials/supplies for 25 of  the 70, 2-quarter
              research internships that will be offered in academic year 1993-94, an in-depth
               evaluation of the internship program, and a portion of the administrative
              costs of the project  staff.  Internal institutional budgetary support and
              external support from corporate partners and  foundations will contribute the
              remaining support for the internship program as well as support  the costs of
              the other programs within the comprehensive strategy.  ***
