Title       : SSC: Junior Aquarist Summer Science Camp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9353177

Award Number: 9353177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151670             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvia James   (Principal Investigator current)
              Renita S. Jagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natl Aquarium Baltimore
	      Pier 3 501 East Pratt Street
	      Baltimore, MD  21202    301/576-3887

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9353177  National Aquarium in Baltimore  Baltimore, Maryland  James, Sylvia
              M. and Retina S. Jagan     The National Aquarium in Baltimore is a major
              resource for marine  and aquatic science in the mid-Atlantic region.  Its live
              and  interactive exhibits along with its on-site and outreach programs  focus
              on creating an attitude of respect for the environment and  the ecological
              balance of life.    The Summer Camp will offer instruction in marine and
              aquatic  science,  hands-on projects and information on career strategies.  
              Additionally, the program is designed to encourage the Junior  Aquarists to
              continue their interest and involvement in the  sciences beyond the four weeks
              of Summer Science Camp.    As Junior Aquarists, participants are immersed in an
              environment  unseen by general Aquarium Visitors -- the day to day routines 
              involved with maintaining a world-class institution.  They go 
              behind-the-scenes and interact with professionals in the field.   Students gain
              hands-on experience working alongside the individuals  who have chosen to
              pursue careers as aquarists, mammalogists,  herpetologists and aviculturists. 
              Students acquire and  understanding of the secondary and undergraduate
              educational  requirements needed to pursue various fields of study and how
              "book  learning" is applied to the real world.  Finally, Junior Aquarists  "do
              science" by designing, carrying out and presenting to their  families and
              friends, research projects using the National Aquarium  in Baltimore's renowned
              collection of poison arrow frogs.    The program provides the foundation for a
              lifelong interest in  science and research as well as an extended relationship
              with the  Aquarium.  Following participation in the NSF-funded Summer Science 
              Camp program, students can continue to meet on a monthly basis as  part of an
              ongoing Junior Aquarist Club.  Further, completion of  the Junior Aquarist
              program can be followed by participation in the  High School Internship Program
              and ultimately the High School  Studen t Guide program.  The latter carries
              high school students  through the Aquarium's rigorous seven-week volunteer
              training  program, provides paying summer jobs and culminates in  certification
              as full-fledged volunteer exhibit guides.  While  still in middle and high
              school, students can apply to the Henry  Hall Scholarship Fund for additional
              marine science opportunities.   Should students attend college, they are also
              eligible to  participate in the Aquarium's College Internship Program.  
              Therefore, the Junior Aquarist Summer Science Camp is not a four-  week,
              one-shot experience.  Rather, it is both the beginning of a  potentially
              longlasting fascination with marine and aquatic  science, and possibly the
              catalyst that produces a future  scientist.
