Title       : SSC: Miami University-Science-Engineering Mathematics Project (MU-SEMP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1995      
File        : a9353164

Award Number: 9353164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Iris DeLoach Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nate Carnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anita Roychoudhury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9353164  Miami University at Oxford  Oxford, OH    DeLoach-Johnson, Iris,
              Roychoudhury, Anita and Carnes, Nate    "Miami University-Science-Engineering
              Mathematics Project (MU-  SEMP)"    Miami University's minority summer science
              camp, referred to as  Miami University-Science Engineering Mathematics Program
              (MU-SEMP),  is carefully designed to build upon the experience of its principal
               investigators, to extend the scope and effectiveness of two major  projects in
              Southwestern Ohio, and to provide a holistic approach  to developing in
              minority youth the knowledge and skills needed for  entrance to and retention
              in the scientific and technological  pipeline.  The project's location (Oxford,
              Ohio) will allow it to  recruit from the large concentrations of minority,
              specifically  African-American, youth in the Cincinnati and Dayton metropolitan
               areas as well as from minority youth who are isolated in rural  schools
              surrounding those urban areas.    In order to reach its goal of assisting
              people of color in becoming  more active members of the science, engineering,
              and mathematics  pipeline, both as American citizens and as potential employees
              in  related career fields, MU-SEMP will combine inquiry-based content  courses
              in science, mathematics, and computer science with a  supportive living and
              learning environment for four weeks.   Students will also attend field trips,
              receive training in  technical writing, communications, and research and study
              skills.   Guest speakers who work in science, engineering, and mathematics 
              careers will also provide reflections from the real world.   Furthermore, in
              order to assure that the supportive environment  continues after the duration
              of the camp, parents as well as  college students, college faculty, and middle
              and high school  teachers will be involved as staff and mentors.        MU-SEMP
              will build upon and expand the strengths of two systemic  initiatives in its
              geographical area.  First, Ohio's Statewide  Systemic Initiative is also
              located at Mia mi University, and MU-  SEMP will use teachers trained by
              Discovery as well as adapt  Discovery materials and curricula.  In addition,
              Discovery teachers  will have opportunities to work with MU-SEMP youth while
              both  groups are in residence in the summer.  MU-SEMP staff have been  involved
              previously in developing and teaching Discovery courses.   Second, Minorities
              in Mathematics, Science, and Engineering (M2SE),  one of the regional Alliances
              for Minority Progress centers is  located in Cincinnati.  Recruitment,
              sensitivity, and retention  techniques used in that project will be adapted for
              the young  teenagers who participate in the summer science camp.  Two of the 
              project's investigators have also been trained by this program.  In  summary,
              by combining rigorous education in science and mathematics  with a supportive,
              pleasant, residential environment, MU-SEMP will  attract, motivate, and retain
              more minority students in the  education pipeline.
