Title       : SSC: Minority Middle School Summer Science Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9353162

Award Number: 9353162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296758             (Estimated)
Investigator: Regina Todd-Hicks   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. Vanable  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
                SSC-9353162  Purdue University  West Lafayette, IN  Todd-Hicks, Regina and
              Vanable, Joseph    The primary objective of this project is to stimulate
              minority  Middle School students to develop an interest in and a facility for 
              science, and as a result, to choose science as a career.  A  secondary
              objective (whose achievement should help with attaining  the first) is to
              stimulate Middle School teachers to reinvigorate  their teaching efforts in
              their home institutions.    To achieve these objectives, 50 under-represented
              minority students  from major Indiana cities and eight of their teachers will
              be  selected for a summer program on the West Lafayette campus of  Purdue
              University.  The students will have finished the 7th grade  and must show
              promise for achievement in science and mathematics.   The program will be held
              for four weeks, and will progress through  a three-year cycle, each successive
              year building on the previous  one.  At the end of the cycle (assuming the
              program continues to be  supported), a new cohort of students will be
              recruited.  To replace  those lost by attrition during a cycle, new students
              will be  recruited for the 2nd and 3rd years from students who have  completed
              the 8th and 9th grades, respectively.  Parents will be an  integral part of the
              program; they will attend workshops at the  beginning and at the mid-point of
              the program that focus on their  role in helping their sons and daughters to
              choose a career, and in  sustaining their educational efforts.    The summer
              program will use several approaches: (1) Inquiry-based 
              lecture/discussion/laboratory experiences that focus on interesting  aspects of
              four areas of science: Biology, chemistry, Earth &  Atmospheric Sciences, and
              Physics (one per week each year).   Although there will be no Mathematics or
              computer Sciences per se.   These disciplines will permeate the four subjects
              chosen.  These  experiences should increase the students' knowledge of these
              areas,  but more importantly, they should engender a sense  that doing  science
              is a quest, rather than merely memorizing "facts."  We very  much hope that
              this point would be reinforced in the Middle school  teachers of these
              students, as well, as they participate in the  lectures, laboratories, and
              discussions.  (2) Opportunities for  careers in science will be identified
              during the daytime lecture/  laboratory/discussion sessions, and by visits to
              laboraties on and  off campus.  Career exploration and evaluation will also be
              an  important part of evening sessions held in the dormitories, both  with
              University staff and with representatives from industry.   Particular emphasis
              will be given to pointing out the issue of  under- representation of minority
              persons in science, and  highlighting the contributions of minority scientists,
              both past  and present.          (3) Help to encourage analytical thinking and
              help to develop  strategies for academic success not only in the lectures, lab 
              activities, and discussions during the day, but also by various  means in the
              evening sessions (e.g., sharpening reasoning powers in  the context of
              enjoyable games; exploring test-taking skills;  emphasizing the value of
              studying in groups).
