Title       : MPWG: Experiment Based Physics for Girls in Elementary Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1993    
File        : a9353753

Award Number: 9353753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99805              (Estimated)
Investigator: Meera Chandrasekhar phys3460@Mizzoul  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca Q. Litherland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9177,9252,
Abstract    :
              9353753  Chandrasekhar    This proposal is requesting second year funding to
              further develop and expand an experiment-  based, hands-on program which is
              introducing girls in the 4th, 5th and 6th grades to the physical  sciences,
              through a collaboration between a university physics professor and the science 
              coordinator of the local schools.  The topic areas selected are:  Optics,
              Sound, Electricity,  Magnetism and Mechanics.  For each a series of modules
              will be developed.  Individual modules  will develop a concept (e.g., the
              reflection of light) through a series of logically sequential  games, simple
              experiment, building of gadgets, toys, art projects and finally, laboratory 
              experiments using simple scientific equipment, and "gee whiz"
              exploratorium-style exhibits.  By  introducing the girls to a number of
              different ways of observing and using the same concept, we  will allow them to
              see how a simple concept is developed on a logical basis to understand  complex
              scientific phenomena.  The objective is to motivate the girls by conveying that
              science  is fun, but more importantly, by familiarizing them with simple
              scientific equipment, by  developing their building and experimenting skills,
              as well as their capabilities of logical  reasoning.    The program is set up
              in the initial years as an extra-curricular effort.  There will be sessions 
              twice a week for four weeks.  The Optics modules were tested in two of the
              eighteen school in  the Columbia Public School District in the first year.  In
              the second year, we will concentrate  on two major areas of enhancement.  We
              will develop modules on two more subjects  (Mechanics, and Electricity and
              Magnetism), and we will conduct workshops to train about 30  teachers.  The
              program will be implemented at eight to twelve schools in the second year.  We 
              anticipate that the material developed will be integrated by elementary school
              teachers into the  regular curriculum in coming years.  ***
