Title       : MPWG: Science for Young Leaders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1994    
File        : a9353804

Award Number: 9353804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78520              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Sullivan ksulliva@seattleu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Seattle University
	      900 Broadway
	      Seattle, WA  98122    206/626-6200

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,
Abstract    :
              9353804  Sullivan    Seattle University proposes an activity-based, team-focused
              model program for female eighth  grade students of color for academic year
              1993-94.  The program will serve students who are  able and well motivated, but
              who might well lose interest in science and mathematics without  special
              attention.  The model program will extend and enhance a four-week NSF-supported
               Summer Science Camp, which will serve the same girls in August 1993.  In that
              camp, called  "Summer Science Splash:  The Mathematics and Physics of Water,"
              students will use group  discussions, experimentation, and field work to learn
              about physical properties of water,  principles of waves, issues of water
              quality, and the role of water in the Northwest ecology.   In the model
              program, each student will build on knowledge and skills gained during the
              summer  by carrying out a challenging science project on a water-related issue
              of particular interest to  her.  It is our hypothesis that year-long
              reinforcement of the excitement generated by the  summer program will heighten
              many students' continuing interest in science.    Each student, or pair of
              students, will direct a project team consisting of a middle school  teacher, a
              Seattle university undergraduate science student, and a professional scientist
              who  works in the community.  Working closely together, each team will design
              and carry out a  project over a five month period.  Possible project areas
              include stream monitoring,  hydroelectric power, water in weather, avalanches,
              and marine biology.  Projects will involve  reading, field work,
              experimentation, team discussion, model-building, and writing.  A  curriculum
              designer will work with each team to design a project that is significant and 
              appropriate for the time frame.  The project will culminate with four spring
              events:  1) the  student's presentation of her project methods and results to
              her classmates; 2) participation in  "Expanding Your Horizons," a career
              workshop for middle school girls; 3) a mar ine science and  environmental
              education camp experience in Washington's San Juan Islands; and 4) Science Day,
               an on-campus colloquium and celebration in which each team presents its
              project to the entire  group.  In addition to the value of the science content
              and the time devoted to science, students  will gain leadership and project
              management skills, experience in cooperation and working as  part of a team,
              verbal presentation experience, and experience interacting with professional 
              scientists as friends and role models.  ***
