Title       : SSC: Michigan Summer Science Camps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9353155

Award Number: 9353155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $674504             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irvin E. Vance   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mozell P. Lang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Pollard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Black Child & Family Inst
	      835 W. Genesee
	      Lansing, MI  489151840    517/487-3775

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9353155  Black Child and Family Institute  Lansing, MI    Vance, Irvin,
              Lang, Mozell and Pollard, John    "Michigan Summer Science Camps"    Michigan
              State University Mathematics Department, in collaboration  with the Mathematics
              and Science Program of the Michigan Department  of Education and the Black
              Child and Family Institute of Lansing,  will offer a five-week summer science
              camp program combined with an  academic year program for underrepresented
              minority students.  This  will be a statewide program with science camps
              offered in three  Michigan sites each year.  These sites will be in
              Lansing/East  Lansing, Pontiac and Benton Harbor.  Each site will operate with 
              its own staff but with a common set of goals and a common  disciplinary focus. 
              A professional development workshop for staff  will precede the camp.    The
              young people served will be African-American, Hispanic-American  and
              Native-American students from the Lansing, Pontiac and Benton  Harbor areas. 
              These students will be entering the seventh, eighth  and ninth grades in the
              fall of 1993.  Three commuter camps, each  enrolling 60 students, will be held.
               In addition, a five-day  residential camp, with an environmental focus will be
              held at the  Kellogg Biological Station at Gull Lake.  One Hundred and eighty 
              students will participate in a program that will include  mathematics, science,
              and environmental and computer science.   Parents of participants will be
              expected to attend selected  sessions and work periodically as program
              volunteers.    Nine Saturday morning sessions for participants will be held at 
              each site during the academic year.  A recognition program for all 
              participants, funded by Macmillan/McGraw Hill Publishing Company,  will be held
              at Michigan State University in the spring of each  year.  The summer science
              camp program will address the need for a  scientifically literate population
              and reversing the declining  aptitude, interest and participation in science by
              underrepresented  groups.  The science c amps will offer:       o    an
              environment, conducive to learning science and  mathematics, with tools,       
                 resources and expert teachers.       o    mentor relationships to nurture
              skills and predisposition  for science and          mathematics        o   
              four-week commuter summer science camp plus a one-week  residential camp with  
                    opportunities to practice science and  mathematics with a
              problem-solving,          exploratory approach       o    a  series of half-day
              Saturday programs, one each month  during the academic year       o    strong
              parental involvement to support and guide the  interest and direction of the   
                     child
