Title       : A Network-Based Interactive Distance Education Program in Mathematics For
               Students And For Teacher Enhancement in Rural And Inner-City
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1996 
File        : a9353689

Award Number: 9353689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony L. Peressini   (Principal Investigator current)
              J.Jerry Uhl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Ziebarth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth J. Travers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Peressini  9353689    This proposal is an invited revision of an earlier NSF
              proposal  "Using computer networks to provide interactive university calculus 
              instruction and in-service technology training for teachers in  rural and
              inner-city high schools" (NSF-ID-9353689) with a reduced  budget and scope of
              activities.    During the past four years, a modem-based network connecting the
               University of Illinois to approximately twenty-five rural and  inner-city high
              schools and a distance interactive instructional  strategy have evolved that
              are capable of delivering a college-  credit, electronic text-based calculus
              course, Calculus &  Mathematics, to these schools in an educationally sound and
              cost  effective manner.  Arrangements are now being made to sustain this  model
              for course delivery independent of grant funds beginning with  the 1996-97
              school year.  The direct instructional costs, including  network costs, will be
              shared by the participating school districts  and students, while the
              administrative cost will be borne by the  University.    This proposal seeks
              funding to expand and enhance this existing  network testbed by:       1)
              implementing and evaluating two new networking models that  are based on ISDN
              or T-1 line connections and that are not only  capable of enhanced interactive
              course delivery, but also the  delivery of Internet instructional resources to
              the participating  schools;       2) designing, implementing and evaluating
              teacher enhancement  activities (on-site and electronic) to develop a community
              of  school-based personnel whose members are equipped to provide  leadership in
              technology-based mathematics and science education in  their schools;        3)
              establishing appropriate linkages between our network and  other networks here
              and elsewhere that are delivering mathematics  and science resources to high
              schools including the NSF-funded  Urban Systemic Initiative in Chicago.    The
              evaluation program for the project will be both formative and  summative, and
              will ad dress: 1) course delivery performance of the  new models with the
              current model; 2) effectiveness of the teacher  enhancement activities; 3)
              changes in the instructional environment  in the participating schomls
              resulting from the project.    The ultimate objective will be to develop a
              sustainable (i.e.  grant-independent), cost effective Internet-based network
              model  linking the University and the participating high schools for the 
              purposes of course delivery, teacher enhancement activities, and  instructional
              resource access.  ***
