Title       : MPWG: Finding Your Wings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1995   
File        : a9353765

Award Number: 9353765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Betty Ruth Jones                        
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75936              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janetle P. Buckingham   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jill A. Marshall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Research Inst
	      6220 Culebra Road
	      San Antonio, TX  782385166    /   -

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,
Abstract    :
              9353765         Marshall    Find Your Wings is a collaborative program based
              upon the research related to attracting women  and girls to science,
              engineering and mathematics (SEM), and retaining them in the career  pipeline,
              as well as upon our experience with past projects in the San Antonio area which
              were  dedicated to those goals.  We have drawn particularly on the
              recommendations of the American  Association of University Women's report, How
              Schools Shortchange Girls, specifically that,  "Local schools and communities
              must encourage and support girls studying science and  mathematics by
              showcasing women role models in scientific and technical fields, disseminating 
              career information, and offering hands-on experiences and work groups in
              science and math  classes." The importance of role models, especially female
              role models, is well documented in  the literature.  Thus, we are stressing the
              classroom presence of scientists and engineers,  particularly women, in the
              aviation and aerospace fields in designing our project.  We chose the 
              aviation/aerospace theme as a recruiting tool to exploit girls' interest
              largely because of the  proximity of four local U.S. Air Force bases and
              several major airports.  (Stinson Field is within  the cooperating school
              district.)  The lack of hands-on experience for girls in hardware 
              experimentation is recognized as a contributing factor in their loss of
              interest in science in the  middle school years (AAUW, Peltz 1990).  We are
              attempting to remedy this by giving the girls  goal-oriented activities in
              areas of interest to most children, and providing them with the  materials and
              encouragement to successfully complete the activities.  We also stress the 
              application of mathematical methods and activities.       The six-week program
              begins with five weeks of math/science exploration built around an 
              aviation/aerospace theme, with two weekly sessions, one at a local elementary
              school after  school hours for teams of girls and adults, working together on
              experi ments and problem-  solving, and one at the new Math/Science Learning
              Academy in an area high school, which will  feature career speakers from the
              aviation/aerospace professions, tours, etc..  These are to be  followed by a
              model "air show" for 100-200 girls in 4-6th grades at five designated
              elementary  schools.  Teachers, parents, Girls Scout leaders, and others in
              that school district will be  encouraged to participate.  Since it is important
              to expose the girls to the working SEM  environment, we are scheduling field
              trips to a variety of aviation and aerospace research and  commercial
              facilities, including operating airports and a U.S. Air Force research
              Institute.  At  all of these locations, the use of computers in the work place
              are to be highlighted, recognizing  the need to increase computer acceptance an
              computer literacy in the target population.   Cooperating organizations also
              include the Edgewood Independent School District, the American  Statistical
              Association, The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and the
              Girl  Scouts.  ***
