Title       : Industrial/University Interaction for Stimulation-Base Process Improvement in
               Electronic Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9353651

Award Number: 9353651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Anderson                     
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip A. Farrington paf@ise.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Swain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherri L. Messimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              93-53651  Farrington  Swain  Messimer  Industry/University Interaction for
              Simulation-based Process Improvement in Electronic  Manufacturing  Electronics
              manufacturing is one of the most critical and highly competitive industries
              within the  U.S. economy.  In the automotive electronics industry, these
              electronics are used to control an  increasing number of engine and safety
              functions.  Unlike the computer and consumer  electronics arenas the harsh
              under-the-hood environment of automotive electronics often stresses 
              electronics devices to their limits.  In addition, technological developments
              are occurring that  improve functionality, decrease package size, and increase
              reliability while maintaining efficient,  high-volume assembly operations.  To
              succeed, firms must balance the complex and competing  requirements of
              electronics design, materials processing, manufacturing, and reliability at the
               earliest stages of product development to insure that the finished product can
              be produced in a  timely, highly reliable, cost effective manner.    The
              difficulty of this task has led manufacturers to build a network of shared
              knowledge among  vendors and assemblers, and to reach out to research
              institutions for specialized knowledge and  assistance in the integration of
              the tasks noted above.  This proposal aims to establish a  cooperative process
              improvement initiative between UAH and Chrysler's Huntsville Electronics 
              Division (HED).  This project will focus on the development of simulation tools
              to support all  aspects of product and process development, in order to
              evaluate a variety of design, materials,  and manufacturing alternatives.  In
              particular, generic simulation models of existing process lines  will be
              developed which can be easily maintained, modified, and expanded thereby
              speeding the  modeling process in the future.  The principal investigators will
              also assist Chrysler's HED in  establishing procedures for validating and
              analyzing these models.  The net result of this project  will b e increased
              university/industry interaction, mainstreaming of junior faculty, as well as
              the  development of advanced simulation tools, and the transfer of knowledge
              about their  development and use.
