Title       : MPWG: TAP: Transition.. Assimilation.. Preparation A Program to Retain and
               Prepare Women Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1994  
File        : a9353782

Award Number: 9353782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78263              (Estimated)
Investigator: Connie Stein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Firouzeh Keshmiri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Milwaukee School of Eng
	      1025 N. Broadway
	      Milwaukee, WI  532023109    414/277-7300

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              69        Life Sciences NEC                       
Program Ref : 9177,9252,
Abstract    :
              9353782  Keshmiri    The TAP Program is aimed at mining the rich vein of talent
              that women can offer.  Encouraged  by the enthusiastic response to the earlier
              IDEAS effort, the TAP Program is built upon the best  of IDEAS.  TAP TEAMS will
              be formed on the basis of major fields of study and will consist  of incoming
              women, returning women, and women alumnae.  The teams will be formed during 
              the two-day "Transition" experience, maintained throughout the "Assimilation"
              experience, and  widely utilized for the "Preparation" experience.    The
              Transition component will provide a two-day on campus experience designed to
              make  incoming women feel comfortable and connected to MSoE.  All activities
              will promote  interaction, bonding, and networking with other incoming women
              students, returning women  students, and women representing the faculty, staff,
              and alumnae of the college.  The  Assimilation component will strengthen the
              friendships and networks begun during the Transition  stage and provide new
              opportunities for feeling connected to the School and to the field of 
              engineering.  These opportunities will include shadowing MSoE women as they
              work on their  senior design projects, designing and implementing new programs
              that meet the special needs  of women on the MSoE campus, and participating in
              a lecture-discussion series led by  professional women engineers.  The
              Preparation component will help women formulate realistic  career goals and
              strengthen their commitment to the filed of engineering.  This will be achieved
               through an extensive shadowing program linking sophomore students to
              professional women  engineers, through quarterly forums in which students share
              their experiences, and through  increased student participation in professional
              organizations on campus.  Evaluation of the  effectiveness will involve
              external consultation, students and faculty/staff.  ***
