Title       : SSC: Skill Summer Science Camp for American Indian Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1995      
File        : a9353256

Award Number: 9353256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252480             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip J. Huebner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara J. McCulloh  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jack A. Weyland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9353256  South Dakota School of Mines and Technology  Rapid City, SD   
              McCulloh, Sara and Weyland, J. A.     "Skill Summer Science Camp for American
              Indian Students"    The Skill Summer Science Camp Program of the South Dakota
              School of Mines and Technology  will be a 4-week residential math/science
              program for American Indian students.  Fifty  American Indian students per
              summer will be selected from South Dakota's nine Indian  reservations to
              participate each summer.    The goals of the Skill Summer Science Camp are to
              provide a foundation for a lifelong interest  in science and mathematics for
              all participants and to encourage the consideration of SEM as  possible career
              choices.  Students entering eighth grade will be selected based on their 
              application and teacher's recommendation/commitment to assist with a Science
              Fair project.    The curriculum uses a hands-on discovery approach,
              collaborative learning work groups and  interdisciplinary curriculum.  The
              disciplinary focus is on "Mathematical Problem Solving in  Physics" with Dr.
              Jack Weyland.           Basic Skills         Research             Careers      
               Mathematical Problem        Science Fair         Robotics    Solving in
              Physics        Project Development  Career Seminars  Computer Labs             
                                    Geology/Paleontology    Communications    Math
              Applications      In order to provide intensive role model/mentor experiences,
              the program staff/faculty includes  over 19 SDSM&T faculty and AISES students,
              and tribal school/college faculty to work with  the SSC students.    Evening
              programs will include astronomy, Project Wild (environmental activities from
              the  Game, Fish and Parks Dept.), field trips and cultural activities.  parents
              will be invited to  participate in the Family Math programs each week as well
              as the geology field trip, science fair  and graduation.    School year
              follow-up will include: bi-monthly newsletters, invitations to Saturday
              seminars, and  a Skill SSC Alumni Reunion during the Hi gh plains Regional
              Science Fair.
