Title       : Recovery from Striate Cortex Lesions Made in Infancy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9109743

Award Number: 9109743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187943             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hillary R. Rodman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles G. Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              It is known that there is a range of recovery to different                     
              kinds of brain damage.  In the visual system of humans, damage to              
              only the visual cortex of the brain often leaves residual                      
              functional vision, called "blindsight", that presumably depends                
              on pathways from the eye to areas other than primary visual                    
              cortex.  There is evidence that sparing or recovery of visual                  
              function is greater when cortical damage occurs during infancy                 
              rather than in an adult.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This project investigates some of the mechanisms by which                      
              such visual recovery in very young animals may be more effective               
              than recovery of older animals.  Visual detection, localization                
              and discrimination will be assessed for the field of vision                    
              normally represented in the excised tissue (the "field defect"),               
              and recovery will be tracked as a function of time and of                      
              practice.  Behavioral responses later will be compared to                      
              responses of single nerve cells in the visual regions of the                   
              brain outside the lesioned areas, and anatomical studies will                  
              explore the development of changes in connectivity.  Results are               
              likely to clarify how recovery in infants occurs better than in                
              adults, and so will be very important to our understanding of the              
              organization and development of the primate and human visual                   
              system.
