Title       : Advancing the Networked Organization with Group Decision Support Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1991 
File        : a9109167

Award Number: 9109167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerardine DeSanctis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Dickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marshall Scott Poole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              In response to pressures associated with sharply fluctuating                   
              customer demand, accelerating technological innovation,                        
              acquisitions or joint venture arrangements, and the emergence of               
              global markets, many large organizations are replacing hierarchical            
              and matrix forms of management with a `dynamic network' design.                
              Dynamic networks are a combination of functional-organization and              
              flexible structures such that the major components of the                      
              organization can be assembled and reassembled in order to meet                 
              complex and changing competitive conditions.  The University of                
              Minnesota and Texaco Inc. propose to undertake a joint study of the            
              role of group decision support systems(GDSS's) and related                     
              information technologies in facilitating a corporation's transition            
              to a dynamic network form.  The project will involve:(a) design and            
              implementation of GDSS prototypes for use in decision rooms and in             
              local and wide-area networks; (b) studies of GDSS use within and               
              between work teams; and (c) studies of GDSS impacts on individuals,            
              teams, and larger business units.  GDSS will be studied as one                 
              aspect of a larger set of change approaches, including quality                 
              programs, self-managed teams, and advanced information technologies            
              (specifically, electronic mail and group conferencing systems).                
              Several propositions related to GDSS design, use and impacts will              
              be explored.  This project builds on a base of GDSS design, theory             
              development, and laboratory research conducted at Minnesota and                
              field work conducted in a GDSS facility at Texaco.
