Title       : Reassurance and the Impact of Policing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9109032

Award Number: 9109032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66011              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wesley G. Skogan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In most developed societies modern policing is premised on the idea            
              of police presence.  For at least the last twenty years,                       
              commentators have stressed the importance of what is dubbed "the               
              reassurance factor."  This emphasis assumes that people feel more              
              secure and safe when they believe that a police officer is nearby.             
              Such conventional wisdom is routinely reiterated in  scholarly                 
              discussions of the impact of police patrol and claims about the                
              potential impact of community policing.  It also plays a central               
              role in the politics of police resource allocation.                            
                                                                                             
              The study being undertaken by Dr. Skogan focuses on the saliency               
              of the reassurance argument for understanding perceptions as well              
              as impacts of the police.  Based on secondary analyses of multi-               
              wave interviews with large panels of residents of 40 higher-crime              
              neighborhoods in ten cities over the course of a decade, this                  
              research tests several hypotheses linking police contact with                  
              citizen reassurance.  The project offers an operational definition             
              of the "reassurance factor" along such dimensions as fear of crime,            
              perceptions of crime trends, beliefs about the defensibility of                
              city neighborhoods, and satisfaction with the quality of police                
              service.  These dimensions will be related to citizen encounters               
              with a variety of kinds of policing (e.g., motorized patrol, foot              
              patrol, community organizing efforts).  Through an altered                     
              replication design (in some instances aggregating across studies               
              and in other instances replicating across multiple sites), the                 
              impact of both police visibility and actual encounters with diverse            
              policing efforts will be assessed.                                             
                                                                                             
              This work holds promise of a major advance.  While using extant                
              data sets, the study brings them together in original ways and adds            
              to fundamental knowledge about the actual impact of visible                    
              policing and the assurance it provides.  Also, the research will               
              yield estimates of the impact of alternative policing strategies.              
              In addition to theoretical and empirical contributions, the project            
              is important in policy terms.  It should yield a fresh basis for               
              organizing routine police activities and selecting policing tactics            
              and strategies in light of scarce resources for years to come.
