Title       : Computer Simulation and Control of Autonomous Underwater Walking Robots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1994     
File        : a9109989

Award Number: 9109989
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Norman Caplan                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yutaka Kanayama   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. McGhee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naval Postgraduate School
	      Code 09
	      Monterey, CA  93943    408/656-2099

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides support for a cooperative research program                 
              involving the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) in the United                    
              States and the Port and Harbor Research Institute (PHRI) in                    
              Japan.  Support from the National Science Foundation is for the                
              U.S. portion of the work, while a companion proposal from PHRI                 
              requests funds from the Japanese Science and Technology Agency                 
              for the Japanese component.  On the U.S. side, the principal                   
              investigators have many years experience with autonomous vehicles              
              and computer-controlled walking machines.  On the Japanese side,               
              PHRI has developed Aquarobot, the first autonomous underwater                  
              walking robot.  This machine was designed specifically for                     
              unmanned inspection of sea-floor building sites and foundations.               
              It is proposed to use the capabilities of NPS in the fields of                 
              artificial intelligence, robotics, computer graphics, and                      
              computer systems architecture, to extend the currently available               
              theory for simulation and control of robotic vehicles to                       
              encompass the case of subsea walking machines.  This theory will               
              be validated by physical experiments with Aquarobot, and is                    
              expected to result in significant improvements in the performance              
              of this vehicle in practical seafloor mapping applications.  In                
              addition, the theoretical and experimental findings of this                    
              research should be of value in supporting the subsequent design                
              of more advanced subsea walking machines.
