Title       : RIA: Efficient ALgorithms for the Design of Systems with non-Gaussian Inputs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9109858

Award Number: 9109858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Aubrey M. Bush                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79092              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey C. Orsak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The objectives of this project are to develop highly                      
              efficient iterative algorithms for use in system design                        
              (especially communication systems) in the presence of non-Gaussian             
              disturbances, and to extend these algorithms to the design of                  
              systems which efficiently adapt to nonstationary environments.                 
                   Analytic solutions to the design of systems with non-Gaussian             
              inputs are typically intractable, therefore numerical methods are              
              frequently required.  Stochastic approximation algorithms are                  
              effective design alternatives which require only estimates of the              
              system error at an iterated set of system parameters.                          
                   This project merges concepts from Importance Sampling with                
              existing stochastic approximation algorithms to dramatically                   
              reduce the total required computations in the design of                        
              parameterized systems and inputs.  In the situation where the                  
              inputs are non-stationary, a selfmodifying Importance Sampling                 
              strategy is developed for use with adaptive implementations of                 
              these algorithms.  This requires the coupling of techniques in                 
              estimation theory with Importance Sampling strategies derived from             
              static systems.  Example of particular interest are communication              
              systems operating in the presence of stationary and nonstationary              
              non-Gaussian background noise.  Preliminary results demonstrate                
              that for the scalar design case, the computational savings are                 
              unbounded when designing detection systems whose error rates                   
              diminish.
