Title       : Deformable Models for Computer Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9109431

Award Number: 9109431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77977              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Gauch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6840,9264,
Abstract    :
              The principal theme of this research is the development and                    
              application of deformable models for computer vision.  In                      
              contrast to traditional, purely geometric object models,                       
              deformable models simulate elastic material which change shape in              
              response to externally applied forces.  The main advantage of                  
              this approach is that it produces coherent object models where                 
              low level vision techniques often suffer from pixel artifacts and              
              may not yield closed object boundaries.  The work begins by                    
              extending existing surface-based models in two fundamental ways.               
              First, models are developed which can dynamically change to                    
              reflect the underlying topology of the object being modeled.                   
              This makes it possible to model object deformations with less                  
              complete and prior knowledge.  Second, the deformable models are               
              generalized so objects in higher dimensions can be modeled.  This              
              will enable scientists to study object behavior in time-sequence               
              images and gain an understanding of the mechanisms involved in                 
              object deformation.  In order to accurately model complex objects              
              in nature, computational methods are needed that are capable of                
              handling models with hundreds of thousands of elements.  The                   
              approach combines two optimization techniques, simulated                       
              annealing and multiresolution analysis, to reduce both the time                
              and space complexity of fitting deformable object models.  To                  
              evaluate effectiveness of the deformable models, the object                    
              modeling techniques are applied to several challenging biomedical              
              computer vision problems: image segmentation; shape description;               
              and object recognition.
