Title       : RIA: A New Approach to Microwave/Millimeter-Wave Transmitters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1993   
File        : a9109830

Award Number: 9109830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoya B. Popovic zoya@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              There is a need for compact, high-power sources for                            
              radar applications in the microwave and millimeter-                            
              wave range.  The output power levels of solid-state                            
              devices in this frequency range are limited.  A                                
              possible solution to be explored in this Research                              
              Initiation Grant is to coherently combine the outputs                          
              of hundreds of active devices that load a two-                                 
              dimensional metal grid with a period equal to a                                
              fraction of a free-space wavelength.  This active                              
              surface is an antenna as well as source.  The devices                          
              can be MESFETs arranged in a gate-feedback                                     
              configuration.  This type of oscillator has a wide                             
              frequency tuning range, as is required in most                                 
              applications.  The oscillating active surface is backed                        
              with a tuning mirror that has an electrically variable                         
              reflection coefficient.  This mirror is another metal                          
              grid loaded with varactor diodes.  The capacitance of                          
              the diodes, and therefore the reflection coefficient of                        
              this tuning surface, is bias dependant.  The mirror                            
              provides positive feedback to the oscillator surface,                          
              which is necessary for the devices to lock to a single                         
              mode.  In a radar, for example, the signal is usually                          
              transmitted in pulses.  In cases when the transmitter                          
              itself cannot be switched on and off at a high rate, a                         
              switching active surface can be used.  This surface                            
              consists of a grid loaded with pin diodes, and it                              
              electrically switches the wave transmitted from the                            
              oscillator grid.  This system is compact and light                             
              weight, since it consists of a stack of planar dielectrics                     
              loaded with solid-state devices that do not require                            
              large power supplies.  It is versatile, for example,                           
              another active surface of Schottky diodes placed in                            
              parallel with the oscillator could have a variable                             
              phase shift for beam steering or beam forming                                  
              applications, or can be used as a multiplier.  In                              
              addition, the planar structure is suitable for wafer-                          
              scale or modular integration.
