Title       : Absolute Kinetic Studies of Carbene Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1993   
File        : a9109044

Award Number: 9109044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Moss moss@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A study of carbenes and related reactive intermediates by laser                
              flash photolysis will be conducted. Spectroscopic and kinetic                  
              measurements of these highly reactive intermediates in solution                
              will be made. The research projects will include investigation                 
              of: (1) the properties of nucleophilic carbenes; (2) the                       
              kinetics of carbene/metal salt reactions (carbenoid formation);                
              (3) the properties of "push pull" carbenes as well as pyridyl                  
              and pyridinium carbenes; (4) the effects of fluoro and methoxy                 
              substituents in modulating intramolecular carbene                              
              rearrangements; and (5) the fragmentation of oxycarbenes to                    
              carbocations. These studies will be of particular importance in                
              providing insight and understanding for reactions that are                     
              characterized by low activation energy barriers.                               
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor Robert A. Moss at Rutgers                         
              University. These studies will be centered around the                          
              production and reactions of carbenes, which are species that                   
              contain a carbon atom with two formal bonds rather than four                   
              bonds as found in stable carbon compounds. Carbenes are                        
              reactive intermediates that are very short-lived. Special flash                
              laser techniques will be employed to observe these reactive                    
              intermediates and to study the rate at which they react.                       
              Carbenes can undergo reaction to give other reactive                           
              intermediates. For example, carbenes can react with lithium                    
              chloride to generate an adduct called a carbenoid with the                     
              normal complement of four bonds. With appropriate substitution,                
              carbenes can give another reactive intermediate, a carbocation,                
              which contains a carbon with three bonds and a net one unit of                 
              positive charge. These reactions will provide a means to study                 
              some of the important reactive intermediates in organic                        
              chemistry.
