Title       : Resource-Bounded Sensor-Based Decision Making In Unconstrained Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1992      
File        : a9109116

Award Number: 9109116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory D. Hager   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A central problem in sensor data fusion is the recovery of                     
              complex, multi-component models from various sensory modalities.               
              An essential component of this process is a description of what                
              decision must be made from the recovered model.  This description              
              is referred to as the sensing task.  The goal of this research                 
              project is to develop and analyze techniques for recovering the                
              minimal or least detailed model required to make a satisfactory                
              decision for a given sensing task.  In particular, the focus is                
              on the task-directed recovery of composite models (models                      
              composed os several components).  The model recovery method is                 
              based on the numerical solution os systems of nonlinear                        
              constraints using interval bisection.  Previous work, based on                 
              making decisions about objects modeled by a single parametric                  
              form, showed that these methods are general, natural, simple to                
              implement, and computationally effective.  In addition, the                    
              investigations were  able to incorporate notions of the cost of                
              computation and the value of information into the recovery                     
              process, and to terminate the recovery process when the model                  
              with the highest net value (decision payoff minus computational                
              cost) was reached.  They are now extending the underlying                      
              recovery method by incorporating model refinement and data                     
              segmentation in a manner that also exploits information about the              
              sensing task.  The results are expect to have particular impact                
              in application area where good a priori models ar not available.               
              Examples of these domains include classification and sorting of                
              irregular (e.g. naturally occurring) objects, supervisory                      
              control, and ultimately, to sensor-based control of partially or               
              fully autonomous vehicles.
