Title       : RPG: Neural and Behavioral Effects of Anabolic Steroids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1991      
File        : a9109687

Award Number: 9109687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10497              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann S. Clark ann.s.clark@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Dr. Clark has received a research planning grant to explore               
              the use of anabolic steroids as a means to examine the                         
              relationship between brain and behavior.  Until recently, the                  
              mechanism of steroid action was thought to require genomic                     
              activity.  Steroids, such as testosterone, estrogen and                        
              corticosterone, are lipid soluble compounds that readily enter                 
              all cells.  Within target tissues, such as the brain, uterus and               
              prostate, the cells contain intracellular protein receptors that               
              bind the hormone.  The steroid-receptor complexes interact with                
              the nuclear DNA and initiate RNA and protein synthesis.  This                  
              increase and/or decrease in protein synthesis mediate the                      
              physiological and behavioral responses to the hormone.  Recently,              
              membrane binding of steroid hormones has been proposed as an                   
              alternative mechanism to explain some biological functions that                
              occur too rapidly for genomic activation.  Because the family of               
              anabolic steroids have a different chemical structure and                      
              metabolic properties, these compounds may be ideal to investigate              
              this alternative mechanism of steroid action.  Dr. Clark will                  
              carry out a series of studies to determine the ability of                      
              anabolic steroids to bind to intracellular and membrane                        
              receptors.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                   Anabolic steroids were initially developed for medicinal                  
              purposes and were used for the treatment of hypogonadal                        
              dysfunction in men, initiation of delayed puberty and growth                   
              production.  Although these synthetic compounds were synthesized               
              to have maximal effects on protein synthesis and muscle growth,                
              they also have androgenic or masculinizing effects.  Therefore,                
              Dr. Clark will examine how these synthetic compounds modulate the              
              biochemical and behavioral action of naturally occurring                       
              androgens and estrogens.  Anabolic abuse by athletics is                       
              receiving international attention.  Although little is known                   
              about the mechanisms of action, it is clear that these drugs have              
              harmful side-effects, especially on muscle, liver and                          
              cardiovascular functions.  The results from these types of                     
              studies will provide needed important about how these compounds                
              are working.
