Title       : Time-Resolved Depletion Region Carrier Dynamics at Semiconductor Surfaces &
               Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9109886

Award Number: 9109886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi J. Halas halas@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Recently we performed a time-resolved experiment                               
              which clearly demonstrates the effect of the surface                           
              space-charge field on the depletion region carrier                             
              dynamics in GaAs.  These studies can potentially                               
              yield considerable insight into carrier transport                              
              properties near semiconductor surfaces and buried                              
              semiconductor interfaces, and in submicron devices,                            
              where the surface space-charge field spans most, if                            
              not all, of the semiconductor device structure.                                
              We propose several important new extensions of                                 
              our experimental studies.  First, we propose to                                
              enhance our current measurement technique by                                   
              utilizing variable wavelength probe pulses.  This will                         
              permit us to vary our information depth within the                             
              surface space-charge region in our experiments,                                
              facilitating a more quantitative theoretical model of                          
              the depletion region carrier transport.  Second, we                            
              would like to extend our measurements to include                               
              other systems, such as silicon device structures,                              
              GaAs/ZnSe buried interfaces, and semiconductor/                                
              metal interfaces.  Third, we would like to extend                              
              our measurements into the variable pump intensity                              
              regime, enabling us to include photomodulation                                 
              effects of the surface or interface space-charge                               
              field. These measurements will provide a detailed                              
              picture of the dynamics of the screening process at                            
              a semiconductor surface or interface, enabling us to                           
              analyze structures with inhomogeneous dopant                                   
              densities directly adjacent to an interface.
