Title       : Research Initiation Award: System Identification for Control Design Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1991 
File        : a9109617

Award Number: 9109617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. A. Jacobson jacobson@cdsp.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal addresses topics in the area of the worst                        
              case identification of dynamical systems.  The goals of                        
              this research program are to develop methods for                               
              system identification that reduce the uncertainty                              
              surrounding a given dynamical system in a way that is                          
              matched to robust control theory.  There will be three                         
              areas of concentration.  The first area of research will                       
              be algorithm development for linear time invariant                             
              systems using a combination of a priori and                                    
              experimental information.  The error criterion of                              
              identification will be chosen to be compatible with                            
              robust control design techniques.  A study will be made                        
              of the intrinsic difficulty of identification of each choice                   
              of a priori and experimental information using the                             
              techniques of Information Based Complexity theory.                             
              The second research area is the study and the                                  
              development of worst case identification methods for                           
              the determination of linearized models of nonlinear                            
              systems.  The research will develop methods for study                          
              intrinsic limits of identification of locally unstable                         
              linearized dynamics of smooth nonlinear systems when                           
              experimental data is obtained from closed loop                                 
              experiments.  The third research area is the study of                          
              offline adaptive control techniques.  The research will                        
              study the merging of worst case system identification                          
              with robust control theory with the goal of developing                         
              efficient and nonconservative methods for utilizing                            
              tools for the reduction of uncertainty and the                                 
              consequent design of feedback controllers in order to                          
              meet a given performance goal.
