Title       : Asset Returns and Economic Fluctuations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1993     
File        : a9109040

Award Number: 9109040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139081             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Cochrane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              At a general level, it is natural to expect that risks and                     
              rewards in the economy's production processes should vary over                 
              the course of economic fluctuations, and that asset returns                    
              should mirror this variation.  However, the mechanism by which                 
              asset returns are linked to economic fluctuations is not yet well              
              understood.  The contribution of this project comes from                       
              developing empirically successful economic models of the links                 
              between asset returns and economic fluctuations.  Such models are              
              important because: 1) they will help discriminate between                      
              competing theories of business cycles; 2) they are one of the                  
              only ways of rigorously determining whether or not volatility in               
              financial markets indicate speculative fads or the response of                 
              efficient markets to changes in fundamentals; and 3) successful                
              economic models could improve portfolio allocation rules.                      
                                                                                             
              The first part of this project extends a production-based asset                
              pricing model, that is a model of the physical rates of return of              
              production processes in the economy.  The extension covers                     
              empirical tests of simultaneous variations in the returns on many              
              different assets using several different techniques and cross-                 
              sectional data of asset prices; improvements in the description                
              of technology; and the explicit study of time aggregation.  The                
              second part of the project involves the calculation of the                     
              variation in conditional moments of discount factors implied by                
              variation in the conditional moments of asset returns.  The                    
              results are used to determine whether or not the behavior of                   
              asset returns is due to "fads" or to rational movements in                     
              discount factors.
