Title       : Political Economy of Regulation and Public Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1993      
File        : a9109707

Award Number: 9109707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138426             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Baron baron_david@gsb.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research studies the design of public institutions and the                
              relationship between institutional characteristics and the public              
              policies adopted by those institutions.  The former focuses on the             
              design of institutional arrangements, such as the price-cap systems            
              and the privatization arrangements being used by various countries             
              in telecommunications, taking into account both economic and                   
              political incentives.  The approach treats the ability of                      
              governments to commit to a long-run incentive system as endogenous             
              and depending on the political action of interest groups as                    
              triggered by information released over time through the performance            
              of the incentive system.  For parliamentary systems, the objective             
              is to develop a theory in which political parties, coalition                   
              governments, and policy formation are endogenous functions of                  
              electoral and legislative institutions.                                        
                                                                                             
              For the U.S., parties are perhaps less important than in                       
              parliamentary systems, and interest groups interact more with                  
              individual legislators than with parties.  In the U.S. context, the            
              objective is to investigate the role of interest groups in                     
              influencing policies through lobbying and election finance.                    
                                                                                             
              The overall objective of this research program is to provide a                 
              political economy theory of the public control of firms and markets            
              as a function of the structure of the political system.  The                   
              research will have a significant impact on our understanding of                
              regulation, political institutions such as electoral laws and                  
              parliamentary governments, interest group activity, and electoral              
              competition.
