Title       : Spectroscopic and Chromatographic Investigations of Derivatized Cyclodextrins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1991      
File        : a9109096

Award Number: 9109096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Apryll M. Stalcup   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Stalcup will prepare and characterize regiospecifically                    
              derivatized B-cyclodextrins to serve as models for the                         
              derivatized cyclodextrins immobilized as chiral selectors in                   
              normal phase high performance liquid chromatography.  She will                 
              use NMR and circular dichroism to probe substitution patterns                  
              on the cyclodextrin as well as to investigate the possibility                  
              of chiral discrimination in the derivatization of the                          
              cyclodextrin with a chiral derivatizing agent.  In addition,                   
              NMR will be used to study the association complexes formed                     
              between the derivatized cyclodextrin and chiral analytes.                      
              In related work, Dr. Stalcup will explore alternative applica-                 
              tions of derivatized beta-cyclodextrins to chiral separations                  
              including their use as chiral mobile phase additives and as                    
              enantioselective precipitation agents.  Derivatized alpha- and                 
              gamma-cyclodextrin bonded phases analogous to previously                       
              reported derivatized beta-cyclodextrin phases will be prepared,                
              evaluated chromatographically and compared with the derivatized                
              beta-cyclodextrin phases.                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              Research Planning Grants enable women who have not had prior                   
              independent Federal research support to develop a competitive                  
              research project.  This project involves the preparation and                   
              characterization of new materials for use in the separation, by                
              high performance liquid chromatography, of molecules which                     
              consist of the same atoms linked in the same way, but which                    
              differ in their three-dimensional structures.  This research is                
              of great importance to the chemical industry.
