Title       : RIA: Hypercube-Based Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1992      
File        : a9109084

Award Number: 9109084
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sotirios G. Ziavras ziavras@mhz.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of this research is to solve the problem of mapping         
              application algorithms developed for multilevel architectures, which           
              are more general than the standard-pyramid architecture, onto                  
              hypercube-based systems.  Hypercube-based systems are commercially             
              available and have widely been used by the scientific community                
              because they are highly flexible, fault-tolerant, and efficient.               
              Researchers have been trying with success, to solve the problem of             
              embedding standard pyramids into hypercubes.  However, such embeddings         
              do not guarantee very high performance for all of the multilevel               
              algorithms, because the performance requirements of particular                 
              algorithms are not taken into account by the embedding process.  This          
              project will evolve through five phases.  The first phase will propose         
              algorithms for embedding multilevel structures into hypercubes.  The           
              second phase will be involved in the refinement of the embedding               
              algorithms proposed in the first phase, in such a way that the exact           
              computation and communication requirements of the application                  
              algorithms should affect the embeddings.  The third phase will attempt         
              modifications of the embedding algorithms proposed in the second               
              phase, so that they will be taking into account statistical                    
              performance data, in order to become suitable for the mapping of               
              non-deterministic and data-dependent multilevel algorithms.                    
              The fourth phase of this project will propose a class of "multicube"           
              systems, which, while providing smaller numbers of communication               
              channels, can yield performance comparable to that of the hypercube.           
              To conclude techniques for mapping multilevel algorithms onto                  
              hypercube-based and multicube systems will be developed.  Analytical           
              techniques and simulation results will be used to prove the                    
              effectiveness and efficiency of the mapping algorithms.
