Title       : Genetic and Environmental Factors that Influence Microgametophytic Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9109270

Award Number: 9109270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Therese A. Markow                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Stephenson as4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Winsor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A large portion of the genetic material in pollen                              
              (microgametophytes) is read off during pollen development, pollen              
              germination and pollen tube growth.  Consequently, the                         
              performance of pollen (speed of germination, pollen tube growth                
              rate and ability to achieve fertilization) can potentially be                  
              affected by its genetic makeup, by its interactions with the                   
              material portion of the flower through which it grows, by                      
              environmental conditions such as temperature, and by the                       
              resources (e.g. nitrogen and phosphorus) provided to pollen                    
              grains by the pollen-producing parent.  Drs. Stephenson and                    
              Winsor will continue their detailed investigations of the factors              
              that affect pollen performance.  They will determine if these                  
              factors result in non-random fertilization, and if non-random                  
              fertilization affects the performance of the progeny.                          
              Specifically, they will use Cucurbita texana to examine the                    
              extent to which pollen tube growth can be selected for by allowing             
              only the fastest growing tubes to achieve fertilization.  Next,                
              they will examine the effects of variation in the amount of soil               
              phosphorus on pollen production, pollen grain size, the quantity               
              of stored phosphorus in pollen, and the performance of pollen                  
              (ability to sire seeds in mixtures).  Finally, they will separate              
              the effects of temperature during pollen production from the                   
              effects of temperature during pollen germination on pollen                     
              performance.  These experiments, when combined with prior and                  
              ongoing studies, will result in a complete picture of the genetic              
              and environmental factors that influence pollen performance, the               
              non-random transmission of genes from one generation to the next,              
              and their effects on the resulting progeny.                                    
                                                                                             
              The results of these studies will address and clarify some of the              
              most actively debated issues in plant population biology.  In                  
              addition, this research will have far-reaching implications for the            
              applied sciences.  The possibility of using pollen to select for               
              agriculturally desirable traits in the pollen represents a                     
              considerable savings of time, money and space over both traditional            
              breeding programs and the newer biotechnology programs.  Finally,              
              it may be possible to use pollen to monitor environmental                      
              degradation, to determine which species are susceptible to                     
              particular forms of pollution, and to develop lines of plants that             
              are more resistant.
