Title       : Investigating Analysis Techniques for Concurrent Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9109231

Award Number: 9109231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ugo A. Buy buy@eecs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the static analysis of concurrent                
              software systems.  The purpose of this analysis is to determine                
              whether a given program or program specification satisfies certain             
              correctness requirements, such as freedom of deadlock or absence of            
              starvation.  The goal of this research project is to define new                
              techniques and automated tools for the analysis of concurrent                  
              programs.  The new techniques will be aimed at extending and                   
              integrating existing analysis methods.  To date a number of approaches         
              to the analysis of concurrent programs have been proposed.  Some               
              approaches have been implemented and the resulting analysis tools have         
              been tested on some well-known examples of concurrent programs.  At            
              present, however, little is known about the types and sizes of                 
              programs to which each approach can be usefully applied, and the kinds         
              of questions about the programs that the approach can effectively              
              answer.  Some approaches which use linear algebra or temporal logic            
              based techniques to perform portions of the analysis are especially            
              promising.  These approaches will be investigated in an effort to              
              characterize their relative strengths and weaknesses.                          
              The evaluation of the existing approaches will guide the definition of         
              new analysis techniques.  Preliminary investigations in this area have         
              identified various possibilities for extending and integrating                 
              existing approaches.  The new analysis techniques must be amenable to          
              the implementation of automated analysis tools.  Practical                     
              experimentations and the evaluation of performance results will play a         
              crucial role when assessing the relative strengths of existing and             
              proposed approaches.
