Title       : Acquistion of a Field-Emission Analytical Electron Microscpoe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9109274

Award Number: 9109274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew R. Libera mlibera@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Warren Moberly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funds to upgrade a scanning transmission                   
              microscope with a field-emission gun which will be used for materials          
              research.  The State of New Jersey has provided funds to purchase a            
              conventional Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope.  This award            
              allows for the purchase of a substantially upgraded, newly developed           
              Field Emission Gun-Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope with              
              advanced capability.                                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              The instrument will be located at Stevens Institute of Technology in a         
              new microscopy facility being developed with state funds, and                  
              available through a consortia of 5 institutions in the New Jersey              
              area, the Advanced Technology Center for Surface Engineered Materials.         
              Consortia institutions include: New Jersey Institute of Technology,            
              Princeton University, Rutgers University, Stevens Institute of                 
              Technology, and David Sarnoff Research Center.  The consortia was              
              created to study surface and thin-film materials problems and is               
              headed by Dr. Bernard Kear, at Rutgers.   The Center at Stevens                
              focusses on materials research problems related to surfaces and thin           
              films such as: interfaces in nanophase ceramics, ceramic/intermetallic         
              matrix composites, optoelectronic thin film crystallization, and               
              buffered superconducting thin films.  The instrument will be available         
              to members of the center and others from local universities and                
              industries.
