Title       : Research Initiation Award: Robust Stabilization Using Phase Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1991 
File        : a9109558

Award Number: 9109558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wassim M. Haddad   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    305/768-8000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Phase information has largely been neglected in robust                         
              control theory but is essential for maximizing                                 
              achievable performance in controlling complex                                  
              multivariable systems.  Phase information, here, refers                        
              to the characterization of the phase of the modeling                           
              uncertainty in the frequency domain.  Real parameter                           
              uncertainty modeling in the time domain provides                               
              phase information in the frequency domain.  The                                
              objective is to develop effective methods for utilizing                        
              phase information in the analysis and design of robust                         
              controllers.  A proposal is made to study numerous                             
              interrelated ideas that are relevant to phase properties                       
              of dynamical systems in general and feedback control                           
              systems in particular.  Although quadratic Lyapunov                            
              functions provide the foundation for much robust                               
              control theory, connections with small-gain (H-infinity)                       
              theory illustrate limitations of this approach in the                          
              presence of phase information.  Extensions of quadratic                        
              Lyapunov functions, such as parameter-dependent                                
              Lyapunov functions, and structured Lyapunov functions                          
              are some of the ideas being proposed to overcome                               
              these limitations.  Also proposed, is to establish a                           
              theoretical foundation of robust stabilization with                            
              positive real uncertainty.  Recent Riccati-based                               
              robustness results for positive real uncertainty obtained                      
              by the author form the starting point for these                                
              investigations.  Finally, it is proposed to generalize                         
              classical frequency-domain stability criteria, such as the                     
              Popov and circle criteria, to state-space controller                           
              synthesis using a Riccati equation approach.  This                             
              development will provide the necessary tools for                               
              controller synthesis for sector-bounded nonlinearities.                        
              This research will provide a new approach to robust                            
              stabilization--one that involves phase information that                        
              can be significantly less conservative than an H-infinity                      
              small-gain approach.
