Title       : The Strategic Role of Debt: Can Leverage Influence Bargaining Outcomes?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1991      
File        : a9109009

Award Number: 9109009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21412              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn E. Spier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This project investigates the strategic role that leverage plays               
              during the renegotiation of contracts with senior stakeholders.                
              In particular, the substitution of debt for equity allows                      
              shareholders, defined as junior claimants with discretion over                 
              investment decisions, to bargain advantageously with the union.                
              The notion is that equity withdrawal in combination with high                  
              leverage credibly alters the shareholders' ex post incentives to               
              invest unless the union's claim on the firm is renegotiated.                   
                                                                                             
              The first part of the project considers a model in which the firm's            
              profitability and investment opportunities are commonly known.  Two            
              types of contract renegotiation will be explored; in the first                 
              wages are renegotiated, and in the second both wage and debt                   
              contracts are renegotiated.  Preliminary results suggest that high             
              leverage will only be chosen in less profitable states of nature               
              when future investment opportunities appear promising.  The                    
              shareholders' ability to alter the capital structure of the firm               
              leads to an inefficient allocation of risk.                                    
                                                                                             
              The second part of the project involes extending the basic model               
              to incorporate incomplete information.  It is reasonable to suppose            
              that the shareholders have better information than the other                   
              stakeholders regarding the firm's future profitability and/or                  
              investment opportunities.  Debt may then signal the firm's                     
              profitability.  Informational asymmetries will lead to breakdowns              
              in negotiations, and thus an inefficiency will be generated by                 
              suboptimal investment decisions.                                               
                                                                                             
              This research will make a significant contribution to our                      
              understanding of the strategic use of debt and the capital                     
              structure problem.
