Title       : Research Initiation Award: Combustion in an Asymmetric Configuration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1992     
File        : a9109778

Award Number: 9109778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean R. Hertzberg hertzberg@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to understand the interaction                 
              of combustion and shear layer control techniques.  The                         
              proposal is to study the fluid mechanics of combustion of a                    
              small aspect ratio rectangular channel sudden expansion.  This                 
              configuration utilizes a combination of several control                        
              techniques.  Active forcing will be used to drive the system's                 
              acoustic resonances and to organize the shear layer vortical                   
              structures for phase locked analysis.  Passive forcing will be                 
              introduced via the configuration geometry; the elliptic vortex                 
              rings formed in the shear layer undergo self-induction,                        
              deforming the jet cross section and introducing transverse                     
              velocities not found in plane and axi-symmetric                                
              configurations.  The approach is experimental, using laser                     
              doppler anemometry and flow visualization to examine the                       
              velocity field and premixed flame in a rectangular sudden                      
              expansion.  The equivalence ratio will range from lean, where                  
              the stabilization of the flame in the shear layer downstream                   
              of the backward facing step is affected by the passive, active                 
              and three dimensional control techniques, to rich, where the                   
              flame/flow interaction is dominated by acoustic resonances.                    
              This will allow determination of the extent to which these                     
              control methods are effective in this configuration.  The                      
              study will be initially limited to premixed combustion.  The                   
              results can later be extended to address issues in nonpremixed                 
              combustion such as the optimization of fuel injection                          
              locations to take advantage of the flowfields produced by the                  
              control techniques.                                                            
                                                                                             
              This research is expected to have a significant impact on                      
              combustion applications ranging from industrial pulse                          
              combustors and toxic waste incinerators to subsonic and                        
              supersonic combustion in ramjets.  The understanding of the                    
              effects of shear layer control techniques on mixing and                        
              combustion can produce immediate results in increased                          
              combustion efficiency and control.
