Title       : Research Initiation Award: Metal Additive Effects on Soot Morphology in Laminar
               Diffusion Flames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1993      
File        : a9109166

Award Number: 9109166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73784              (Estimated)
Investigator: Constantine M. Megaridis cmm@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This experimental study addresses the influence of iron                        
              additives on soot-particle morphology in laminar, coannular,                   
              ethylene/air diffusion flames.  The primary objective of the                   
              work is to determine both state and morphology of the additive                 
              species within the combustion environment, as well as their                    
              dependence on flame coordinates.  Other fundamental issues to                  
              be addressed include whether the additive intervenes at an                     
              early or late combustion stage, to determine if iron                           
              combustion products are occluded in the soot phase, and in                     
              case they are, to examine their incorporation within the                       
              carbon matrix as a function of flame location.  The                            
              incorporation of iron combustion products within the soot                      
              phase (if present) will be quantified through an elemental                     
              analysis of the particulate phase collected from various flame                 
              locations.  A recently developed intrusive sampling technique                  
              winl be used in conjunction with transmission electron                         
              microscopy to provide the samples for morphological and                        
              elemental characterization of the particulate phase within the                 
              flames.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The proposed fundamental research would contribute to a better                 
              understanding of the metal-additive influence on the basic                     
              mechanisms involved in the formation, growth, oxidation and                    
              emission of soot from laboratory, well-defined flames.  Our                    
              ability to resolve these issues may define new ways to enhance                 
              and optimize fuel-additive use for soot suppression.
