Title       : Categorical Aspects of Motor Timing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1992        
File        : a9109638

Award Number: 9109638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41709              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Collyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A voluntary movement can be made rapidly or slowly, and it                     
              appears to the person making a movement that it can be made about              
              equally accurately at any intermediate speed.  However, if the                 
              mechanism responsible for timing the movement has one or more                  
              characteristic frequencies of oscillation, the actual speed of                 
              movement would be expected to depart from the intended value in                
              the direction of one of these frequencies.  That is, each                      
              intended speed would be subject to its own degree and direction                
              of bias.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Collyer, Broadbent, and Church have recently demonstrated a                    
              pattern of biases across a wide range of movement speeds which                 
              confirms the existence of characteristic frequencies in motor                  
              timing and allows them to be measured.  This finding shows that                
              motor timing is categorical rather than continuously adjustable,               
              and this is an important step toward an adequate theory of the                 
              timing of voluntary acts.  However, much remains to be learned                 
              about this categorical timing mechanism.                                       
                                                                                             
              This research is designed to examine some basic properties of                  
              this type of motor timing.  The basic task involves repetitive                 
              manual tapping at target rates set by a series of computer-                    
              generated sounds.  It will involve three types of experiments:                 
              (1) Manipulation of the relative contribution of external and                  
              internal bases for motor timing, with the expectation that the                 
              biases introduced by characteristic frequencies will be greatest               
              when internal (cognitive) factors predominate;  (2) Study of the               
              role of the characteristic frequencies in controlling fast and                 
              slow speeds of movement and transitions between speeds;  and (3)               
              Examination of correlations between characteristic frequencies                 
              and other behavior such as preferred rates of movement and                     
              perceived durations of signals.                                                
                                                                                             
              The research will advance our understanding of normal motor                    
              timing processes and provide information about a potentially                   
              important link between time perception and time production.
