Title       : Planning Grant for Multiple User Database on Historical Congressional
               Statistics, Chapel Hill, Fall 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1991  
File        : a9109335

Award Number: 9109335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : July 1,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10894              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine K. Swift   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Research on Congress and on the dynamics of the legislative process            
              in the United States is hampered by the lack of significant short              
              term variation in important aspects of the legislative process.                
              For example, although the structure of the congressional committee             
              system is believed to be important in determining the operation of             
              Congress, the fact that the structure of the committee system has              
              changed only very little over the past half century makes analysis             
              of the effects of committee structure difficult to study using                 
              contemporary data.                                                             
                                                                                             
              To compensate for this problem congressional scholars have turned              
              increasingly to history.  Specifically, by studying congressional              
              change over longer periods of time it is possible to observe                   
              greater variation in key concepts and variables.  The problem,                 
              however, is that systematic and reliable data have not been                    
              collected on many aspects of Congress for the years prior to about             
              1950.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              This award supports a planning conference of congressional scholars            
              to study the feasibility of developing a comprehensive, multi-user,            
              historical data base on congressional structure, process and                   
              composition.  The conference will involve the leading scholars in              
              the field and will seek agreement on the types of data that should             
              be collected, the format a comprehensive data base should take,                
              and on the types of questions that could be addresses if these data            
              were collected.                                                                
                                                                                             
              When completed this project will provide a much better                         
              understanding of the data needs and opportunities in this important            
              area of Political Science.
