Title       : The Effects of Social Networks on Labor-Market Outcomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1991     
File        : a9109056

Award Number: 9109056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Montgomery   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  It has long been recognized that many workers find jobs                   
              through friends and relatives.  A number of area labor-market                  
              studies carried out by economists attest to the importance of                  
              social contacts in the hiring process, whereas a number of studies             
              carried out by sociologists confirm the importance of social                   
              contacts in influencing labor-market outcomes in the form of                   
              individuals' wages and job satisfaction.  These lines of research              
              focus on the specific contact used by a worker to find a job rather            
              than on more general characteristics of the worker's social                    
              network.  This project formalizes hypotheses offered by                        
              sociologists about social networks with the aim of facilitating                
              better interpretation of existing empirical work on labor-market               
              outcomes and processes and of developing more appropriate testing              
              strategies. It also develops a model that suggests that equilibrium            
              differences in wage and labor-force participation between groups               
              may be a byproduct of referral hiring.  Beyond reproducing observed            
              differences in wages and participation, the model also predicts the            
              greater use of referrals by males and an observed pattern of own-              
              sex referrals.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                   This research to develop the theoretical underpinnings of                 
              social network effects in the labor market helps fill a gap in                 
              labor economics, and it contributes to the integration of the                  
              optimizing and equilibrium methods of economics into important                 
              sociological empirical work in the area of social networks.  This              
              project has important implications for understanding earnings                  
              inequality and its transmission across generations, poverty and                
              the "underclass," and the process of the job search.
