Title       : Functions of Grooming Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9109039

Award Number: 9109039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin L. Hart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Grooming is a very common behavior of mammals, including African               
              antelope.  This project is an integrated field and experimental                
              approach to understanding the interaction of utilitarian (tick                 
              removal) and social aspects of grooming of impala.  Impala are                 
              ideal subjects for this type of project.  The animals are common               
              in eastern and southern Africa and can be watched for long                     
              periods of time to accumulate quantitative data.  Impala are also              
              ideal subjects because they display a type of highly reciprocal                
              mutual grooming that is unique among antelope and possibly among               
              all mammals.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The field studies comprise behavioral observations, sampling of                
              tick loads on the various age-sex groups of impala to correlate                
              with grooming rates, and assessment of ticks in the environment                
              to correlate with tick loads.  Behavioral observations on mutual               
              grooming will examine the social influences on the grooming                    
              system, which may be one of the few genuine animal examples of                 
              evolved cooperation.  Systematic field studies are needed to                   
              fully explore this unusual behavior.  The part of the project                  
              dealing with mutual grooming explores a complex system in an                   
              ungulate species where the formation of social bonds and                       
              alliances is much simpler than in primates.                                    
                                                                                             
              This multidisciplinary approach to understanding the role of                   
              self-grooming and mutual grooming in the control of ectoparasites              
              is expected to contribute information critical to the management               
              and conservation of wildlife in African environments where                     
              domestic livestock farming is encroaching upon the habitat of the              
              wildlife.
