Title       : Rhythms in the Suprachiasmatic Nucleus: Role in Mammalian Photoperiodism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1991    
File        : a9109811

Award Number: 9109811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Robert Lynch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Biological time keeping is a fundamental property of living               
              systems.  In mammals, these daily physiological and behavioral                 
              events, such as sleep/wake cycle, temperature and hormone levels,              
              are regulated by an internal clock located within the                          
              suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus.  A fundamental                    
              question is how this neural clock modulates overt rhythmicity in               
              response to input signals, such as light.  Recently, Dr. Lynch                 
              reported the daily pattern of neuronal activity can be altered by              
              changing exposure to light to resemble that of winter months.                  
              These data are very exciting because they suggest that this                    
              neural clock is a flexible, integrative structure and not                      
              "hard-wired" with regard to time.  Using an in vitro preparation               
              and neurophysiological recordings, Dr. Lynch will now determine                
              if the photoperiod-specific pattern is linked to daylength per                 
              se, or to the action of light at a particular circadian phase.                 
              Moreover, he will determine how hormone factors, especially                    
              melatonin, modulate both the firing pattern within the                         
              suprachiasmatic nucleus and changes in daily behavior (sleep/wake              
              cycle).  Melatonin, a hormone of the pineal gland, is an ideal                 
              candidate since it is strongly linked to the control of circadian              
              rhythms.  This research will significantly enhance our                         
              understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying circadian and                
              photoperiodic events and has important ramifications about the                 
              plasticity of the neuronal pacemaker.  Findings ways to influence              
              the neural clock may lead to improved treatments for people with               
              sleeping disorders and problems caused by jet lag and shift work.
