Title       : Computation and Theory for a Class of Nonsmooth Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1994       
File        : a9109345

Award Number: 9109345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Robinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate theoretical and computational aspects of         
              a class of nonsmooth equations involving functions called normal maps.         
              These normal maps express the necessary conditions for solution of             
              optimization or equilibrium problems, so solving an equation involving         
              such a function amounts to satisfying the necessary conditions for             
              solution of optimization or for equilibrium.  A great many practical           
              problems involve the solution of such problems, so the proposed work,          
              if successful, would have substantial practical utility.  Generally            
              nonsmooth normal maps have a considerable amount of structure, and             
              much of the first-order local theory of differentiable functions has           
              already been extended to these maps.                                           
                                                                                             
              On the theoretical side, several global topological aspects of such            
              functions will be investigated.  In particular, special conditions             
              will be studied under which normal maps will be homeomorphisms, in             
              order to investigate more generally, the nature of their critical              
              values, and to explore the possibility of extending global homotopy            
              approaches from equations containing smooth functions to those                 
              involving normal maps.                                                         
                                                                                             
              On the computation side, some of the embedding and homotopy methods            
              will be implemented to investigate their numerical behavior.  These            
              computational investigations will be aimed particularly at producing           
              methods that could help in solving hard nonlinear optimization or              
              equilibrium problems for which good starting values are not available.
