Title       : Multiagent Search Algorithms for Learning & Planning in Colony-Style Robots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9109298

Award Number: 9109298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Lemmon Michael.D.Lemmon.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6840,9264,
Abstract    :
              Direct implementation of the sensory-cognitive motor triad for                 
              intelligent robotic systems will generally place severe demands                
              on the computing, communication, and memory resources of these                 
              systems.  One solution to this problem has been to distribute the              
              triad's functionality among various physical components of the                 
              robot.  The colony-style robot ?1! and its predecessor ?2!                     
              (subsummation architecture) represent related methods for                      
              achieving this functional distribution.  Colony-style robots use               
              a collection(ie., colony) of hierarchically inhibited agents to                
              control the robot.  Existing colony-style robots suffer several                
              disadvantages limiting their utility as autonomous system.  These              
              disadvantages involve problems in determining the robot's                      
              underlying control hierarchy and the inability of  existing                    
              systems to save and use prior experience.  This project uses                   
              multiagent processing paradigms called multiagent search                       
              strategies of MASS algorithms ?3! to solve the deficiencies of                 
              current colony-style systems.  MASS algorithms ar inspired by                  
              recent work with competitively and cooperatively inhibited neural              
              networks ?3!?4!.  It can be shown, using statistical mechanical                
              arguments, that competitive MASS algorithms can form minimum                   
              entropy representations of density functions.  This project uses               
              that analytical formalism to develop MASS algorithms capable of                
              learning the components and structure of the colony-style control              
              hierarchy.  The research also explores how "cooperative"  MASS                 
              can be used to realize fully discretized solution of Bellman's                 
              dynamic programming equation, and uses this capability to devise               
              a method for implementing long term memory and path planning                   
              capabilities in colony-style robots.  The project will fully                   
              develop, through simulation and analysis, the MASS algorithms                  
              needed to realize memory, learning, and planning in colony-style               
              robots.  The research will also investigate extensions of this                 
              approach to more complex systems such as flexible manufacturing                
              systems.
