Title       : Behavior and Physiology of the Gibbon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1994  
File        : a9109441

Award Number: 9109441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald D. Nadler NADLER@RMY.EMORY.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory Univ Yerkes Reg Pri
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Gibbons are the one nonhuman primate closely related to humans                 
              that exists with an apparent monogamous mating relationship and a              
              family-unit form of social organization.  Moreover, these animals              
              represent an endangered species that have not been adequately                  
              studied.  Using a semi-natural environment, Dr. Nadler will carry              
              out a series of studies on gibbon reproductive endocrinology,                  
              stress and behavior.  The research program integrates                          
              evolutionary, functional and mechanistic issues and approaches at              
              several levels including physiology, behavior and taxonomy.                    
              This work is of great importance in discerning the possible                    
              origins of human behavior.  The ideas fostered by this research                
              may lead to a better understanding of the nature of monogamy in                
              primates and with respect to possible parallels to human mating                
              systems.  Moreover, information about reproductive physiology on               
              gibbons is critical for the conservation and maintenance of this               
              endangered species.  Finally, given their close biological                     
              relationship, information gained from this work is of potential                
              value in elucidating the interactions between reproductive                     
              hormones and behavior in humans.
