Title       : Various Inverse Problems in Partial Differential Equations and Methods for their
               Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a9971674

Award Number: 9971674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Kuchment   (Principal Investigator current)
              William Rundell  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9971674
Rundell

This proposal investigates several inverse problems for
              partial differential 
equations.  Our particular focus is in uniqueness
              results that seek the 
minimal amount of data required to determine unknown
              coefficients lying 
within certain predetermined classes. We are also
              interested in 
reconstruction methods based on iteration schemes and in
              particular to 
schemes that utilize higher derivatives of the coefficient to
              data map. 
Finally, for certain undetermined coefficient problems we propose
              to 
investigate the following: given information (or assumptions) on the error
              
in the data, that is, what type of distribution it obeys and what are the
              
significant moments, what is the distribution of the possible
              
reconstructions of the coefficient?

Many objects of physical interest
              cannot be studied directly. Examples 
include imaging the interior of the
              body, the determination of cracks 
within solid objects, and material
              parameters such as the conductivity of 
inaccessible objects. When these
              problems are translated into 
mathematical terms they take the form of partial
              differential equations, the 
Lingua Franca of the mathematical sciences. The
              additional unknowns in 
the model translate into unknown parameters in the
              equations and we 
attempt to solve for these by means of further measurements.
              In this 
proposal we deal with the practical aspects of this from a
              mathematical 
perspective: We are interested in the question of when a unique
              
determination can be made, as well as designing algorithms for the
              
efficient numerical recovery of the unknowns. The mathematical 
techniques
              used and to be developed are applicable to several different 
scientific
              problems. Examples are: (1) The recovery of the location and 
shape of
              interior objects from surface measurements. Applications here 
include the
              determination of tumors (which are characterized by a greater 
metabolic rate)
              and buried mines and munitions (characterized by a higher 
electrical
              conductivity). (2) The determination of the interior density 
profile of the
              sun from spectral data. This is important because it would 
provide an
              independent check of our current understanding of both the 
composition of a
              star such as the sun and the underlying physics with 
which we model its
              internal reactions.

