Title       : Nonlinear Problems of Solid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a9971823

Award Number: 9971823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart S. Antman ssa@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              S. S. Antman will treat a variety of dynamical and  steady-state
nonlinear
              problems for rods, shells, and three-dimensional solid bodies.
The bodies are
              composed of nonlinearly elastic, viscoelastic, plastic, 
viscoplastic, or
              magnetoelastic materials.  In each case, properly invariant, 
geometrically
              exact theories encompassing general nonlinear constititutive 
equations are to
              be used.  The goals of these studies are to discover new 
nonlinear effects,
              determine thresholds in constititutive equations separating 
qualitatively
              different responses, determine general classes of constitutive 
equations that
              are both physically and mathematically natural,  examine 
important kinds of
              instabilities, contribute to the theory of shocks and dissipative 
mechanisms
              in solids, and develop new methods of nonlinear analysis and of 
effective
              computationfor problems of solid mechanics.

The award will support
              mathematical research on the mechanics of solids, 
such as metals, plastics,
              etc.  Qualitative phenomena such as the buckling 
of columns and shells, the
              propagation of waves in rods, and the formation of 
shocks that could lead to
              fracture will be studied for wide classes of mathematical 
models. This work
              is interdisciplinary, combining modern techniques
from engineering mechanics,
              physics, and mathematics.  One important feature
of the modern mathematical
              techniques employed, which is not widely known 
outside of mathematical
              circles, is that the analytical methods used can handle whole 
classes of
              physical problems for different kinds of materials in different kinds of
              
shapes subject subject to different kinds of loadings, all at the same
              time.
In this sense, the approach is the antithesis of computational
              methods,
which can handle only one specific problem at a time. Part of the
              outcome of this 
work will be the development of effective numerical methods
              for this rich class 
of problems, and some of the results will be illustrated
              numerically.

