Title       : Optimization: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9971852

Award Number: 9971852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Burke burke@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971852
Burke

Two topics are proposed for study: (1) the variational
              analysis of 
eigenvalue functions and (2) non-parametric population analysis.
              In the 
first topic the principal investigator will apply modern techniques of
               
nonsmooth analysis and variational geometry to study the variational
              
properties of certain functions of the spectrum on the space of  n x n
              
complex valued matrices, e.g., the spectral abscissa and the spectral
              
radius. In the second topic, the principal investigator intends to analyze
              
and develop algorithmic solution techniques for the non-parametric 
version
              of the basic problem of population analysis. Specifically, the 
principal
              investigator intends to use maximum likelihood techniques to 
estimate the
              underlying probability measure associated with population
              
variability.

Understanding the variational behavior of the spectrum of
              matrix valued 
mappings is essential to our understanding and control of
              discrete and 
continuous dynamical systems. Such systems arise in numerous
              practical 
applications ranging from the design of structures that can
              withstand a 
major earthquake to flight control for modern aircraft. The
              results of the 
principal investigator's research program are intended to make
              possible for 
the first time the derivation of optimality and/or equilibrium
              conditions for 
numerous problems associated with spectral variations that
              occur in 
numerous engineering applications. On the other hand, population
              analysis 
is the statistical methodology used to understand inter-subject
              variability 
in studies designed to analyze a phenomenon associated with a
              targeted 
population. For example, the methodology is widely used in
              
pharmocokinetic studies since it is the key to understanding how drugs
              
behave in humans and animals. The principal investigator intends to 
analyze
              and develop algorithmic solution techniques for the non-
parametric version of
              this problem. The goal is to incorporate these 
algorithms into a software
              package now being developed by the Resource 
Facility for Population Kinetics
              at the University of Washington.

