Title       : Semiparametric Regression for Multivariate Failure Time Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9971701

Award Number: 9971701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Song Yang yang@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Yang, Song DMS-9971701
ABSTRACT

Multivariate failure time data are
              frequently encountered in scientific investigations.  Their analysis is much
              complicated by correlations among components, censoring, and time-dependent
              covariates.  This project initiates some new approaches in the semiparametric
              regression analysis of multivariate failure time data.  Various univariate
              semiparametric regression models are considered for the components of
              multivariate failure time data.  They include some familiar models, such as the
              Cox model, as well as some new models.   Inference procedures are proposed from
              diverse considerations, ranging from  pseudo likelihood to martingale residuals
              and estimating functions.  The new procedures are applicable to the currently
              two main modeling approaches: the marginal and the frailty approaches.  The
              proposed methods much enhance and extend the existing results by considering
              various semiparametric marginal models, by proposing several classes of general
              inference procedures, and by eliminating the computational burden that is
              almost always associated with the existing frailty methods. A key ingredient in
              the new approaches is the use of some weighted empirical
              functions.

Applications of multivariate failure time data analysis may be
              found in industrial life testing, clinical trials and genetic epidemiology,
              among others. A machine component may break down repeatedly; a patient may
              experience failures of several organs; phenotypic traits may be collected on
              human pedigrees that consist of blood relatives and their spouses.  Often, data
              of interest are not observed completely due to the time frame of the study
              design or loss of follow-up; also, risk factors, such as treatment indicators,
              may vary over time.  Adding to the complication are the correlations among
              observations taken from the same patient or within the same pedigree.  The new
              approaches deal with these challenges and propose various modeling and analysis
              tools to the study of multivariate failure time data.  The emphasis is on
              developing statistical procedures that are flexible, robust, simple to
              interpret and easy to implement, while maintaining good efficiency
              properties.

