Title       : Qualitative Properties of Solutions to Second Order Elliptic and Parabolic
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9971052

Award Number: 9971052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail Safonov safonov@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project deals with properties of solutions to elliptic and 
parabolic
              equations of second order, such as estimates for Green's 
functions and
              harmonic or caloric measures, uniqueness of blowup solutions 
to semilinear
              elliptic equations, regularity of solutions to quasilinear 
and nonlinear
              equations under weak structural assumptions. Part 1 of the 
project is devoted
              to the behavior of solutions near the boundary. Special 
attention is paid to
              the conditions on the coefficients, which guarantee 
the absolute continuity
              of harmonic and caloric measures with respect to 
the surface measure on the
              boundary. Such Dini-type conditions are known 
for equations in the divergence
              form. The study of equations in the 
non-divergence form needs quite different
              technique. Part 1 also includes 
the problem of uniqueness of solutions to
              semilinear equations, which blow 
up on the boundary. Our recent results show
              that positive solutions, which 
vanish on the boundary, have same rate of
              decay. We expect blowup solution 
near a portion of the boundary must have
              same rate of growth. Part 2 of the 
project deals with the regularity of
              solutions of quasilinear equations 
with minimal smoothness with respect to
              the gradient of solution, and of 
fully nonlinear equations without the
              concavity conditions with respect to 
the second derivatives.

        An
              essential part of the project deals with boundary properties 
of solutions of
              partial differential equations with non-smooth 
coefficients. Such equations
              appear in the investigation of different 
processes in composite materials,
              porous media, chemistry, biology, etc. 
The boundary properties of solutions
              are especially important, because they 
are "responsible" for interaction of a
              given object with its environment 
(heat emission, radiation, etc). In many
              situations, in order to get a 
desirable effect in a given region, one can
              only act on its boundary. The 
study of behavior of solutions near the
              boundary allows us to make such 
boundary control more predictable and
              effective. The blowup solutions of 
semilinear equations are associated with
              certain processes in biology, 
medicine, nuclear engineering, where their
              control cannot be overestimated. 
In this project, we also discuss the
              regularity of solutions of nonlinear 
equations. Positive results of such sort
              are interesting not only from the 
theoretical point of view, they also give
              the background for numerical 
solution of equations.  



