Title       : Bayesian Inference Estimation in Nonparametric Regression and its Frequentist
               Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1999    
File        : a9971848

Award Number: 9971848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Zhao lzhao@stat.wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nonparametric regression analysis is a rapidly developing contemporary
              statistical methodology.  It avoids some of the restrictive assumptions in more
              classical regression approaches.  However, to date it has suffered by
              comparison from an almost total absence of the inferential tools (e.g. tests
              and confidence intervals) which help make classical regression analysis so
              useful.  Zhao (1998 preprint) proposed the first proper Bayesian estimator for
              nonparametric regression which has acceptable performance for every sample
              size.  The current proposal is to extend this construction in various ways and
              to study the inferential properties related to such Bayesian formulations.  Its
              various properties, including the acceptable performance of its Bayes
              estimator, suggest that Bayesian inference based on this prior distribution and
              its extensions may be feasible.  They may also present a satisfactory
              comprehensive set of inferential tools for nonparametric regression analysis
              and related formulations.

Regression analysis is a classical general
              statistical tool, which has been widely used in virtually every area of
              statistical applications.  
Nonparametric regression analysis is a more recent
              methodology, which avoids some restrictive assumptions in the classical theory.
               The general theory includes nonparametric formulations of regression, of
              density estimation, of signal processing and of spectral density estimation in
              time series analysis. The theory has already found significant applications in
              areas such as medical and environmental imaging, economic analysis, computer
              engineering, and geophysics.  Bayesian analysis is a very powerful general
              statistical methodology.  This research project proposes a possible way of
              using Bayesian techniques to solve nonparametric regression problems.
