Title       : Data Analysis and Simulation for Nuclear Physics with the CLAS Detector at
               Jefferson Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a9971916

Award Number: 9971916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422588             (Estimated)
Investigator: Latifa Elouadrhiri latifa@jlab.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Hardie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Heddle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Doughty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Brooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Christopher Newport Univ
	      One University Place
	      Newport News, VA  236062949    757/594-7266

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1232,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971916
Elouadrhiri
This Proposal will allow the CNU  Nuclear Physics Group to
              continue
a research and educational program at the Thomas Jefferson National
              Laboratory.

The proposed research program will contribute significantly to
              our
understanding of both nucleon structure and non-perturbative Quantum
              Chromodynamics (QCD).
The physics  program includes a detailed analysis of the
              N-Delta  Axial Vector Form Factor an approved experiment  for which data
              has
already been taken. The program also includes a measurement of the Neutron
              

Magnetic Form Factor, for which data will be taken early next fall.
This
              proposal will allow us to  make  important contributions 
to the Partial Wave
              Analysis (PWA) of the N* program and  to develop a web-accessible database of
              CLAS results.

In addition this proposal will allow the  CNU nuclear physics
              group to
begin a major simulation effort designed to understand the acceptance
              and response of the CLAS detector for large variety of reactions.  This
              simulation  is critical for the extraction  of cross sections. 

Moreover,
              the proposal will allow us to continue to enhance and  
upgrade the data
              acquisition system, hardware and software, for the CLAS detector.

Support of
              this proposal will allow the CNU Nuclear Physics group to
continue its
              excellent educational record.  The proposed projects
provide many
              opportunities for our undergraduate and graduate
students, in  physics,
              computer science and computer
engineering.

