Title       : Research in Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9971802

Award Number: 9971802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257378             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome P. Levine levine@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Ruberman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9971802

Principal Investigators: Jerome Levine and Daniel
              Ruberman

Abstract: This proposal discusses problems in several areas of knot
              theory, and low-dimensional topology.   Ruberman will undertake a comprehensive
              investigation of the topology of the diffeomorphism group of a 4-manifold using
              tools of gauge theory.  Ruberman will continue to work on cutting and pasting
              operations on 3-manifolds, with the goal of understanding how these affect
              Seiberg-Witten invariants of 3-manifolds.  He will also begin an approach to
              classical knot cobordism, using tools of foliation theory.  Levine will
              continue his work on the theory of finite-type invariants. He will investigate
              several new proposals for extending the notion of finite-type, which was
              originally confined to the class of homology-spheres, to general 3-manifolds.
              This will also involve further investigation of the relation between
              finite-type invariants and the structure of the mapping class group of a
              surface. In another direction Levine will also continue work on the concordance
              classification of linksin 3-space. Ruberman and Levine will jointly investigate
              link cobordism in even dimensions.

Modern geometric methods, some of which
              originate in theoretical physics, continue to have a major impact on the study
              of topological objects such as knots, links and 3 and 4-dimensional manifolds. 
              Conversely the understanding of the structure of these geometric objects, in
              their role as modeling the real world, has important applications to
              theoretical physics.  The research proposed concerns the study of numerical and
              algebraic invariants of each of these categories of geometric objects and the
              use of such invariants in the study of the structure theory of knots,  surface
              symmetries and 3-dimensional manifolds, and in the study of symmetries and
              deformations of 4-dimensional manifolds. The diverse mathematical tools
              involved in our projects involve techniques from partial differential
              equations, differential geometry, combinatorics, representation theory, group
              theory and classical cut and paste techniques for the construction and analysis
              of 3-dimensional manifolds.

