Title       : Several Questions in Probability Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9971146

Award Number: 9971146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore P. Hill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The principal investigator is carrying out research on topics related to the
              mathematical theory of probability. Specific objectives include continuation of
              his investigations of optimal-stopping problems (especially stopping under
              incomplete information), constructions of random distributions, analysis and
              applications of Benford's law, general partitioning inequalities, and
              convergence and invariance principles. In new directions he is studying sharp
              inequalities for expected extrema and general continuity-representation
              theorems. The research has both theoretical and applied components, and
              involves collaboration with other researchers both at Georgia Tech and other
              universities, as well as with several graduate students.
	This research
              involves the study of random processes, such as evolving financial markets or
              government policies, when unpredictable fluctuations are present. Much is known
              if there is complete knowledge of the nature of the random fluctuations, but
              this is usually not the case in practice. One of the thrusts of this research
              is to try to discover good methods for deciding when to stop or change a policy
              when only partial information is available about the random fluctuations.
              Another thrust of this research is to develop new statistical tools for
              estimating changes in random processes. One very new use of these ideas is
              application to detection of fraud in financial data. The idea is that
              fabricated data is usually qualitatively different from true data, and there
              are just recently tests based on these fluctuation theories which are proving
              useful in distinguishing true from fabricated data. Applications of the
              research on random measures includes new models for the distribution of mass in
              space, including various settings in physics and materials science.
