Title       : Topics in Nonparametric Analysis and Model Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a9971301

Award Number: 9971301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kjell A. Doksum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971301
 
This project is the continuation of our research on the question of
              how intuitive and concise linear model concepts and techniques can be extended
              to nonparametric settings and on the development of nonparametric techniques
              for model diagnostics, dimensionality reduction, and assessing adequacy of
              particular classes of models.  Some of the procedures considered in this
              research are based on conditional versions of the familiar regression,
              covariance, and correlation coefficients, where the conditioning is on
              covariates restricted to neighborhoods.  The size of the neighborhood serves as
              a resolution scale, and dependence of the response on the covariates is
              measured and summarized at multiple scales.  Other procedures are curve or
              surface estimators and estimators of integral functionals of distributions. 
              Many of the estimators to be considered depend on smoothing parameters needed
              in estimation of curves and surfaces.  A large part of the research addresses
              the problem of developing reliable data-based methods for smoothing parameter
              selection. Properties of estimators are studied using both asymptotic methods
              and Monte Carlo simulations.

The advent of computer data bases of
              unprecedented size and complexity, and the dramatic increase in computer power,
              makes desirable and possible the development of more flexible models, concepts,
              and procedures.  These can be used to study relationships between variables and
              to construct models without the need of relying on rigid global assumptions. 
              Much of the recent work in statistics has addressed this need for more general
              and flexible methods.  This research further extends this work with a special
              focus on procedures that are counterparts to many commonly used linear model
              concepts and that expose important features in the data using intuitive and
              familiar ideas. The developed procedures are applied to financial, economic,
              insurance, medical, and other data. 


