Title       : Asymptotic Equivalence in Nonparametric Function Problems-Theory and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9971751

Award Number: 9971751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence D. Brown lbrown@stat.wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Recent results indicate the possibility of constructing a comprehensive
              asymptotic theory  of nonparametric function estimation. The major focus of the
              proposal is on continuing development of such a comprehensive asymptotic
              equivalence theory. In particular, the emphasis is on constructive, equivalence
              results. These allow researchers to develop statistical methodologies within
              the most tractable mathematical formulation and then to readily transfer those
              methodologies to the possibly less tractable formulation of practical interest.
              Additionally,  asymptotic equivalence as so far defined is a very stringent
              property which fails in some important practical settings, particularly those
              involving higher dimensional problems. One additional aspect of the proposal is
              to develop a weaker, but still constructive, partial equivalence
theory which
              can productively be applied when full equivalence fails. Research involving the
              use of equivalence ideas to further develop currently popular spline and
              wavelet methodologies is also proposed. This should lead to new, improved
              adaptive smoothing spline methodologies and to increased understanding of the
              existing adaptive wavelet methodologies.

	Contemporary advances in
              computational and statistical methodology have made it possible to model and
              analyze complex patterns arising in two and three dimensional data contexts.
              Examples abound in medical, geophysical, and astrophysical imaging and in the
              analysis of the data corresponding to such images. The statistical models
              accurately corresponding to such images are "nonparametric" in the sense that
              they do not possess the restrictive structure prevalent in statistical models
              developed in the pre-computer era. The current
proposal is aimed at a broad,
              but constructive, understanding of such models. In more detail, there are
              currently several rather different ways to model and analyze such nonparametric
              data. The main focus of this proposal is on establishing results which
              constructively demonstrate the operational similarity of all these models. The
              constructive nature of the proposal should make it feasible to move from one
              model to the other. For example, this can make it possible to choose one form
              which is best for efficient computation and then to directly pass to another
              which is more efficient for general presentation or for further mathematical
              analysis.
