Title       : Moduli Spaces, SU(n) Gauge Theory, and 3-Dimensional Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9971578

Award Number: 9971578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58473              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans U. Boden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS-9971578

PI: Hans Boden

Abstract: The investigator proposes
              a study of invariants of knots, links and 
3-manifolds obtained from their
              representation varieties. In joint 
work with Chris Herald, he will derive
              gauge-theoretic formulas for 
new 3-manifold invariants by interpreting
              representations as flat 
connections and perturbing the flatness equations.
              Corresponding 
invariants of knots and links were defined by Frohman,
              Frohman-Long,
and Frohman-Nicas. In joint work with Andy Nicas he will analyze
              
some mysterious combinatorial identities arising from computations 
for
              fibered knots. He will also study the extent to which 
cut-and-paste methods
              can be used to compute the new invariants 
in joint work with Chris Herald,
              Paul Kirk, and Eric Klassen. 
The principal goal in this line of inquiry is to
              establish a formula 
linking the 3-manifold invariants with the knot and link
              invariants. 
Over surfaces, representation varieties can alternatively be
              viewed 
as moduli spaces of stable bundles, and a study of the geometry and
              
topology of these moduli spaces is also proposed. This uses methods
from
              algebraic geometry and will provide an additional perspective
for
              understanding other naturally occuring spaces, such as
moduli spaces of
              linkages and GIT quotients of Grassmanians and
flag varieties. 

The
              principal objects studied by geometric topologists are called
manifolds. A
              manifold is a geometric shape which near any point
looks like Euclidean space.
              Thus manifolds are all locally the 
same, and in order to distinguish one
              manifold from another, 
mathematicians define invariants which encode the
              manifold's
global properties. To illustrate this point, consider the
              
following three commonplace objects: a flat sheet of paper, the 
surface of
              a ball, and the surface of a donut. To a near-sighted 
insect, each of these
              objects looks the same. From any given point 
the insect can map all nearby
              points using standard xy coordinates. 
The invariant which distinguishes these
              three shapes is called
the Euler characteristic. It is the number you get by
              triangulating 
the object and counting the number of vertices and triangles
              
and subtracting the number of edges. For example, the Euler
characteristic
              of a triangle is simply 3+1-3=1. Performing a 
similar count for each of the
              three surfaces, you get 1
for the sheet of paper, 2 for the surface of a ball,
              and 0 for 
the surface of a donut. This number is called an invariant because
              
it is independent of the choice of triangulation. One of the most 
important
              problems in low-dimensional topology is that of 
distinguishing all
              3-dimensional manifolds. Understanding the 
global structure of these
              manifolds will have numerous applications 
to physics, chemistry and biology.
              The investigator proposes to 
construct new invariants of 3-manifolds and to
              develop methods 
for computing the invariants. The long-term goal is to use
              the new 
invariants to help in classifying 3-manifolds and knots and links
              
contained in them.
 

