Title       : Analysis and Characterization of Natural Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2001     
File        : a9971320

Award Number: 9971320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sidney A. Coon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gemunu H. Gunaratne gemunu@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The first part of the work utilizes a characterization of textured patterns,
              referred to as the "disorder function," which measures the deviation of a
              pattern from a perfect plan form.  It was shown to be a parameter dependent,
              but configuration independent aspect of textures.  A study of patterns
              generated in model systems showed that the pattern formation consists of two
              stages.  The initial formation of striped domains from the random background
              exhibits trivial scaling while the (later) domain coarsening is nontrivial.  We
              will study analogous relaxation of experimental patterns (done in Prof. H. L.
              Swinney's lab) in a vibrated layer of sand.  Next, we propose to quantify
              configuration independent aspects of textured patterns formed in magnetic
              bubble systems and ferrofluids.  The parameter dependence of the disorder
              function for the textures will be studied.  Thirdly, as an application of the
              philosophy, we propose to use pattern characterization to estimate the
              "roughness" of a metal surface on a nanometer scale.  The idea is to
              characterize the disorder in an image obtained by scattering a laser beam off
              the surface.  A preliminary numerical study will be followed by an experimental
              collaboration.  Such a characterization is expected find application in auto
              industry.
	The second problem is the development of methods to perform modal
              decomposition of experimental patterns.  The methods utilizing Karhunen-Loeve
              decomposition have been developed.  As an application, we will analyze cellular
              states observed in a flame front (Prof. M. Gorman's group) and oscillation of a
              lattice generated in a vibrated layer of sand (Prof. Swinney's group). 
              Knowledge of the principal modes and their symmetries will allow us to develop
              normal form theories for the states.  Consequences of the theory will be
              compared with results from the experiments.

