Title       : Stochastic Differential Equations and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a9971720

Award Number: 9971720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip E. Protter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jin Ma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The principal investigators will study various issues involving stochastic
              differential equations (hereafter SDEs).  These include numerical
              approximations of expectations of both functions and functionals of solutions
              of SDEs, whether they be diffusions or more generally Markov processes with
              jumps.  Models inspired by Stochastic Finance theory will receive  attention;
              one example is forward-backward SDEs, where a general weak existence and
              uniqueness theorem is sought.  Further a special emphasis is devoted to
              filtering theory where a new Monte Carlo approach is developed, and also a
              martingale problem approach will be tried to treat the infinite dimensional
              case.  Stochastic partial differential equations will be studied via a new
              method of viscosity solutions, hopefully yielding existence, uniqueness and
              stability results in the fully nonlinear case.  Quasi-linear backward SDEs will
              be studied with an eye to applications in Stochastic Finance theory; in
              addition several problems in Finance theory will be treated directly, including
              complete markets with jumps and competitive price equilibria in incomplete
              markets.
	The principal investigators of this project study stochastic
              differential  equations.  A differential equation models phenomena that vary
              with time,  dealing with rates of change.  A stochastic differential equation
              includes the  possibility that the change comes from random forces.  Examples
              of  applications can be found in modeling radio and x-ray transmissions, and 
              cellular telephone signals, where the randomness comes from static noise; 
              biological examples where growth of viruses and plants have a random 
              component; and also in banking and finance where interest rate models, 
              commodity prices, and securities prices are modeled with random components.  
              The stochastic differential equations are complicated and sophisticated and 
              cannot be solved with explicit solutions: the desired quantities need to be 
              approximated by using a high speed computer.  Efficient algorithms are needed 
              and these methods are not yet well understood; by consequence the practitioner 
              has a choice to use models that are too simple but with methods that work, or 
              models that better approximate the true state of nature but for which methods 
              work poorly, if at all.  We propose to remedy this situation to a large extent 
              by developing algorithms that work for the better models, and in addition we 
              propose to quantify to what extent the models are effective.
