Title       : RUI: Stability and Dynamics of Self-Similarity in Evolution Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a9971969

Award Number: 9971969
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Bernoff ajb@hmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9141,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Self-similar behavior is evident in many physical systems including
the rupture
              of thin films, the pinching of thin liquid threads or
solid necks, and the
              spreading of liquid drops.  This research seeks
to increase the understanding
              of self-similarity by viewing the mathematical 
models for these phenomena in
              the context of dynamical systems theory.
Self-similar solutions can be thought
              of as steady equilibria in a
rescaled coordinate system that is "zooming" to
              match the scale of
the phenomena. Most of these models have an infinite number
              of
self-similar solutions. The foremost goal of this project is
              the
development of a stability theory that will identify which solution
              is
dynamically selected by the model.

The ideas developed in this project
              will provide mathematicians,
engineers and physicists with a set of tools for
              analyzing
self-similar dynamics. A phenomenon is self-similar if it appears to
              be 
unchanging once the time scale is suitably accelerated or slowed down
              
and the spatial scale is also adjusted. For example, integrated circuits rely
              on the
deposition of thin metallic traces on a substrate; this research
will
              help determine when these traces will break during fabrication
and elucidate
              the details of how the break occurs, since there is often
              self-similar
behavior near the critical event.  Thin fluid films are created
              in the application 
of paint, adhesives and optical coatings; the techniques
              developed in this 
project should describe when and how films rupture and help
              devise 
strategies for preventing these defects, which often develop in a
              self-similar way.  
This grant will also underwrite the research of Harvey
              Mudd 
College undergraduates who will become an integral part of this
              investigation.


