Title       : Statistical Inference for Spatial Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9971127

Award Number: 9971127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Stein stein@galton.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971127

This proposal focuses on two major areas in spatial statistics: 
              inference for point processes and prediction and inference for Gaussian random
              fields.  The work in point processes is largely motivated by questions arising
              in the analysis of an important cosmological catalog of locations along the
              lines-of-sight between quasars and the Earth of what are known as heavy-element
              absorbers.  This catalog provides a means for assessing the clustering of
              matter in the universe over very large spatial scales and for describing
              changes in this clustering as the universe has evolved.  The absorber catalog
              can be most simply modeled as a collection of realizations of a point process
              observed on a large number of intervals.  The fact that the process is observed
              over many regions rather than one large contiguous region produces some
              interesting opportunities and challenges for estimating properties of the point
              process and obtaining valid standard errors for the estimates.  For example,
              one can use resampling methods with the regions as sampling units to obtain
              confidence statements, although the problem is rather difficult if, as in the
              absorber catalog, the regions are of different sizes.  The proposed work on
              Gaussian random fields addresses several problems related to prediction when
              the covariance structure of the random field is partially unknown.  Under the
              natural asymptotic regime of an increasing number of observations in a fixed
              and bounded domain, only in some very simple cases is it presently possible to
              prove that predictions based on an estimated covariance structure are
              asymptotically optimal.  Recent work by Putter and Young provide a promising
              approach for proving such results.  This proposal also addresses the design of
              observation networks for prediction when the covariance structure is unknown. 
              For prediction, the local behavior of the random field is critical and
              practical experience has demonstrated that evenly spaced observations are poor
              designs when trying to infer this local behavior.  This proposal aims to
              provide theoretical support to this empirical finding.  For example,
              preliminary work shows that there is tremendous potential for improving the
              estimation of the fractal dimension of a Gaussian process by taking
              observations on two grids of very different spacing rather than on a single
              evenly spaced grid.

Spatial statistics is a rapidly growing area of inquiry
              with broad applicability to the natural and social sciences.  Despite its
              present widespread usage, the theoretical properties of many commonly applied
              procedures in spatial statistics are poorly understood.  The first major topic
              of this proposal is the analysis of data made up of locations in space.  This
              work is motivated by a cosmological data set that provides important
              information about the large-scale structure of the universe.  Estimating this
              large-scale structure is a critical component in resolving the fundamental
              cosmological problem of how the universe evolved from its nearly uniform early
              state to its present highly clumped state.  In addition to the direct
              application the proposed work has to cosmology, the problems addressed also
              occur naturally in microscopy.  The second major topic in this proposal is the
              prediction of quantities such as temperature, pollution concentrations and soil
              characteristics whose levels vary randomly across space.  Two specific problems
              include studying the properties of such predictions when there is uncertainty
              about how the values of this quantity fluctuate in space and selecting the
              locations of observations to yield accurate predictions.  Spatial prediction is
              widely used in the atmospheric sciences, pollution monitoring, hydrology and
              mining.


