Title       : Mathematical Problems for Nonlinear Inversion in Intermediate and High Contrast
               Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9971209

Award Number: 9971209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Liliana Borcea borcea@caam.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971209
Borcea

This research project will consider inverse problems for
              elliptic partial 
differential equations with coefficients that vary
              substantially in the 
domain of the solution. Specifically, the focus will be
              on imaging 
electrical conductivity and permittivity of a medium, given low
              frequency 
electro-magnetic field measurements. Such inverse problems are
              highly 
nonlinear and pose difficult analytical and computational questions.
              The 
research goal is to build a coherent set of algorithms and analytic tools
              for 
imaging intermediate and high contrast media, that go beyond the usual
              
linearization procedure that is clearly inadequate. Towards this goal, the
              
following directions of research have been identified: 1) Use state of the
              
art, minimal variational principles in our algorithms for imaging
              
intermediate contrast media. 2) Develop imaging algorithms based on our 
new
              asymptotic studies for time-harmonic electro-magnetic fields in high 
contrast
              media. 3) Extend the asymptotic theory to problems in linear 
elasticity, for
              media with a high volume fraction of rigid inclusions.

Imaging electrical
              properties of heterogeneous media finds important 
applications in
              environmental studies such as underground contaminant 
detection. The research
              focuses on intermediate and high contrast media 
because of the known fact
              that the underground electrical conductivity and 
permittivity can have large
              variations, up to orders of magnitude. One 
practical way of imaging the shape
              of fluid plumes underground is to 
make electrical or electro-magnetic
              measurements on the surface of the 
Earth and in boreholes. The data gathered
              are processed in order to 
estimate both the location of underground good
              conductors and their 
magnitude. A substantial amount of work has been done
              for the case of 
electrical, d.c. measurements. Comparatively, little work has
              been done on 
the electro-magnetic inverse problem. Most of the results
              available apply 
to low contrast media. Recently, we have done studies of
              electro-magnetic 
fields in high contrast media and plan to use these studies
              in inversion. 
The results are promising and should bring significant
              improvement to the 
current stage of available imaging algorithms.

