Title       : Research in Stochastic Processes and Nonlinear Filtering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9971767

Award Number: 9971767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Sellke tsellke@stat.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. Lalley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Research will be conducted in two distinct areas: (1) stochastic processes,
              especially stochastic growth models, on graphs with 'hyperbolic' geometries;
              and (2) filtering and inference for time series produced by chaotic dynamical
              systems. In the first area, the primary objective is an understanding of how
              'hyperbolicity' influences the behavior of certain fundamental stochastic
              processes, including random walks, branching random walks, contact processes,
              and percolation, and to elucidate the nature of the different phase transitions
              that occur in such processes. In the second area, the goal is to develop
              statistical procedures for analyzing time series data produced by systems
              governed by 'chaotic' dynamics. In particular, situations where data from
              deterministic, but chaotic, systems is corrupted by external 'noise' will be
              studied. The goals of the research will be (a) to determine when, and how,
              chaotic 'signals' can be extracted from noisy time series; and (b) to develop
              procedures for inference about the governing dynamical laws based on raw time
              series data.
	Stochastic growth processes are crude mathematical models for
              the growth and spread of populations in time and space. Understanding of the
              mathematical laws governing the evolution of such processes may also contribute
              to our understanding of how epidemics develop, how favorable genes are
              disseminated in large populations, and how information makes its way through
              large communications networks. The notion of a 'phase transition', a  drastic
              change in the qualitative behavior of a system precipitated by a small change
              in the parameters governing it, is especially important, because understanding
              the nature of such transitions may have ramifications for the development of
              intervention strategies. 
