Title       : Topics in Nonparametric Analysis and Model Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9971579

Award Number: 9971579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Samarov samarov@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971579

This project is the continuation of our research on the question of
              how intuitive and concise linear model concepts and techniques can be extended
              to nonparametric settings and on the development of nonparametric techniques
              for model diagnostics, dimensionality reduction, and assessing adequacy of
              particular classes of models.  Some of the procedures considered in this
              research are based on conditional versions of the familiar regression,
              covariance, and correlation coefficients, where the conditioning is on
              covariates restricted to neighborhoods.  The size of the neighborhood serves as
              a resolution scale, and dependence of the response on the covariates is
              measured and summarized at multiple scales.  Other procedures are curve or
              surface estimators and estimators of integral functionals of distributions. 
              Many of the estimators to be considered depend on smoothing parameters needed
              in estimation of curves and surfaces.  A large part of the research addresses
              the problem of developing reliable data-based methods for smoothing parameter
              selection. Properties of estimators are studied using both asymptotic methods
              and Monte Carlo simulations.

Computer data bases of unprecedented size and
              complexity and the dramatic increase in computer power makes possible the
              development of more flexible models, concepts, and procedures, which can be
              used to study relationships between variables and to construct models without
              relying on rigid global assumptions.  Much of the recent work in statistics has
              addressed this need for more general and flexible methods.  This research
              further extends this work with a special focus on procedures that are
              counterparts of many commonly used linear model concepts and that expose
              important features in the data using intuitive and familiar ideas.  The
              developed procedures are applied to financial, economic, insurance, medical,
              and other data.



