Title       : CISE Experimental Partnerships: Prototyping the Superthreaded Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9971666

Award Number: 9971666
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $932472             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Lilja lilja@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pen-Chung Yew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 4725,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9971666
Lilja, David J
Yew, Pen-Chung
University of Minnesota-Twin
              Cities

CISE Experimental Partnerships: Prototyping the Superthreaded
              Processor
Architecture (Experimental Partnerships)

This research seeks to
              discover sufficient parallelism in programs both at the instruction-level and
              at the thread-level by exploring new compiler technologies and computer
              architectures.  The superthreaded processor architecture simultaneously
              exploits multiple granularities of parallelism in application programs by
              supporting both instruction-level and thread-level speculation with
              compiler-assisted cross-thread runtime data dependence checking. This research
              validates the superthreaded architecture with a hardware description language
              implementation using a software-based emulation facility as a step towards a
              more detailed cycle-based emulation.  An integrated parallelizing compiler for
              both C and Fortran is being developed to support tests using realistic
              benchmark programs.  Extensions to the superthreaded architecture and
              compilation techniques are being investigated to exploit another thread
              dimension to expend additional parallelism to more effectively hide memory
              latency.  Significant enhancements are being made to the existing integrated
              parallelizing compiler to target the extended superthreaded architecture to
              address both the scalability and the memory latency hiding issues.  The new
              compiler techniques developed in this project will also benefit existing
              wide-issue superscalar processors since techniques to exploit thread-level
              parallelism and latency hiding in C programs are still in their infancy today. 
              Additionally, a complete infrastructure is being developed to study the
              interaction between architecture and compiler techniques for concurrent
              multithreaded architectures that exploit various levels of parallelism and
              speculation for both scalability and memory latency hiding.  This experimental
              infrastructure includes the integrated parallelizing compiler, an interface to
              a fast emulation facility, and a complete execution-based simulator.


