Title       : Research on Tilings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9971884

Award Number: 9971884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Propp propp@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9971884

The investigator is exploring tilings and related mathematical
              objects from the perspectives of combinatorics and probability theory.  In the
              study of tilings one examines the different ways in which a region can be built
              by fitting together smaller pieces (called tiles) taken from a small collection
              of shapes.  The combinatorial perspective focuses on the question `In how many
              ways can this tiling problem be solved?' while the probabilistic perspective
              focuses on the question `What does a typical solution to this tiling problem
              look like?'  In many instances these tiling models are equivalent to models
              studied by statistical mechanicians for decades, but the new outlook is leading
              to many results that the physicists missed.  The tools that are used in
              attacking these questions range from complex analysis and the calculus of
              variations to ergodic theory and interacting particle systems.

On one level,
              this is basic mathematical research whose main motivation (like that of most
              theoretical mathematics) arises from the desire to understand phenomena that
              are simple yet surprising, especially in cases where existing analytical tools
              do not make it possible to provide rigorous proofs of empirically well-founded
              conjectures.  A further (and potentially more applicable) motivation for this
              research comes from the fact that tilings are simplified models of matter,
              particularly of matter that incorporates randomness at the very finest levels
              of organization.  In many cases, the precise details of the tiling problem (the
              shape of the tiles and of the region to be tiled) enforce a kind of large-scale
              heterogeneity reminiscent of physical systems in which different phases of a
              substance (such as ice, liquid water, and steam) coexist.  In studying tiling
              models, one can prove rigorous results concerning the ways in which the
              boundaries between different phases are maintained thermodynamically.  Thus the
              study of tilings can serve as a kind of a test-bed in which some ideas about
              random media can be subjected to mathematical analysis.

