Title       : Nonparametric and Semiparametric Modelling for Data Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9971602

Award Number: 9971602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans-Georg Mueller mueller@wald.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For many scientific problems, nonparametric and semiparametric statistical
              modelling can contribute to a better understanding and analysis. This includes
              the application of curve estimation techniques. The P.I. explores models which
              combine smooth (nonparametric), non-smooth (discontinuous) and parametric
              components. For high-dimensional data, such as curve data and longitudinal
              data, a sensible modelling approach includes components which achieve a
              dimension reduction. These are typically parametric parts of a model, and
              nonparametric smoothers are then applied in a second step to the dimension
              reduced data.  The P.I. develops models which are geared towards scientific
              problems which yield data in the form of samples of curves, high dimensional
              data or discontinuous data. The techniques used include generalized linear
              models, estimating equations, change-point analysis, random effects modelling
              and smoothing (in particular, kernel and local polynomial smoothers).

The
              proposed models with discontinuous parts are used to address the question
              whether the growth of children proceeds continuously or discontinuously. A
              second application is the modelling of DNA sequences here discontinuities in
              base frequencies enable DNA segmentation techniques. Further applications
              include edge detection in image analysis and the segmentation of continuously
              recorded financial data such as stock market indices. In addition, the P.I.
              constructs models for the efficient analysis of high dimensional data. An
              example is dose-response analysis in nutrition with the aim of finding optimal
              vitamin sources. The P.I. also proposes models for data where an entire
              function is recorded per experimental unit. Such data occur in many fields,
              notably the life sciences, and require innovative statistical approaches. A
              pertinent example are data on the individually recorded egg-laying behavior for
              a large cohort of medflies. A major question in aging research is the relation
              between reproduction and longevity. It is therefore of particular interest to
              apply the proposed models to explore this connection.
