Title       : Non-Steady Solutions of Models Describing Smoldering Combustion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9971881

Award Number: 9971881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Schult dschult@colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9141,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DMS - 9971881

Non-steady Solutions of Models Describing Smoldering
              Combustion

Daniel Schult

Colgate University

Abstract

Smoldering
              combustion refers to combustion in which the primary reaction 
process
              involves both solid and gaseous reactants instead of the gas/gas 
reactions
              seen in common flames.  Smoldering often occurs when oxidizer 
supply to the
              reaction is limited, for example because it must flow 
through porous media to
              reach the reaction site.  Models of smoldering 
combustion require a
              description of porous fluid flow as well as a 
description of the reaction
              process.  The resulting partial differential 
equations are highly nonlinear,
              making description of solutions difficult. 
Numerical simulations involving
              adaptive methods which change resolution 
as the process evolves have been
              able to approximate steady solutions to 
these models in some detail. 
              Asymptotic methods have also been successful 
in describing steady and slowly
              varying approximate solutions to these 
models.  The proposed project involves
              extending both asymptotic and 
numerical methods to the study of non-steady
              solutions and then using 
these techniques to describe the details of the
              dynamics and transitions 
of these solutions.  This project should be of
              interest to scientists 
using asymptotic methods, using adaptive numerical
              methods, studying 
systems with multiple solutions, interested in issues of
              stability of 
solutions with many time scales, or interested in the
              development of 
chaotic solutions.  It will be of particular interest to fire
              safety 
experts who wish to understand dynamics of smoldering near extinction
              
limits, transitions from smoldering to flaming and patterns of smolder
              
propagation through materials.


Smoldering combustion is the burning of a
              solid without an airborne flame.  
It is of interest for fire safety not only
              as a precursor to flaming, but 
also because it tends to release large
              quantities of toxic gases.  
Smoldering is also used in the design of timing
              devices (ignition fuses), 
and material synthesis processes such as
              self-propagating high-temperature 
synthesis.  Understanding the mechanisms
              and processes behind smoldering 
can enhance fire safety as well as allow
              better control for engineering 
uses of smoldering combustion.  Models of
              smolder processes involve 
highly nonlinear partial differential equations
              making description of 
solutions difficult.  Approximate descriptions exist
              for steady uniform 
propagation and slowly varying propagation, but smoldering
              often involves 
complicated non-steady behavior.  Understanding the mechanisms
              which 
drive this dynamical behavior should help us control smoldering
              systems
and may even allow design of desirable smolder dynamics.  The proposed
              
project involves developing and extending high-performance
              computing
algorithms as well as analytical asymptotic methods to the study
              
of non-steady smolder and then using these techniques to describe the
              
details of the dynamics and transitions of these complex smolder waves. 
              
The solution methods introduced by this work and the specific 
descriptions
              of the dynamics of smoldering will increase our 
understanding of the
              smoldering process and transitions to flaming.  
In addition, the techniques
              will likely be applicable in other areas of 
combustion and problems of flow
              in porous media.  This project should be 
of interest to scientists using
              asymptotic methods, using adaptive 
numerical methods for high-performance
              computing, studying systems with 
multiple solutions, interested in issues of
              stability of solutions with 
many time scales, or interested in the
              development of chaotic solutions.  
It will be of particular interest to fire
              safety experts and combustion 
control engineers who wish to understand
              dynamics of smoldering near 
extinction limits, transitions from smoldering to
              flaming and patterns 
of smolder propagation through materials.

