Title       : Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9971159

Award Number: 9971159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70820              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea R. Nahmod nahmod@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9971159
Principal Investigator: Andrea R. Nahmod

Abstract:
              Nahmod's project aims at studying specific problems in harmonic analysis and
              partial differential equations that arise when smoothness conditions on the
              domain or the operations are relaxed to conform with a more natural physical
              setting. The first part concentrates on the study of the boundary unique
              continuation property for the Laplace operator on irregular domains. This
              property is a boundary version of the classical interior unique continuation
              property for elliptic operators, and is closely related to results on nodal
              sets of eigenfunctions. Basically nothing is known for
              nonsmooth-nonconvex-domains. This project will investigate whether or not
              Lipschitz domains have the boundary unique continuation property. It is first
              approached by considering a special case, the Bang-Bang Principle of control
              theory, which is of interest in its own right. The second part focuses on the
              study of bilinear operators associated to nonsmooth symbols that arise in the
              context of compensated compactness and are also related to Calderon's
              commutators. Nonlinearity in certain partial differential equations prevents
              direct use of weak continuity arguments to ensure the convergence of
              approximating solutions. Compensated compactness was developed to overcome this
              difficulty by exploiting cancellation properties and a priori bounds of certain
              associated nonlinear quantities, usually bilinear. The aim of this project is
              to establish a comprehensive criterion in one dimension for bilinear operators
              with nonsmooth symbols to map into some Hardy space. The approach is via a
              delicate use of time-frequency analysis, as pioneered by C. Fefferman and later
              successfully exploited by Lacey and Thiele. A concurrent aim of the project is
              to both develop and gain a greater understanding of the ideas and
              decompositions involved in the analysis with the goal of making these
              techniques more readily applicable in other specific contexts. 

Partial
              differential equations, the ultimate object of study in Nahmod's project, are
              the mathematical models of the laws governing many phenomena in our physical
              world. The role of mathematical analysis is to study the behaviour of their
              solutions, provide the tools to extract quantitative and qualitative
              information about them, and lay the foundations upon which methods to
              approximate the solutions with reasonable accuracy are developed.
              Time-frequency analysis, one of the key methods to be employed by Nahmod,
              consists in decomposing complex objects into basic building blocks (via a
              collection of "modulated waveforms") that are localized and easy to understand,
              and then piecing them back together in a straightforward manner. A
              time-frequency analysis of a problem can be likened to a musical score. The
              modulated waveforms (the notes) have four attributes: amplitude (loudness),
              scale (duration), frequency (pitch) and position (instant it is played). The
              object that the full "time-frequency composition" portrays might, for example,
              be speech, a radar signal, or a fingerprint, but might also be a more abstract
              oscillatory expression arising in optics, acoustic scattering, and wave
              propagation problems. This type of analysis is closely related to the theory of
              wavelets. Its impact is both theoretical and computational for its potential to
              implement the ideas developed in harmonic analysis to produce fast
              computational algorithms for operations which, due to their nonlocal nature,
              are otherwise expensive to compute numerically.



