Title       : Complex Stochastic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a9971571

Award Number: 9971571
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Kurtz kurtz@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971571
Kurtz
	Research programs will be carried out in the areas of
              stochastic analysis, measure-valued processes, stochastic filtering and
              control, large deviations, and spatial point processes. Work in the area of
              stochastic analysis will focus on stochastic partial differential equations,
              the analysis of simulation schemes for stochastic equations, and the
              relationship between stochastic equations and martingale problems. Filtering
              equations for nonstandard observation structures will be derived and analyzed.
              Previous work on the martingale characterization of regular control problems
              will be extended to singular and partially observed control problems. Methods
              for the study of large deviations for Markov processes based on convergence of
              nonlinear semigroups will be extended to new classes of models. Spatial point
              processes characterized as stationary distributions of Markov birth and death
              processes and as solutions of stochastic equations driven by Poisson random
              measures will be studied. The work will focus on spatial ergodicity and central
              limit theorems with applications to parameter estimation in mind.
	The study
              of stochastic processes is concerned with mathematical descriptions of natural
              phenomena governed by "random" or "chance" mechanisms. Mathematical models of
              such phenomena may attempt to describe variation in time, in space, or both.
              The research to be performed is concerned with developing methods for
              specifying these mathematical models, approximating complex models by simpler
              ones, obtaining information about the true state of a system from corrupted or
              "noisy" observations, and determining how to influence or "control" the
              evolution of the models and the phenomena they represent. In particular,
              filtering equations provide a method of processing information about phenomena
              that cannot be directly and/or accurately observed, by using a mathematical
              model for the relationship between the unobserved phenomena and quantities that
              can be observed. Examples of the kind of situations that will be considered
              include models in which the observed information is spatially distributed such
              as might be obtained from satellite observations and models of communications
              networks in which one attempts to obtain information about the state of the
              network from observations at a few points in the network. 

