Title       : Applications of the Ordered Phases of Helium Three to Broader Questions in
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9971694

Award Number: 9971694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas D. Osheroff osheroff@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971694
Osheroff
This is a low temperature physics project dealing with less
              abundant isotope of helium, He-3. The low temperature ordered phases of solid
              and liquid He-3 exhibit complex yet remarkably well understood and easily
              measured physical properties which in many instances mimic the behavior seen
              less clearly in systems with much greater technological importance. For
              instance, one can easily observe antiferromagnetic domain walls in the U2D2
              spin ordered phase of solid He-3 from shifts in the NMR spectra of the adjacent
              magnetic domains. This ability will be utilized in the present research program
              to study domain wall pinning and mobility in an antiferromagnet cleanly for the
              first time. This knowledge should be useful in understanding the stability of
              magnetic systems on a mesoscopic scale, and macroscopic tunneling phenomena
              generally. In another example, the p-wave 3He BCS superfluid ground state would
              be infinitely degenerate at Tc were it not for critical fluctuations, which are
              predicted to stabilize phases near Tc which are different from those seen at
              lower temperatures. This research program will probe the width of this region,
              and attempt to identify the ordered phases near Tc, thus providing a new test
              of our understanding of the theory of critical phenomena. The project educates
              primarily graduate students, although physics majors carry out senior honors
              projects in the lab as well. Students who pursue low temperature studies obtain
              a rigorous and very broad education in condensed matter physics and
              experimental techniques. 
%%%
This low temperature physics project will
              utilize many of the unique properties of the low temperature phases of solid
              and liquid He-3 to study specific properties of these ordered phases whose
              physical origins are common to properties seen in other more technologically
              important materials, such as those used in magnetic memory devices. In one set
              of experiments, the nature and mobility of the boundaries between magnetically
              ordered domains with different orientations will be studied in a magnetically
              ordered phase of solid 3He using magnetic resonance techniques. This study will
              bear on the question of how a system can quantum mechanically tunnel through a
              barrier which is too high for it to go over. A second study will involve
              superfluid 3He, which exhibits ordered phases similar to those seen in
              conventional superconductors, but much more complex. The nature of the
              superfluidity just below the transition to the ordered state will be used in a
              novel test of the theory which appears to successfully describe all second
              order, or 'continuous' phase transitions. This will provide a unique test of
              the applicability and validity of this Nobel prize winning theory. The project
              educates primarily graduate students, although physics majors carry out senior
              honors projects in the lab as well. Students who pursue low temperature studies
              obtain a rigorous and very broad education in condensed matter physics and
              experimental techniques. 
***


