Title       : Optimal Curve Estimation: from Asymptotic to Small Sample Sizes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9971051

Award Number: 9971051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50957              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sam Efromovich efrom@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SAM EFROMOVICH 
Optimal curve estimation: from asymptotic to small sample
              sizes
9971051

The primary focus of this research is to explore the bridges
              between the sharp asymptotic theory of nonparametric curve estimation and
              practically important cases of small sample sizes.  Main objectives are as
              follows: (i) For the case of classical direct statistical settings, like
              density estimation or heteroscedastic regression, create the theory and methods
              of finding minimal sample sizes (the degree of the problem) where
              asymptotically sharp data-driven estimates outperform any other estimates. (ii)
              For indirect statistical problems, such as nonparametric survival analysis,
              blurred images or regression
with measurement errors in predictors, create the
              theory of equivalence between these settings and the corresponding direct ones
              with a particular emphasis on finding the relation between sample sizes needed
              for a similar quality of estimation. (iii) For nonparametric curve estimation
              problems involving time series with heavy tails and long range dependence,
              which frequently arise in the modern communication systems like the World Wide
              Web, develop optimal data-driven procedures of nonparametric estimation.
              

Statistical theory is primarily interested in finding most accurate
              procedures for large samples while in practically interesting cases sample
              sizes may be both large and small.  Moreover, the notion of a large or small
              sample depends on an underlying setting.  The research is devoted to developing
              universal procedures, which are simultaneously optimal for both large and small
              sample sizes.  The developed methods will be tested on the following specific
              practical problems which motivated this proposal: (1) Insulin secretion by the
              type II diabetes patients; (2) The geomagnetic polarity time-scale and the
              speed of seafloor spreading using marine magnetic observations, and how these
              factors affect environment and global change; (3) Drinking water quality
              including monitoring arsenic and other cancer-causing substances in New Mexico;
              (4) Learning machines for screening patients in emergency rooms; (5) Engineered
              systems for the analysis of transformed and noisy images. These applied
              problems will be done together with Sandia National Laboratories, the UNM
              Medical Center and Maui High Performance Computing Center.  

