Title       : Time Reversal, Neutron Structure, and Neutron Beta Decay
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1999  
File        : a9971952

Award Number: 9971952
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy E. Chupp chupp@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin P. Coulter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1234      LOW ENERGY NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The tools of nuclear and neutron polarization allow investigation of the
              symmetries of time reversal and parity that can be used to study weak
              interactions in the presence of much stronger interactions.  Time reversal
              symmetry and its violation are key to understanding physics at the elementary
              particle level and to address the question: how has the predominance of matter
              over anti matter been generated.  The reversal of time or motion of particles
              and spins in the decay of polarized neutrons provides a probe of parity even -
              time reversal odd physics and a unique view of certain kinds of interactions
              not yet observed.  An experiment with the cold neutron beam at NIST,
              Gaithersburg addresses is designed to measure the triple vector correlation of
              electron and proton momenta with decaying neutron spin.
	The charge
              distribution of the neutron can best be studied by scattering of polarized
              neutrons by electrons or of electrons from 3He.  Though neutral, the subtle
              distribution of charge characterized by the neutron charge radius and electric
              form factor has a fundamental origin in the strong interaction.  Experiments
              with a cold polarized neutron beam at Los Alamos and with polarized electrons
              scattering at MIT/Bates are designed to address these questions.
	The weak
              interaction between neutrons and protons has never been directly observed,
              though features of the current distribution of the heavy nuclei as well as
              parity mixing of nuclear states has been observed.  At Los Alamos, an
              experiment is under development to use a polarized cold neutron beam captured
              on liquid parahydrogen to measure this coupling for the first time.  Models of
              the nucleon-nucleon force including the weak interaction corrections predict a
              range of values.  Measurement to 10% should restrict this range and corroborate
              other observations including the anapole moment of 113CS measured in atomic
              parity violation.


