Title       : Poisson Geometry and Riemannian Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a9971505

Award Number: 9971505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. Weinstein alanw@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Alan
              Weinstein
----------------------------------------------------------------------
ABSTRACT OF PROJECT: POISSON GEOMETRY AND QUANTIZATION
Principal Investigator:  Alan Weinstein

Poisson structures are the ``shadow of quantum noncommutativity'' on
differentiable manifolds, manifested as singular foliations with
symplectic structures along the leaves.  Weinstein will investigate
several aspects of Poisson geometry and its relations to
noncommutative algebra.  The central part of the project, motivated by
the study of convexity theorems in symplectic and Poisson geometry,
actually belongs to riemannian geometry.  Versions of Ulam's ``general
stability problem'' concerning approximate homomorphisms from groups
and approximately invariant submanifolds for compact group actions
have been reduced to averaging problems for families of submanifolds.
Several methods of averaging will be investigated.  The averaging
methods will then be applied to the classification of proper Lie
groupoids, with applications to convexity theory and isoparametric
submanifold geometry.  A separate part of the project will use the
geometry and quantization of Dirac structures (singular foliations
with presymplectic structures along the leaves), to complete the
classification of quantum tori up to Morita equivalence.

This project is concerned with various extensions of the notions of
symmetry and symmetry group.  Initially, one thinks of a symmetry of a
physical or mathematical object as a transformation which leaves the
structure of the object invariant.  The collection of symmetries of a
given object, together with the operation of applying one symmetry
after another, forms a "symmetry group" whose analysis aids the study
of the object under investigation.  Many important applications
require generalizations of the notion of symmetry group, and even the
notion of symmetry itself.  First of all, one has symmetries defined
only on part of an object (e.g. between individual molecules in a
complex compound, rather) or symmetries which leave the properties of
an object only approximately invariant (e.g. in the study of real
data, whose symmetries are generally imperfect).  Through a method of
averaging, we intend to derive true symmetries from imperfect ones;
this idealization could reveal the underlying structure of an object
despite our imperfect perception of it.  The method of averaging may
also be applicable to problems in computer graphics, such as the
"morphing" of one curve or surface into another by a continuous family
of curves or surfaces.  Part of the project involves algebraic systems
related to those in which the usual associative law of composition:
(ab)c = a(bc) is satisfied only approximately.  Such systems have
recently been shown relevant to the hypothetical "M-theory" which may
unravel some of the mysteries of high-energy physics.

