Title       : The Topology of Hydrodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1999        
File        : a9971629

Award Number: 9971629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Ghrist   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL:  DMS-9971629

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Robert Ghrist

ABSTRACT: 
              

The principal theme of this project is the development and refining of
              topological techniques for answering dynamical  questions about inviscid fluid
              flows (the Euler Equations)  in the full three-dimensional setting. Through a
              correspondence  between Beltrami fields and the Reeb dynamics of contact 
              structures, one can import techniques from contact topology  and
              pseudoholomorphic curve theory to answer questions of  existence of solutions
              and of forced recurrence. In addition,  knot-theoretic techniques shed light on
              the global properties  of the Euler equations on Riemannian manifolds. Goals of
              this project include the resolution of the Weinstein Conjecture on solid tori
              (which would imply that steady force-free fields in a tokamak have closed field
              lines), the spectrum of knot types which can/must appear as closed flowlines in
              steady Euler flows, and the implications of the tight/overtwisted  dichotomy in
              the hydrodynamical context with respect to  hydrodynamic instability and energy
              minimization.   

One of the enduring challenges in science is the
              comprehension  and taming of fluid behavior: from tornadoes to ocean currents, 
              we live in a world of complicated fluid dynamics.  All of these phenomena have
              mathematical manifestations ---  projections onto a simplified abstract setting
              whose  analysis yields clues to the workings of the physical world. This
              project will focus on the equations governing ``perfect'' fluids: models
              appropriate for certain non-viscous  fluids and plasmas alike. Emerging
              techniques from global  geometry and topology provide tools for attacking
              problems heretofore beyond the reach of analysis. Surprisingly, such  seemingly
              unrelated questions as ``How do strings tie up  into different knots'' and
              ``What does geometry in four  dimensions look like'' are closely tied to
              questions of  recurrence and stability in steady fluid flows. 

