Title       : New Insights into Current Issues in Nanoindentation from Finite
               Element/Atomistic Multiscale Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1999      
File        : a9971429

Award Number: 9971429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald W. Brenner brenner@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971429
Brenner
Nanoindentation of gold substrates will be simulated using
              finite-element/atomistic multiscale modeling.  The simulation, using techniques
              adapted from methods developed to study crack propagation, will treat the
              region around the indentation with an atomistic model.  This region will be
              embedded in a continuum modeled with finite elements.  The dynamics of
              nanoindentation may then be resolved to the atomic scale without the need for
              an excessively large number of atoms to model long-range stresses.

Three
              series of simulations will be carried out, each of which are motivated by the
              results of an ongoing experimental collaboration at North Carolina State
              University and Sandia National Laboratory in which the indentation of gold
              substrates will be studied.  In each of the simulations, the atomistic
              substrate region will be modeled with embedded-atom potentials using the public
              Sandia-Livermore code.  Code to treat the continuum region of the substrate
              will be developed as a set of subroutines to the EAM code.  At the end of this
              project, these routines will be made available to other researchers through the
              PI's web site.

Nanoindentation of gold substrates will be simulated using
              finite-element/atomistic multiscale modeling.  Nanoindentation occurs when a
              material of greater hardness, usually in the form of a pointed probe, impinges
              on the surface of another.  The response of the substrate is a measure of the
              relative hardness.  Modeling this nanoindentation involves coupling of
              atomistic and continuum length-scales.  This grant supports theoretical
              research which attempts to model nanoindentation experiments being conducted at
              North Carolina State University and Sandia National Laboratory.


