Title       : Stochastic Models of Asset Valuation in Markets with Frictions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1999       
File        : a9971415

Award Number: 9971415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thaleia Zariphopoulou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:

 The PI proposes to continue her program to develop methods to
              study a
broad range of valuation problems in portfolio management and
              asset
pricing. More precisely, using techniques from the theories of
              stochastic
control and nonlinear partial differential equations, the PI
              proposes to
continue her research program in the following two general
              areas:
A. Models with transaction costs: The goal is to investigate (i)
              the
valuation of early exercise instruments and exotic derivatives in
              a
multi-security framework, (ii) the estimation of hedging probabilities in
a
              relaxed super replication setting, (iii) the impact of a finite horizon
to
              trading policies, and (iv) the asset valuation with transaction costs
and
              alternative price processes.
B. Models with stochastic volatility: The goals
              are (i) the complete
characterization and calibration of stochastic volatility
              functions and
(ii) the analysis of delta hedging and value at risk in the
              presence of
stochastic volatility and unhedgable risks.
 
 Financial markets
              are not "perfect" due to the presence of various
frictions like transaction
              costs, asymmetric information, stochastic
volatility, trading constraints,
              irreversibilities and liquidity. These
market imperfections generate
              unhedgable risks which cannot be priced via
the existing classical valuation
              principles. This project proposes to 
introduce novel valuation methodologies
              and to analyze the relevant
stochastic optimization problems. In addition to
              the areas of derivative
pricing and portfolio management, it is expected that
              the new results will
be applied to other valuation systems arising in
              corporate finance, credit
risk, insurance theory, electronic commerce and
              optimal environmental
management. 


