Title       : Stochastic Adaptive Control and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9971790

Award Number: 9971790
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tyrone E. Duncan duncan@math.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bozenna Pasik-Duncan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971790
Duncan

This proposal describes a variety of stochastic problems for
              
investigation.  These problems are associated with stochastic 
adaptive
              control which is the control of an incompletely known 
stochastic system. 
              Typically to solve an adaptive control problem 
it is necessary to identify
              the unknown parameter of the system and 
simultaneously to construct a
              control.  The cost functionals for the 
control problems are typically ergodic
              (average cost per unit time).  
A family of processes, fractional Brownian
              motion, is proposed for 
development by extending a stochastic calculus and
              using these 
processes for adaptive control problems.  This family of
              processes 
seems to have wide applicability.  Adaptive control for stochastic
              
distributed parameter systems is proposed by considering partially 
known
              semilinear systems.  This family of systems includes some 
stochastic partial
              differential equations.  The adaptive control of 
continuous time branching
              processes is proposed for investigation 
because these processes are important
              and little use of control has 
been made for these processes.  Risk sensitive
              control problems are 
especially useful for financial models.  It is proposed
              to study 
adaptive control for these problems.  The work in this proposal
              
should be applicable to physical systems that have stochastic 
models that
              are controlled.  It should enhance the understanding of 
these physical
              systems.

Mathematical models are used to describe physical systems and
              
analysis is performed on these mathematical models.  Typically it 
is
              required to control the physical systems so that control is 
introduced in the
              mathematical models.  Usually the models are not 
completely specified so it
              is necessary to identify some parameters 
of the model from the evolution of
              the system.  To describe 
perturbations or unmodelled dynamics in a system,
              noise is 
introduced in the model.  The control of an incompletely specified
              
system with noise is called stochastic adaptive control.  It is 
proposed to
              investigate a wide variety of problems in stochastic 
adaptive control.  These
              problems include lumped and distributed 
systems.  Some new noise models using
              fractional Brownian 
motion will also be investigated.

