Title       : Multivariate Nonparametric Methodology Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9971797

Award Number: 9971797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Scott scottdw@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis D. Cox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971797

This research project focuses on the development of nonparametric
              density and regression methodology in mid-range dimensions.  Closely related
              applications such as clustering, mixture estimation, and dimension reduction
              are examined with a new point of view, relating locally adaptive and spatial
              estimation and recent extensions of nonparametric criteria to parametric
              problems.  The new data-based parametric estimation algorithm, based upon
              integrated squared error, is investigated for its flexibility and robustness. 
              An investigation of the dual solutions to the bandwidth choice problem for
              locally adaptive curve estimates continues, with the surprising finding that
              one solution is asymptotically a large constant.  Three algorithms for finding
              interesting subspaces will be investigated.  One measures the number of modes;
              a second finds maximal bias subspaces; and a third is a new least-normal
              criterion.  Visualization work continues with the acquisition of an
              ImmersaDesk, which will allow improved implementations of algorithms such as
              the density grand tour.  A somewhat new methodology is called Variable
              Clustering Analysis, which assists in semiparametric density estimation, data
              analysis, and interpretable dimension reduction.  Also in the area of
              clustering, an algorithm for simplifying complex mixture models fitted by EM is
              developed, as is a new estimation and testing algorithms for the number of
              components.  The project continues innovative work on spatial modeling and
              combining many data surveys into useful data modeling and conditional
              estimation of factors and their covariates in collaboration with researchers in
              the Department of Agriculture.

Nonparametric methodology is widely used in
              one and two dimensions, but less so in higher dimensions.  This research
              focuses on the mid-range dimensions and provides a deeper understanding of the
              implications to data modeling of the curse of dimensionality and problems
              associated with massive data sets.  Particular emphasis is given to
              multivariate regression and density estimation problems, and closely related
              applications such as clustering, mixture estimation, and dimension reduction. 
              Visualization is especially important when dealing with medium-dimensional data
              and the growing body of massive data sets.  Of special interest is discovering
              and displaying data in visual clustering and visual discrimination
              applications.  Rice University has acquired an ImmersaDesk, which will allow
              the implementation of recently developed algorithms in a virtual reality
              environment.  At a recent National Research Council workshop, numerous
              scientists identified critical statistical needs in their work with massive
              data sets:  alternatives to principal components, specialized visualization
              tools for exploring massive data, better clustering algorithms, and techniques
              for handling nonstationary data.  Results from this research directly impact
              three of these four critical opportunities.  This program represents a
              comprehensive and long-term attack on a host of important data analytic
              problems in multivariate estimation.  Graduate training is significant
              component of this project.  The results will be of long-term theoretical
              interest and will provide short-term solutions to real-world problems.


