Title       : Multiscattering and Absolutely Continuous Spectrum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a9971592

Award Number: 9971592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanislav A. Molchanov smolchan@math.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Boris R. Vainberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of this research is to study random and
deterministic
              differential operators with mixed spectrum 
containing a dense pure point
              spectrum (corresponding to 
localized states) and an absolutely continuous
              spectrum 
(corresponding to extended states). According to the classical
              
Anderson conjecture, both types of spectra coexist for random 
Schrodinger
              operators with "small" disorder. This conjecture has
not been proved yet in a
              rigorous fashion. The award will support 
research on a rigorous proof of this
              conjecture when the disorder 
is not necessarily small in magnitude, but
              instead sparsely distributed.
The awardees will also study related non-linear
              evolution problems 
in suitable classes of sparse functions.

The problems
              under consideration concern the behavior of quantum
particles or waves in a
              cloud of localized and randomly distributed 
obstacles. The interaction of a
              particle with each individual obstacle can be
described in terms of classical
              scattering theory, while the global
picture is a subject of multiscattering
              analysis. There are two
different scenarios which are not necessarily mutually
              exclusive: 
either particles or waves are trapped by the system of
              obstacles,
or they can propagate to infinity. This research will investigate
              which 
scenario holds under what circumstances, in the case of very thinly
              
distributed obstacles. This theory is essential to an understanding 
of wave
              propagation in disordered media, such as crystals with 
randomly distributed
              microdefects.  A concrete application is in
quality control of silicon
              surfaces using lasers.

