Title       : High-order boundary perturbation methods for the solution of problems of wave
               propagation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a9971379

Award Number: 9971379
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando Reitich reitich@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with the study of the response of complex 
objects
              and materials to electromagnetic radiation. In particular, 
theoretical and
              computational advances are projected in the solution 
of classical problems of
              wave scattering by obstacles and interfaces. 
Such progress will stem from the
              further development of a new approach 
to these problems, based on high-order
              perturbation and analytic 
continuation techniques, that was previously
              introduced by the principal 
investigator (PI) and which has been proved to
              deliver very accurate
results for a variety of configurations. The
              investigations to be 
carried out relate to the analysis and possible
              improvement of each of 
the elements that combined to produce these highly
              precise calculations 
and, in particular, with their influence on the
              applicability and 
accuracy of the resulting numerical codes. Concurrent with
              this effort 
on the electromagnetic return of macroscopic objects, the PI will
              work 
to enhance his recently devised algorithms for the simulation of
              
electrically conducting and/or magnetically permeable microscopic
              
particulate suspensions, by incorporating a variety of nonlinear
              
hydrodynamic and electromagnetic effects.

The generation, control and
              detection of electromagnetic radiation has
been, and continues to be, at the
              core of innumerable engineering and 
technological advances in areas ranging
              from radar and tomography to 
optical systems, communications and "smart"
              materials. Historically, 
most of these advances have resulted from expansive
              experimentation 
guided more by intuition and physical insight than by
              mathematical 
modeling and computations. Recently, as computers grew more
              powerful, 
it became natural to attempt to incorporate them into design
              processes, 
and the search for fast, accurate and reliable algorithms to
              numerically 
solve sophisticated models turned into one of science's central
              problems.
This project revolves around this search as it seeks to enhance
              currently 
available techniques for the determination of the electromagnetic
              
signatures of large objects and microscopic composite dispersions.
              
Particular areas of application where the methods to be developed here 
are
              expected to have a direct impact include target recognition and the 
design of
              advanced controllable (electro and magnetorheological) fluids.


