Title       : Extreme Values, Time Series and Prediction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9971980

Award Number: 9971980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Smith rs@stat.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research in this project focuses on a number of theoretical and applied
              topics concerned with prediction and extreme values in time series. Theoretical
              research includes: (1) spectral methods for fitting regression models where the
              residuals form a bivariate time series with unknown spectral density of
              possibly long-range dependent form; (2) extensions of the methodology to
              spatial-temporal series; (3) decision-theoretic comparisons of Bayesian and
              frequentist methods for prediction of extreme values, and (4) extensions of (3)
              to multivariate processes, including ideas both from hierarchical models and
              multivariate extreme value theory.  

The applications which have motivated
              these topics come from two distinct areas, namely (a) climatology, and (b) the
              evaluation of risk in insurance and finance. On (a), the P.I. has previously
              
collaborated with two leading climatologists (T. Wigley and B. Santer) on an
              autocorrelation-based method of detecting climate signals in series of
              hemispheric temperature averages. The new research, which continues this
              collaboration, includes more extensive and rigorous techniques for separating
              signals from background noise in cases where the statistical structure of the
              background noise is unknown. Extensions will be developed to cases in which the
              patterns 
of temperature over the earth's surface are described, not just
              through northern and Southern Hemisphere averages, but through much more
              detailed summaries over spatial grid boxes.  The benefit of this research is
              improved methods for detecting anthropogenic influence on the earth's climate,
              which related to the Federal strategic interest in Environment and Global
              Change (EGCH).  The second topic (b) is concerned with extensions of the idea
              of "value at risk" which has become a widely studied topic in the fields of
              insurance and finance. Value at risk is a collection of tools for assessing the
              probability of very large financial losses, but most currently available
              systems do not use the most advanced statistical techniques available. The new
              research will assess alternative measures of risk using statistical methods
              derived from the mathematical theory of extreme value probabilities.  
