Title       : Multidimensional Problems in Granular Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9971188

Award Number: 9971188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79000              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Bruce Pitman pitman@math.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a unified research program of modeling, analysis
and
              computation to better characterize and understand granular flows,
in
              particular, granular flows in the presence of interstitial fluid.
Dry granular
              materials may be characterized as a fourth state of matter.
Granular media can
              support stresses like a solid, but also
can flow like a liquid, or, under some
              conditions, like a gas.
While deforming, a granular sample may dilate or
              consolidate,
depending on packing conditions.  These features lead to a
              dynamics 
of granular materials whose richness and scope rivals that of fluid
              dynamics.
At the same time, particle materials used in technological
              applications are
becoming smaller, and, consequently, the presence of
              interstitial fluid is
becoming increasingly important.  This is particularly
              true
in the use of toner powders in xerography, where the small size
of the
              power particles means higher quality copies.  As they move, these 
small light
              particles (about 10 micron diameter) are strongly influenced 
by the
              surrounding gas, and particle motion is intimately coupled to fluid
              motion.
Furthermore, owing to van der Waals attraction, these toner
              powders
are cohesive, often tending to clump.  The introduction of controlled
              
fluid flow, through fluidization and vibration, is a common mechanism
for
              breaking the cohesive attractions and controlling particle motion.
In a very
              different application, new ideas for drying and coating
larger particles
              (about 500 micron diameter) use rapid vertical vibration 
of a flat plate to
              accelerate a granular mass.  Because of the large 
acceleration, interstitial
              fluid again plays an important role in the 
motion of particles.  Theoretical
              and numerical techniques will be used to
characterize state diagrams, study
              the stability of layers of fluidized powder
under tilting, and study the onset
              of bubbling and clumping.

The combined flow of particles and fluid has many
              other industrial
applications, such as particle flow in pressurized vessels,
              cat-cracking,
transport by lubrication, and heat transfer.  In these
              applications, 
transport and handling of powders presents a significant
              difficulty.
Without a better understanding of particle-fluid flows, products
              that
exploit new particle technologies may not come on-line as quickly, nor
              with
sufficient reliability.  In this regard, it is useful to
note a study by
              the Rand Corporation showing that, because of an
inability to accurately
              predict powder behavior, solids-producing
manufacturing plants performed on
              average at 63% of design capacity,
compared to 84% for liquids-producing
              plants.
The analysis and computations performed during this project, together
              with
experiments by other academic and industrial researchers,
will help to
              provide the needed characterization of these flows. 


