Title       : Physics of Strongly Correlated Quantum Many-particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9971503

Award Number: 9971503
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dung-Hai Lee dhlee@physics.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971503
Lee
Equivalent classes provide a global view of diverse phenomena
              occuring in condensed matter physics.  Each equivalent class is characterized
              by a distinct state of matter.  Some of the better known examples include Fermi
              liquid; superconductor and superfluid; band, Mott and Anderson insulator; and,
              quantum Hall liquid.  A simple theoretical model can be used to represent an
              equivalent class as long as it captures the qualitative aspects of the
              corresponding state of matter.  Through the study of these models one can build
              up a set of "fixed points" which serve as the basis for future understanding of
              nature.  The objective of this theoretical research is to understand all of the
              current equivalent classes and discover new ones.  Among the projects to be
              undertaken:

What are the manifestations of strong correlation in the optical
              properties of Mott-Hubbard systems?

Is the half-filled Landau level a new
              state of matter, and what is the relation between the recently developed
              neutral fermion theory and the composite Fermi  liquid theory?

What does one
              learn from the I-V characteristic of edge tunneling in strong magnetic
              fields?

Why is the Josephson effect in superfluid 3He so different from that
              of superconductors?

These efforts, and others, will be closely coordinated
              with ongoing experiments.
%%% 
This grant supports theoretical research,
              closely coordinated with experiments, on a wide variety of strongly interacting
              states of matter.  Common characteristics will be investigated in each state,
              with the expectation of discovering new states of matter, in addition to
              gaining a deeper understanding of existing states.
***


