Title       : Nonconvex Homogenization and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9971958

Award Number: 9971958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70719              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro Ponte Castaneda ponte@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will support research on a challenging class of mathematical
              
problems in the field of nonlinear homogenization. Specifically, the project
              
is concerned with the study of the effective or "homogenized" behavior of
              
finite elastic composites such as elastic foams or particle-reinforced
              rubber. 
These are heterogeneous material systems that are characterized by
              nonlinear
and in fact nonconvex local energy functions. The key idea is to
              make use of 
available homogenization estimates for suitably chosen "linear
              comparison 
composites" to generate corresponding estimates for the nonlinear
              composites. 
This is an idea that has been pioneered with success by the PI in
              the 
context of nonlinear problems with convex energy functions 
(e.g.,
              plasticity, nonlinear conductivity, etc.). By suitably enlarging the 
class of
              "trial" linear comparison media, a generalized version of the method 
will be
              developed that will be suitable for nonconvex problems.

The objective of
              this research is thus to develop mathematical methods for 
estimating the
              macroscopic behavior of nonlinear elastic composite materials 
that are
              subjected to finite deformations. The work will be directly relevant to
              a
range of technologically important material systems, from the
              commonplace,
such as elastomeric foams, to the more sophisticated, such as
              shape-memory
alloys. In particular, the work will focus on models for
              particle-reinforced elastomers 
(e.g., carbon-black filled rubbers) and porous
              elastic solids (e.g., polymeric foams).
As a result, effective estimates for
              the response of such materials will be produced
that are easy to use by the
              engineering community and that can be compared to 
experimental studies.


