Title       : Correlated Many-Chain Dynamics: Slow Modes, Entanglements, and Glass Transition.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9971687

Award Number: 9971687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marina Guenza mguenza@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971687                                                                         
                                                                                             
                     Guenza                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    A key to understanding the technological
              and biological properties of polymeric materials is to have a powerful
              theoretical approach that is capable of making the connection between molecular
              structure and experimental data.  A molecular level understanding of the
              macroscopic properties of polymeric systems is essential for a successful
              tailored synthesis of new materials with specific properties.  Several rigorous
              theoretical approaches have been developed that successfully describe the
              experimental findings on the basis of a microscopic physical picture.  However,
              since the range of temporal and spatial scales of the important motions in
              polymeric fluids is so broad (from psec to days, years or even longer), in the
              past different approaches have been developed that are specific for each
              physical phenomenon.  For some important phenomena, a theory has not yet been
              developed, as in the case of the dynamics of supercooled polymer systems.

To
              have a consistent treatment of the physics of polymers we need to have a theory
              that can describe, in a unified way, polymer systems in different environments:
              at different temperatures (from the melt to the glass transition), different
              polymer volume fractions (from single molecule solution to melt), different
              architectures (linear, star, dendrimers), and different local polymer
              flexibilities (protein, DNA, polymer liquid srystals).  While the importance of
              a unified theory has always been clear in principle, it has never been possible
              to achieve this goal until now.

A new theoretical approach is developed and
              applied for a unified picture of the dynamics of polymeric systems.  The key
              ingredient is the presence of contributions describing not only the
              intramolecular, but also the intermolecular interaction terms in the dynamic
              equations. For weak intermolecular interactions, the theory recovers the single
              chain dynamics as described by the Rouse theory with memory function, i.e., the
              generalized Langevin equation.  Increasing the strength of the intermolecular
              interactions, the theory describes the simultaneous dynamics of many chains
              characteristic of a polymeric liquid.  For very strong intermolecular
              interactions anomalous exponents appear in the polymer diffusion and time
              correlation functions.  Interestingly, the strength of the potential can be
              enhanced in different ways: by increasing the molecular weight of the polymer,
              by increasing the polymer volume fraction, or by decreasing the temperature of
              the system.  The same equations describe the anomalous dynamics that appear in
              entangled polymer fluids, supercooled polymer systems, and highly dense polymer
              fluids.
%%%
A key to understanding the technological and biological
              properties of polymeric materials is to have a powerful theoretical approach
              that is capable of making the connection between molecular structure and
              experimental data.  A molecular level understanding of the macroscopic
              properties of polymeric systems is essential for a successful tailored
              synthesis of new materials with specific properties.  Several rigorous
              theoretical approaches have been developed that successfully describe the
              experimental findings on the basis of a microscopic physical picture.  However,
              since the range of temporal and spatial scales of the important motions in
              polymeric fluids is so broad (from psec to days, years or even longer), in the
              past different approaches have been developed that are specific for each
              physical phenomenon.  For some important phenomena, a theory has not yet been
              developed, as in the case of the dynamics of supercooled polymer systems

In
              this grant a new theory will be developed which provides a unified approach to
              diverse phenomena in polymers.  Besides increasing our fundamental
              understanding of these systems, this work will also have technological
              applications.

