Title       : Modeling and Predicting Rupture in Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2001     
File        : a9971475

Award Number: 9971475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Didier Sornette sornette@moho.ess.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971475
Sornette
This award supports theoretical research on modeling and
              predicting rupture in composite materials.  The fracture of all types of
              materials is a catastrophic phenomenon with considerable technological and
              scientific importance.  A vigorous investigation will be initiated of a
              statistical physics framework and of physically motivated models that will be
              correlated with experimental data in order ro obtain accurate assessments of
              the rupture point and identification of potential precursors.  This research
              applies in particular to fiber composites, rocks, concrete under compression
              and materials with large distributed residual stresses.  The research will
              address two main issues: (1) What is the nature of rupture as a function of
              heterogeneity, load sharing rules and relaxation processes? (2) What are the
              characteristics of precursors when they are present?  Starting with the
              discovery that the rupture process can be abrupt or critical depending on the
              amount of disorder, we will investigate whether this phenomenon is robust in
              other systems, what is its degree of "universality," and how it can be used
              practically.  We propose two complementary approaches: (1) a numerical modeling
              effort, using a thermal fuse model and a tensorial extension, as well as a
              block-spring model, will test how the rupture depends on different material
              properties and on the microscopic scale structures.  In particular, we will
              explore how much "disorder" is "strong" disorder and when collective effects
              dominate over the "one crack" problem.  (2) a methodological and data analysis
              effort will focus on the conditions of application of the theory of
              time-to-failure that has been developed based on the detection of
              characteristic scales.  This will be investigated in the context of the two
              numerical models and on experimental data available from collaborating
              experimental groups.  We will extend this theory in three ways: by using a
              novel non-perturbative resummation technique that will allow us to extend the
              interval of fit; by using a log-periodic wavelet that provides an optimal
              (time-to-failure)-scale decomposition of log-periodic precursory patterns; and,
              by using stochastic Langevin equations of rupture to analyze the distribution
              of lifetimes within a class of exactly solvavble models.
  
This award
              supports theoretical research on modeling and predicting rupture in composite
              materials.  The fracture of all types of materials is a catastrophic phenomenon
              with considerable technological and scientific importance.  A vigorous
              investigation will be initiated of a statistical physics framework and of
              physically motivated models that will be correlated with experimental data in
              order ro obtain accurate assessments of the rupture point and identification of
              potential precursors.  This research applies in particular to fiber composites,
              rocks, concrete under compression and materials with large distributed residual
              stresses.


