Title       : GOALI: Advanced Cantilevers for MRFM with IBM Almaden
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a9971414

Award Number: 9971414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Kenny kenny@cdr.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Rugar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              An important new imaging technique has been proposed by Sidles, in which forces
              derived from a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) measurement would be measured
              accurately enough to allow 3-dimensional imaging of individual atoms.
              Electronic nanodevice evaluation, gene sequenceing, drug development, ananlysis
              of storage media, and many other commerical, medical and industrial applicatons
              would would benefit  from this new imaging technology.  The basic challenge of
              Magnetic Resonance Force Microscopy (MRFM) lies in the exceedingly small forces
              which must be detected, which are of order atto-newtons (1 aN=10-18N).  Force
              detection sensitivity of mechanical cantilevers is ultimately limited by
              thermo-mechanical noise which apprears as a force fluctuation.  To achieve the
              very high sensitivity required for MRFM, the temperature and stiffness of the
              cantilever must be minimized while maximizing Q.  Research to obtain sngle-atom
              imaging by MRFM has been underway in Rugar's IBM Almaden group for several
              years, and significant progress has occurred.  Recent research has included
              demonstrations of the ability to detect atto-newton forces, observation of
              numerous fN-sale forces near surfaces, and work to identify and reduce the
              mechanism for thermo-mechanical noise inthe cantilevers used to detect these
              forces.  all of this has taken place during a GOALI-Funded collaboration
              between Standford and IBM, which has featured  student research at IBM and use
              of NNUN facilities at Stanford to fabricate unique cantilevers.  Our goals in
              this renewal effort focus on cntinued work to understand and reduce the damping
              mechanism in micromechanical cantilevers that limit the value of Q.  We have
              constructed an apparatus which allows systematic experimental measurements of
              cantilever Q as a function of temperature, dimensions, and materials, and we
              will use this to identify damping mechanisms.  Also we propose to develop a new
              design for a micromechanical cantilever that will allow in-situ annealing in
              the MRFM apparatus.  In addition, we have used these sentisitve cantilevers to
              develop develop a novel surface dissipation microscopy, in which trapped
              charges on the cantilever induce surface charges whose mobility can be
              determined on the nm-scale.  Work along all 3 of these directions will
              continue.  The long-term goal remains the demonstration of MRFM imaging of
              sigle atoms.
