Title       : Point Processes and Time Series: Networks and Wavelets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a9971309

Award Number: 9971309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Brillinger brill@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9184,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research concerns two basic topics: a) the study of networks with
              temporal processes at the nodes and b) variants of wavelet analysis involving
              temporal and spatial point processes. Applications are made to understanding
              the interconnections of the auditory system of the brain on the basis of
              recorded spike trains and to creating isoseismal maps of earthquakes in the
              aftermath of a destructive event. The network effort relates to graphical
              modeling while the wavelet work may be seen as a competitor to local weighting
              procedures, for handling nonstationarity.  The topics come together in the
              problem of assessing whether learning is taking place in a biological neuron
              network.
In the case of the network study, principal applications are to
              contemporaneous spike trains obtained from biological neurons at locations,
              determined post mortem in cats and rats, having in mind the goal of inferring a
              latent wiring diagram.  In the case of the wavelet research, applications are
              made to both seismology and neurophysiology seizing on the ability of the
              wavelet approach to handle nonstationarity. Both the temporal and the spatial
              cases are considered.

The research proposed is motivated by problems arising
              in the fields of biology and seismology, for example, and the belief that they
              may be well-addressed by contemporary research work involving the concept of
              networks.  Work involving novel mathematical expressions, which allow some
              change in time or space to take place in a situation, also relates to the
              research.  Both theoretical development and empirical model fitting and
              verification will be involved.  There may be applications to the Biotechnology
              (BIOT) area of Federal strategic interest.  The value of working in fields as
              diverse as biology and seismology is that analytical techniques thought of for
              one may be abstracted and applied in the other.
