Title       : Application of Harmonic Analysis and Geometry of Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9971311

Award Number: 9971311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314103             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Jones jones-peter@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald R. Coifman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9971311
Principal Investigators: Peter W. Jones, Ronald R.
              Coifman

Abstract: Professors Coifman and Jones will continue their work on
              the analysis and geometry of sets in Euclidean space. The research is centered
              on methods to classify sets or functions and to provide efficient descriptions
              of these objects. On the level of sets, this involves descriptions of, for
              example, the Julia set associated with a rational mapping or the limit set of a
              Kleinian group in terms of its Hausdorff dimension or related geometric
              concepts. Another example relates to potential theoretic aspects of sets,
              including algorithms that allow for fast computations. For functions, the
              relevant objective is to find short descriptions with prescribed error. A
              common aspect of the analysis of both sets and functions is the search for
              methods of reducing dimensionality (with prescribed error) so as to bring the
              problem into a regime where more classical methods apply.

The problems on
              which Jones and Coifman intend to work are those that now confront
              mathematicians who are forced to deal with massive quantities of data. While
              the modern computer has been very useful in treating many computational
              problems, severe limitations occur when the amount of data becomes too large. 
              Instead of treating the full set of data, one therefore seeks to reduce
              significantly the amount of information being handled, at the same time
              ensuring that only small errors occur in the process. After such a reduction
              has been made, more classical methods can then be used to analyse the reduced
              data. Harmonic analysis is a field that has been developed over the past
              century to accomplish precisely this kind of reduction, albeit for problems in
              the realm of pure mathematics. The projected research centers on exploiting
              these older methods and developing new ones in order to acquire efficient tools
              for treating a wide array of concrete data sets. One example of how useful this
              technique might be in a practical, everyday situation arises in the telephone
              industry, where it would be highly desirable to send only a small percentage of
              the sounds produced by one person, yet still have the message understood by the
              person listening at the other end of the line. The development of an effective
              method for compressing data in this instance would allow a large increase in
              the number of calls that could be sent on a single telephone line. 

