Title       : Theory of Semiconductor Surface Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9971241

Award Number: 9971241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Doren doren@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Douglas Doren of the University of Delaware is supported by a grant from the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program  to continue his theoretical
              studies of semiconductor surface chemistry.  Doren is studying pericyclic
              reactions of organic molecules at the clean (100) surface of silicon.  He is
              studying the role of excited surface electronic states in these reactions, and
              the effect of dopant and alloy atoms on bonding and reactivity.  The method
              being used is primarily density functional theory, and the surface models
              include both finite clusters and periodic slabs.  The Diels-Alder reaction will
              be studied in some detail with the goal of understanding the factors that
              determine product selectivity and to broaden the class of reagents that can be
              used in the reaction.  A new class of pericyclic reactions, the 1-3 dipolar
              additions on Si(100), will also be studied.  This work will explore the
              thermodynamics and kinetics of these reactions, and characterize spectral
              properties for comparison with experiment.  Dopants including Ge, B and P on Si
              surfaces will be used to study the effects of these atoms on binding energies,
              surface electronic states and activation energies.

Semiconductor surface
              chemistry is fundamental to processing the electronic devices that pervade
              modern life.  As device features reach the nanometer scale, the need for
              control over device structure at the atomic level is becoming critical. 
              Chemical processing methods that allow controlled surface modification over
              macroscopic areas are essential to allow continued, economical reductions in
              device dimensions.  Both practical and fundamental issues have made
              semiconductor surface chemistry an active and rapidly growing field.  Doren's
              research focuses on theoretical studies of reactions on the (100) surface of
              silicon, the main surface used currently in integrated circuit production.
