Title       : In Situ Electron Microscopy Investigation of Physical Properties of Multiwalled
               Carbon Nanotubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a9971412

Award Number: 9971412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293547             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter A. De Heer deheer@electra.physics.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhong L. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971412
De Heer

Electronic and mechanical properties of multi-walled carbon
              nanotubes have been widely investigated but are still only poorly understood.
              In this research these problems are attacked by means of a series of in situ
              electron microscopy experiments in which the properties of individual, well
              characterized nanotubes are measured.  These properties include the electronic
              transport, field emission, electrostatic potentials of the electrically charged
              nanotubes, and elastic constants.  The feasibility of such measurements have
              been demonstrated by a series of preliminary experiments which include (i) the
              making and breaking of electrical contacts involving nanotubes; (ii) in situ
              field emission; (iii) phase contrast effects of the charged nanotubes; and (iv)
              observations of electrically induced mechanical resonances.  The latter effect
              suggests a new approach towards nanomechanics.  This research offers many
              opportunities for the training of graduate students and postdoctoral research
              associates in a field which stands at the forefront of contemporary condensed
              matter physics and materials sciences.
%%%
Carbon nanotubes are nearly
              perfect graphitic tubes with remarkable properties among which are their
              exceptional mechanical strength, high current carrying capabilities, possible
              hydrogen storage capabilities, and others.  In order to characterize these
              properties and to discover new ones it is essential that carbon tubes be
              studied individually. The principal investigator has developed the required
              methods for such studies.  This research offers opportunities for the training
              of graduate students and postdoctoral research associates in an advanced
              technological field that offers many employment opportunities during the 21st
              Century.
***




