Title       : Low-dimensional Manifolds and Knot Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a9971718

Award Number: 9971718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cameron M. Gordon gordon@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Proposal Number: DMS-9971718

Title: 	Low-dimensional manifolds and knot
              theory

Principal Investigator: Cameron McA. Gordon  

Abstract: The focus
              of Professor Gordon's project is the study of Dehn filling on 3-manifolds, and
              in particular the program to obtain the optimal bounds on the distances between
              the various kinds of non-hyperbolic fillings on hyperbolic manifolds.  Many of
              these bounds are now known,   the only remaining cases being (1) reducible
              fillings on complements  of (hyperbolic) knots in the 3-sphere; (2) toroidal
              fillings on knots  in lens spaces; and (3) the case where one of the fillings
              is a small Seifert fiber space.  Professor Gordon will continue to investigate
              these questions, as well as other problems concerning Dehn fillings.  A special
              effort will be made to attack the Cabling Conjecture, which asserts that no
              fillings of type (1) above exist.   

The area of mathematics which forms the
              context of Professor Gordon's project is 3-dimensional topology, the general
              goal of which is to understand the structure of 3-manifolds. These are objects
              that are locally like ordinary 3-dimensional space, but whose global structure
              may be quite complicated.  Since we live in a 3-manifold, one might say that
              3-dimensional topology aims to describe what the mathematical possibilities are
              for our spatial universe.  This aim is still not realized, although there is
              tantalizing evidence that such a description might ultimately be possible.  One
              very interesting application of the mathematical theory of 3-dimensional
              manifolds is the "circles in the sky" project, in which, in two years' time,
              certain observations will be made from a satellite, on the basis of which an
              attempt will be made to mathematically determine the geometric structure of the
              universe.   An important aspect of 3-dimensional topology is the theory of
              knots - a knot being a closed loop embedded in some tangled fashion in
              3-dimensional space - and one of the main ways in which knot theory relates to
              the general theory of 3-manifolds is through Dehn surgery, a process in which a
              solid tube around a knot is removed from space and sewn back in differently,
              giving a new 3-manifold.  Much effort has been devoted over the last few years
              to investigating this construction.  Although the impetus for this effort is
              the desire to further our understanding of 3-dimensional topology, it is
              interesting to note that a theorem about Dehn surgery, the Cyclic Surgery
              Theorem, has recently been used to determine the topological action of  certain
              enzymes on strands of DNA.  

