Title       : PDE analysis of thin liquid films: Steady states, long-time behavior, and
               blow-up
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9971392

Award Number: 9971392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary C. Pugh mpugh@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will support the PI's studies of mathematical models 
for thin films
              of viscous liquids. A characteristic 
feature of these problems is that there
              is a competition between 
different physical effects, such as gravity and
              surface tension.  
Specifically, the partial differential equations that
              describe the 
thin film evolution equation have both linearly stabilizing
              terms (from surface
tension) that lead to smooth film profiles and terms (from
              gravity, for example) 
that destabilize long length scales.  The models thus
              exhibit a finite band of linearly 
unstable modes, leading to interesting
              steady states or long-time 
dynamics and to new finite-time singularities.
              These models will
be studied with analytical, numerical, and asymptotic
              techniques.

Pattern formation in fluid films is very familiar.  For example,
              when a liquid
is spilled on a table, what determines the size, distribution,
              and shape 
of the droplets that form?  How does the composition of a paint
              affect
the irregularities that form when it dries?  What properties of an
              
inhalant will allow it to spread most effectively on lung tissue?  
In all
              these situations there is a competition between "smoothing" 
and "roughening"
              physical effects.  These effects are often unavoidable and
typically lead to
              the formation of persistent or transient patterns.  The 
award will support
              mathematical work on the formation and development
of such patterns in thin
              liquid films. Understanding such phenomena is of 
mathematical and scientific
              interest, as well as of engineering, industrial, 
and medical use.


