Title       : Built-In IDDQ Sensors for Deep-Submicron Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1999  
File        : a9971192

Award Number: 9971192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193278             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duncan M. Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4710      DESIGN AUTOMATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is on developing new methodologies for VLSI chip manufacturing
              test built using very deep submicron technologies.  Existing test methods do
              not scale up because of increased background currents that will exist.  The
              approach is to explore the quiescent current (IDDQ) signature approach by using
              magnetic filed measuring techniques, and to develop and apply built-in current
              sensors (BICS) to provide the ability to distinguish between faulty and
              fault-free IDDQ levels.  This problem is caused by the increase in subthreshold
              leakage currents with each technology generation.  The BICS design goals
              include microampere resolution, 1% area overhead, and 1 ms measurement time. 
              Further, the project is developing design methods to automatically place BICSs
              into a mesh-type supply network to achieve maximum coverage and resolution. 
              Research problems include: the need to shut off the power supply during BICS
              calibration; an accounting for large variations in fault-free IDDQ levels
              caused by process, environment and circuit state variations.  Methods to
              improve limit setting by extending the current siganture methodology are being
              explored by using model-based estimates of normal IDDQ levels (derived from
              simple electrical tests), and by exploiting the spatial correlation of BICS
              measurements.  Algorithms and software demonstrating these ideas are being
              developed.
