Title       : Asymptotic Behavior of Queueing Networks and Interacting Particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a9971248

Award Number: 9971248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maury D. Bramson bramson@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971248

Although typically appealing to different groups of researchers, the
              areas of queueing networks and interacting particle systems both deal with
              large systems of objects, such as customers or particles, which are connected
              together by some interaction rule.  The techniques that are applicable to the
              two areas are often related.  Professor Bramson intends to study stability
              questions and the behavior under diffusive scaling for the first class of
              models; the use of fluid models is an important tool in such analysis.  The
              second class includes models such as the voter model, and two-type particle
              systems with the annihilation and creation of mass. The equilibria and the
              limiting concentrations are the objects of investigation for such
              models.

Queueing networks and interacting particle systems are two subjects
              within the field of probability theory.  The goal in both areas is to
              understand the long-term behavior of large systems of objects, such as
              customers or particles, for which there is randomness in the system.  Here,
              "customers" need not denote just individuals, but also products or some task to
              be performed, such as in the manufacture of semiconductor wafers.  In queueing
              theory, one analyzes the efficiency and stability of such systems.  The
              proposal concentrates on the latter topic, and on the statistical fluctuations
              that are inherent in such systems.  In interacting particle systems, one
              studies complex random systems that occur in the context of physics, chemistry
              and biology, whose components represent, for example, particles, cells, or
              various organisms.  For instance, one studies models for the outcome of a
              chemical reaction, or the genetic diversity of a population.  The proposal
              investigates the nature of the long-term equilibria of such systems.

