Title       : Analysis of High Frequency Time Series Data and Structural Breaks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9971903

Award Number: 9971903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188647             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruey S. Tsay ruey.tsay@gsb.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971903

Two research projects are being proposed.  Project (I) is concerned
              with analysis of high frequency time series data. Its objective is to develop a
              multivariate framework for analyzing effectively and efficiently high-frequency
              data observed in many scientific areas such as environmental study, finance and
              telecommunication.  It focuses on modeling time durations between observations
              and the associated quantities of interest by using a flexible dynamic model to
              govern the evolution of conditional distributions of variables involved.  The
              model also takes into account the effects of exogenous variables and cross
              dependence between the variables.  The proposed model builds on ideas of
              generalized linear models by relating conditional means and variances of the
              variables to the contemporaneous time duration and available information.  The
              model decomposes discrete-valued variables into ``direction'' and ``size'' of
              changes and uses a stochastic scale parameter evolving over time to describe
              the dynamic of time duration.  Consequently, the proposed model combines two
              sets of dynamic equations to form a multivariate dynamic system for high
              frequency time series data.  Properties of the proposed multivariate models are
              investigated, and Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods are used in estimation. 
              Project (II) is concerned with detecting and modeling structural breaks in
              multivariate time series analysis.  It generalizes univariate results to the
              multivariate case in several directions such as to include processes with
              long-range dependence, to provide a joint detection for several types of
              structural breaks, and to investigate the relationships between detected breaks
              among components. 

Advance in technology and data collection enables
              researchers to observe high-frequency data such as traffic patterns in
              internet, minute-by-minute measurements of ozone concentration and
              meteorological data via a satellite, and tick-by-tick transactions data in
              financial markets.  Key features of these data include extremely large sample
              sizes and in some cases irregularly spaced time intervals between events. 
              Analysis of such data is important for many reasons, including (a) it can
              provide an early warning signal, via predicting time interval to the next event
              and the associated measurements, of potential big surges in internet traffic or
              air pollution index in a metropolitan area, (b) it can shed light on the
              micro-structure of the system under study that is critical to understand the
              dynamic behavior of the data, and (c) it gives a framework on which scientists
              or data analysts can assess potential risk under different scenarios in a
              timely manner such as estimating the risk of a position held by a financial
              institution over a given time horizon. The goal of the proposal is (a) to
              provide an efficient and effective method for analyzing such  high-frequency
              data, (b) to bridge the gap between theory and applications of high-frequency
              data analysis, and (c) to develop methods for detecting structural breaks in a
              multivariate system that can occur in practice.  The proposal intends to use
              recent developments in statistical estimation, large-scale data processing, and
              multivariate time series analysis to achieve its goal.  Results obtained by the
              proposed research will have applications in many scientific areas beyond
              statistics such as in environment and global change, in telecommunication, in
              e-commerce, and in finance. Students will participate in the proposed research.
              

