Title       : Low Temperature Scanning Tunneling Microscope Studies of Magnetic Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9971690

Award Number: 9971690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Crommie crommie@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971690
Crommie

This Condensed Matter Physics project will study the
              properties of magnetic nanostructures using an ultra-high vacuum cryogenic
              scanning tunneling microscope (STM). The STM will be used to probe the local
              electronic structure of individual magnetic atoms and atomically fabricated
              magnetic nanostructures on clean, well-characterized metal surfaces. STM
              spectroscopy will probe the interaction between conduction electrons interact
              and the localized d-levels of transition metal adsorbates. Such interactions
              determine the magnetism of individual impurity atoms, and also lead to
              cooperative electronic behavior, as seen in the Kondo effect. Trends in
              electronic behavior will be studied for different adsorbate atoms from the 3d,
              4d, and 5d rows of the periodic table. The effects of temperature variation and
              an applied magnetic field will be investigated. Atomic manipulation will be
              used to vary the spacing between magnetic adsorbate atoms and also to assemble
              magnetic nanostructures atom by atom. Efforts will also be made to use
              inelastic tunneling spectroscopy as a probe of the magnetic excitation spectra
              of artificially fabricated nanostructures. The work will provide an
              experimental test of several theoretical predictions concerning magnetic
              nanostructures. The research provides excellent training for undergraduate,
              graduate and post-doctoral students in areas of both fundamental and
              technological significance. The manipulation of individual atoms is one of the
              current frontiers in materials science. 
%%%
The purpose of this Condensed
              Matter Physics project is to gain a better understanding of the behavior of
              magnetic nanostructures at surfaces. Magnetic surface and interface phenomena
              currently have important applications in the data storage industry, and an
              increased understanding of microscopic magnetic behavior should impact this and
              other applications. The research will study the properties of magnetic
              nanostructures using an ultra-high vacuum cryogenic scanning tunneling
              microscope (STM). This instrument will be used to probe the local electronic
              structure of individual magnetic atoms and atomically fabricated magnetic
              nanostructures on clean, well-characterized metal surfaces. Atomic manipulation
              will be used to vary the spacing between magnetic adsorbate atoms and also to
              assemble magnetic nanostructures atom by atom. Atomic manipulation allows a
              fundamentally new way of controllably measuring interaction effects between
              magnetic atoms, and promises to open a new regime in the experimental study of
              atomic-scale magnetic objects. Efforts will also be made to use inelastic
              tunneling spectroscopy as a probe of the magnetic excitation spectra of
              artificially fabricated nanostructures. The fundamental knowledge gained from
              this project should provide a useful step toward the goal of controlling the
              electronic and magnetic properties of condensed matter systems at the nanometer
              lengthscale. Results from this study should also be helpful in understanding
              larger-scale systems whose properties depend on constituent nanostructures
              (such as granular magnetic materials). The research provides excellent training
              for undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students in areas of both
              fundamental and technological significance. The manipulation of individual
              atoms is one of the current frontiers in materials science. 
***



