Title       : Hyperbolic Geometry and Combinatorial Surface Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9971596

Award Number: 9971596
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133413             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yair N. Minsky yair@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Yair Minsky

Title: Hyperbolic Geometry and Combinatorial Surface
              Proposal:  9971596

Topology

Abstract: Minsky will investigate phenomena
              of rigidity, deformation and classification in the related theories of
              hyperbolic 3-manifolds (Kleinian groups) and mapping class groups of surfaces. 
              In Kleinian groups Minsky plans to continue work on Thurston's Ending
              LaminationConjecture, which states that a hyperbolic 3-manifold is uniquely
              determined by its topological type and a list of invariants that describe the
              asymptotic geometry of its ends.  Consequences of this conjecture are a
              rigidity theorem for Kleinian group actions on the sphere, and a description of
              parameter spaces of isomorphic Kleinian groups.  In collaboration with H. Masur
              and B. Farb, Minsky plans to consider the question of quasi-isometric rigidity
              of the mapping class group of a surface, which says that all quasi-isometries
              of this group must in fact respect its group structure up to a bounded error. 
              A common tool to both sets of questions is the "complex of curves" on a
              surface, which is a simplicial complex encoding the combinatorial structure of
              the set of isotopy classes of simple curves on the surface. Masur and Minsky
              have previously established a hyperbolicity property for this complex, with
              applications to the conjugacy problem for mapping class groups.  Minsky has
              found explicit connections between geometric properties of this complex and
              those of Kleinian representations of surface groups, and this work should have
              applications to the ending lamination problem. Jointly with R. Canary and J.
              Brock, he will also investigate the structure of geometric limits of Kleinian
              groups, which can be quite intricate. A good description of the set of all
              geometric limits is an important tool for obtaining uniform estimates on
              individual groups.

The interactions between geometry, topology and dynamics
              have been a beautiful and powerful feature of mathematics and physics for more
              than a hundred years. Dynamics is the study of time-evolution of mathematical
              or physical systems, whereas geometry and topology involve "static" objects
              such as surfaces or higher-dimensional analogues, often the background for a
              dynamical process.  Henri Poincare already knew that the standard round sphere,
              the setting of classical analysis and geometry, functioned also as a "horizon
              at infinity" for an exotic non-Euclidean geometry that we now call Hyperbolic
              space. Dynamical properties of transformations of the sphere translate to
              geometric properties of rigid motions of this space, and give rise to families
              of symmetric tilings whose structure we can study by geometric and topological
              methods.  The complexity of these systems can constrain them so much that a
              combinatorial (or topological) description suffices to determine them uniquely,
              and this is what we call rigidity. This phenomenon occurs in many guises
              throughout geometry and dynamics, and is relevant to issues such as
              classification of systems, mapping out regions of stability and instability,
              deformation and bifurcation of families of systems, and probabilistic
              properties such as ergodicity, all of which have significance in both pure and
              applied mathematics.  The particular aspects studied in this project are
              typical in some ways and special in others.  A better understanding of them
              promises to shed light on other parts of the field, both by way of examples and
              by the formulation of organizing principles.

