Title       : Relationship of Structural Dynamics and Elasticity in Soft Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a9971432

Award Number: 9971432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Weitz weitz@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971432
Weitz

This project will develop experimental probes leading to an
              understanding of the elastic properties of "soft" materials on a local scale,
              where the structure of the material directly influences its elasticity. The
              types of materials that will be studied include colloidal suspensions, gels,
              concentrated emulsions, and a variety of biologically important materials
              including actin networks, vesicles, model cells, and cells themselves. Many of
              these materials are structurally inhomogeneous, and thus their elastic
              properties can vary significantly in different regions of the material.
              Traditional bulk elastic measurements probe only the average properties; the
              methods to be developed here will probe local properties to differentiate the
              function and purpose of the different components of the material. The probes to
              be developed rely on the study of the motion of probe particles embedded within
              the medium; this motion will either be thermally induced, or driven with an
              external field. The motion of the probe will provide important information
              about the elasticity of the material on the length scale of these probes. The
              study will involve a post doc and several graduate students. 
%%%
Many
              important materials can be highly inhomogeneous, and their properties can vary
              significantly within different regions of the material. The relationship of
              this inhomogeneous structure to the properties of the material can be crucial
              for its functioning. For example, an object as fundamental as a cell, is
              comprised of a wide variety of components, each with its own structure and each
              with its own function and each with its own properties. However, knowledge of
              the mechanical or elastic properties of such materials is typically obtained by
              measuring the response of a large collection of them; this provides some
              average information, but obscures important variations across the individual
              objects. The goal of this work is to develop new methods for making very local
              measurements of the elastic or mechanical properties of such inhomogeneous
              materials. The results will provide important insight into the function and
              role of the components of the material, and will assist in the rationale design
              of new materials that share or even improve upon the function of the material
              under study. This work will provide support and important education for both
              graduate students and post docs.

