Title       : Applications of Algebraic Topology to Geometric Group Theory, Parametrized Fixed
               Point Theory and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9971219

Award Number: 9971219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46470              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross Geoghegan ROSS@MATH.BINGHAMTON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9971219

PI: Ross Geoghegan

Abstract: Professor Geoghegan is
              working at the interface of topology, geometry
and group theory.  In
              collaboration with Professor Robert Bieri
(Frankfurt, Germany) he is
              investigating new topological properties of
an arbitrary action by a group G
              on a "non-positively curved" space M.
They have introduced the idea of
              n-connectedness of the action over M
and have found that this is an open
              condition on the space of all such
actions.  For actions with discrete orbits
              they have identified their
conditions as equivalent to well-known finiteness
              properties of
stabilizers of points in M thus proving that these are also
              open
properties.  Previous work of many authors on a restricted case
suggests
              that this should be a promising line of investigation, bringing
topological
              methods into algebra in a new way.  They have set their
sights on a test case,
              the Moebius action of SL(2, Z[1/m]) on the
hyperbolic plane (for a positive
              integer m).  They conjecture that the
amount of connectvity is directly
              related to the number of prime
factors of m, and they propose to prove this
              among other things.  In
collaboration with Professor Andrew  Nicas (McMaster,
              Canada) Professor
Geoghegan will continue his study of parametrized fixed
              point theory
and its relationship to non-singular flows.  They hope to
              elucidate the
geometrical meaning of some K-theoretic  torsions which have
              been
defined for such flows.  They have already achieved part of that
program
              but more remains to be done.

Mathematics involves various styles or forms of
              thought.  Among these
are the geometrical (or visual) and the algebraic (or
              discrete).  For
example, "discrete group theory" (the formal study of
              symmetries) has
traditionally been part of abstract algebra.  But fruitful
              advances in
our understanding of symmetries have been made in recent years
              through
geometrizing this kind of algebra.  One way of doing this is
              through
the notion of "fundamental group of a topological space".  If
              the
topological space is chosen wisely, much about the algebra of the
              group
which was previously invisible and unknown becomes clear
              through
applying the very old and deep field of "algebraic topology" to
              the
group being studied, via this space.  The study of symmetries is basic
in
              many applications of mathematics, particularly to physics. This
approach is
              being used in the present proposal to better understand the
interplay of group
              theory with geometry and number theory (in the part
with Bieri) and with flows
              in dynamics (in the part with Nicas).

