Title       : High Magnetic Field Probes of Electronic and Magnetic Structure in Low
               Dimensional and Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9971474

Award Number: 9971474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Brooks brooks@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971474
Brooks

This experimental project addresses materials of central
              importance in condensed matter physics: anisotropic conductors and
              superconductors, correlated electronic metals, and magnetic nano-clusters. In
              all cases microscopic mechanisms are responsible for their ground state
              behavior, but many open questions about the nature of these ground states
              remain even after intense theoretical and experimental investigations.
              Prominent are incoherent or non-Fermi liquid transport with magnetic field
              orientation in low dimensional metals; the details of electronic structure
              which influence magnetic or superconducting ground states in intermetallic
              compounds; and the intra-cluster magnetic mechanisms in nano-magnets such as
              manganese acetate. In these investigations the unique capabilities of the
              National High Magnetic Field Laboratory will be utilized. Novel approaches to
              the determination of electronic structure will be implemented, thereby raising
              the utility of magneto-transport-based studies to a new level. In addition,
              studies of nano-magnetic clusters using nuclear decay methods will have a
              potential impact in the area of information storage at the quantum level. A
              strong commitment to education and public awareness in areas relevant to this
              research will be sustained, as will a high degree of international
              collaboration.
%%%
In electronic and magnetic materials, sometimes subtle
              details of their structure determine their macroscopic physical properties.
              Will the material be a magnet? A superconductor? An insulator? Such details
              lead to materials of scientific importance and with potential applications.
              This research project addresses experimentally several classes of materials
              central to condensed matter physics -anisotropic conductors and
              superconductors, correlated electronic metals, and magnetic nano-clusters. In
              all cases microscopic mechanisms are responsible for their most important
              physical properties. In these investigations the unique capabilities of the
              National High Magnetic Field Laboratory will be utilized, and a novel approach
              to the problem of electronic structure determination is proposed, which when
              implemented, will raise the utility of magnetoresistance-based studies for the
              characterization of materials to a new level. The magnetic studies too, have a
              potential impact in the area of information storage and processing at the
              quantum level, since intra-cluster switching mechanisms of the magnetization
              states in nano-magnets will be studied. A strong commitment is made to include
              educational outreach at all levels, and to provide outstanding graduate
              education opportunities which involve state-of-the-art instruments. Graduate
              students and post-doctoral associates are provided with training for a range of
              careers in industry, government and academe.



