Title       : Dynamic and Nonlinear Static Problems in Periodic and Random Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9971999

Award Number: 9971999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Berlyand berlyand@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research deals with problems  arising in the mathematical
modeling  of
              strongly heterogeneous materials, primarily composites.
A composite is a
              mixture of several different  constituent materials or 
phases so that it
              combines the most useful features of each.
For example, a high thermal
              conductivity composite consists of ceramic 
filler beads in a  polymeric
              matrix.  The goal is to maximize thermal conductivity. 
Ceramic is a very good
              thermal conductor while the polymer 
is not. It is not practical to use pure
              ceramic since it is too brittle.
However, the polymer/ceramic composite is a
              good thermal conductor and it 
has desirable mechanical properties. The
              problem in this context is 
to optimize strength and thermal conductivity by
              the correct selection of 
the filler identity, size, shape, and the random
              size distribution. Tools from
the mathematical theory of homogenization will
              be used to attack these questions.
The three problem areas of the proposed
              work are the optimization of dielectric and 
mechanical properties of
              epoxy/ceramic composites, with applications to the
design of capacitors;  an
              investigation of dynamical  problems and frequency 
dependent effects in
              transducer materials, with applications to sensors and 
transmitters of
              acoustic signals; and a study of problems from superconductivity,
              
superfluidity, and liquid crystals, with the goal of understanding
              mathematical 
issues caused by the presence of vortices, nonlinearity, and
              nonstandard 
boundary conditions.

The planned work lies at the frontier
              between mathematics and materials science, 
and close collaborations with
              materials scientists from universities and private industry 
will be carried
              out.  Mathematics can help to develop new materials with superior 
properties
              for various industrials needs, verify the reliability of 
experimental data,
              and devuise efficient ways to compute properties of 
designer composites. The
              results of the work in the first of the three areas 
(epoxy/ceramic
              composites) will provide guidance for future directions in 
manufacturing and
              materials development in various important industrial applications. 
Two
              typical examples are the  design of new 'packages'  for integrated circuits
              
which remove heat from the electronics more efficiently and significant
              enhancement 
in functionality of capacitors which are used in various
              electronics products. 
The planned work on transducer materials has immediate
              applications in underwater 
sonar and medical imaging.  The work in the third
              area (superconductivity) will help  
to clarify which of the existing physical
              models provide the best way of calculating 
effective properties of
              superconducting thin films  with a large number of vortices, 
and it will lead
              to better models for these phenomena.  



