Title       : NMR Studies of the Competition Between Ground States in Correlated Electron
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a9971530

Award Number: 9971530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart E. Brown brown@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns the study of the physics of competing ground states in
              correlated electron systems.  The properties of low temperature phases as well
              as the phase transition between different ground states are to be determined. 
              Tuning external parameters, such as the pressure, disorder, stoichiometry and
              magnetic field will control the phase transitions.  Specifically, phase
              transitions will be investigated in which antiferromagnetism competes with
              either superconductivity or an ordered Spin-Peierls phase. Additional attention
              will be given to the properties associated with the evolution from
              antiferromagnetism to superconductivity in the organic superconductor
              (TMTSF)2PF6, and the high-Tc superconductor lanthanum cuprate co-doped with Sr
              and Li.  The Spin-Peierls/antiferromagnetic transition in the systems
              (TMTTF)2x, where x = PF6 or AsF6 will be examined.  The primary probe is NMR
              spectroscopy, under varied but controlled conditions of high pressure and high
              magnetic fields in order to access the different phases. The Principal
              Investigator will conduct this research in collaboration with graduate and
              undergraduate students.  The students will be involved in the design, planning
              and execution stages of the experiments.  They will learn a variety of
              technical skills in areas of current research and are thereby trained for
              employment in fields of technological importance during the next few decades of
              the 21st Century.  
%%%
This project is concerned with the investigation of
              how novel materials can coexist in different physical states and how
              transitions between these states compete with one another. The materials in
              question are those that exhibit, for example,  superconductivity and other
              phenomena which are intensively studied for their own intrinsic scientific
              interest as well for their potential applications in new technological devices.
              Graduate and undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral research
              associates participate in this work and are thereby trained in forefront areas
              of condensed matter physics and materials science.  They are thus prepared to
              enter the scientific/technical workforce of the future.
***


