Title       : Resolution and Minimum Aberration for Nonregular Factorial Designs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9971212

Award Number: 9971212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97417              (Estimated)
Investigator: Boxin Tang tangb@msci.memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9149,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9971212

A regular fractional factorial is uniquely determined by its defining
              relation and it has a simple aliasing structure in that any two effects are
              either orthogonal or fully aliased.  When we have little or no knowledge as for
              what effects are potentially important, it is appropriate to select designs
              having minimum aberration.  Minimum aberration designs enjoy some desirable
              model robust properties and therefore can be properly called model robust
              designs.  Regular fractional factorials are well studied and results are
              abundant in the literature.  The same cannot be said of nonregular fractional
              factorials.  Nonregular fractional factorials are given by Plackett-Burman
              designs,  Hadamard matrices, or more generally by orthogonal arrays. Both
              regular and nonregular designs permit orthogonal estimation of all the main
              effects.  When some interactions are potentially important, the two classes of
              designs have rather different behaviors.  This leads some researchers to study
              the projection properties of nonregular designs.  Despite this important
              contribution, there has not been a systematic method for assessing and
              comparing nonregular designs. The broad objective of this project is to extend
              the theory and methods in regular designs to nonregular designs.  This is
              facilitated by the introduction of J-characteristics, which generalizes the
              concept of defining relation.  The whole project is conducted by focusing on
              the following research topics: (i) motivate and introduce generalized
              resolution and minimum aberration criteria, (ii) investigate the hidden
              projection properties of generalized minimum aberration in terms of
              estimability and efficiency of designs, (iii) develop a theory of
              J-characteristics and establish their connections with the projection
              properties, and (iv) develop, implement, and test efficient computational
              algorithms for constructing generalized minimum aberration designs.

In many
              areas of investigations, such as those of Federal Strategic Interest, efficient
              data collection is one of the key steps for the eventual success of a research
              project.  Well planned experiments ensure relevant and informative data to be
              collected.  Factorial designs provide cost-effective experimental plans that
              allow a large number of variables to be studied simultaneously and efficiently,
              and are therefore widely used in industrial experiments for improving the
              quality of manufactured products and the productivity of manufacturing
              processes.  Factorial designs can be categorized into two classes: regular
              designs and nonregular designs.  Regular designs are well studied and results
              are abundant in the literature.  The same cannot be said of nonregular designs.
               Two reasons for the scarcity of results on nonregular designs are the lack of
              general theory and methods, and the associated computational difficulties in
              data analysis.  The broad objective of this project is to develop general
              theory and methods for studying and constructing nonregular designs.  This is
              achieved by introducing an instrumental concept, called J-characteristics, that
              is capable of capturing the properties of a design when projected onto lower
              dimensions. Developing and testing a user-friendly computer package is part of
              the proposed research.  The theory and methods to be developed in the proposed
              research will shed new light on the study of factorial designs, lead to new
              economical designs for the experiments in the physical, chemical, and
              engineering sciences, and promote the application of factorial designs in the
              areas such as biotechnology and medical research that have huge potential to
              benefit further from the design methodology.


