Title       : Stochastic Spatial Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9971868

Award Number: 9971868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74994              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Theodore Cox jtcox@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971868
Cox
	This research deals with several topics in the theory and
              application of stochastic spatial processes. Such processes are stochastic
              models for large systems with many interacting components. Among the phenomena
              these systems model are competition of species, epidemics, spread of genetic
              traits, and catalytic reactions. Research on several specific problems will be
              considered. The first project involves a model for mutually catalytic
              branching. The goal is to understand the simultaneous evolution of two
              spatially distributed populations undergoing random motion and reproduction,
              where individuals from one population reproduce and die only in the presence of
              individuals from the other population. The second project involves
              measure-valued scaling limits of interacting particle systems. The goal is to
              study further the phenomenon, only recently discovered, that certain lattice
              systems with strong local interactions converge, when scaled appropriately, to
              super-Brownian motion. In particular, a detailed description of this phenomenon
              for the voter model in two or more dimensions is a primary goal; both spatial
              and genealogical structure will be studied. The third project involves
              questions which arise in the study of mathematical models of hybrid zones. The
              goal here is to describe the large scale behavior of models with a spatially
              dependent selection mechanism, especially when the selective advantage
              parameter is small.
	This research involves several topics in the theory and
              application of stochastic spatial processes. The goal of this research is to
              obtain a better qualitative understanding of some of the complex phenomena
              exhibited by systems made up of a large number of interacting components, with
              the interaction having a stochastic or random element. Such systems occur in
              many applications, one notable area being theoretical biology and ecology,
              where there is great interest in improving older mathematical models which do
              not allow for explicit spatial dependence (as do these models). Stochastic
              spatial models are used to study questions involving predator-prey
              interactions, species coexistence, and genetic diversity. These models often
              have dozens of parameters and interaction rules; consequently, they are
              generally not amenable to rigorous mathematical analysis. The investigator
              plans research on several specific models which retain the interesting
              qualitative behavior of more complicated models, but are "simple" enough to
              allow for the possibility of mathematical analysis. By studying these models,
              the investigator seeks to give rigorous mathematical arguments which explain
              the observed behavior of the models. The investigator also plans to study what
              appears to be an intimate connection between two apparently different types of
              stochastic spatial models (discrete models with strong interactions and
              continuous models with weak interactions).

