Title       : Estimation from Dynamical Systems and Individual Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9971964

Award Number: 9971964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew B. Nobel nobel@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9971964 
Estimation from Dynamical Systems and Individual Sequences
Andrew
              B. Nobel, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill

ABSTRACT:
The advent of
              modern computing and the recent interest in chaos have focussed increasing
              attention on deterministic systems that exhibit random behavior.  Statistical
              analysis of such systems is often complicated by the fact that measurements of
              their behavior can exhibit very long-range dependence.  The Principal
              Investigator is studying non-parametric estimation from ergodic processes and
              individual sequences, with particular emphasis on processes and sequences that
              arise from measurement of a dynamical system.  He is developing and proving the
              consistency of schemes for the following problems: (i) estimating the map
              generating a given discrete time dynamical system; 
(ii) estimating the
              stationary density and Lyapunov exponents of a dynamical system; and (iii)
              density and regression estimation from individual sequences.  

In addition,
              the P.I. is seeking to characterize deterministic sequences and to estimate
              their induced transformations.

The advent of modern computing and recent
              scientific interest in chaos have focussed increasing attention on physical
              systems that are governed by deterministic laws, but exhibit erratic or
              unpredictable behavior that is characteristic of random phenomena.  Dynamical
              systems of this sort have found application in such diverse areas as medical
              diagnostics and weather prediction.
The Principal Investigator (P.I.) is
              developing statistical methods that can be used estimate the underlying
              properties of a dynamical system from observations of the system as it evolves
              in time.  This is important if one wishes to predict or control the future
              behavior of the system.  The P.I. is developing methods to estimate the rule
              that dictates the evolution of the system over a single unit of time.  He is
              also developing methods to assess the sensitivity of the system to its initial
              conditions: if the system is started off in two very similar states, how
              different will it look later?  The P.I. is seeking methods that will be
              effective for a wide variety of systems, including those whose measurements
              exhibit dependence over very long time scales.  

