Title       : Ergodic Theory and Applications in Combinatorial Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9971120

Award Number: 9971120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78048              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Boshernitzan michael@math.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9971120
Principal Investigator: Michael D.
              Boshernitzan

Abstract: The central subject of this proposal is diophantine,
              combinatorial and spectral properties of iet's  (interval exchange
              transformations) and itm's (interval exchange maps, the nonbijective version of
              iet's). Boshernitan's approach, unlike the "global" approaches of others, puts
              special emphasis on the way diophantine and algebraic properties of the
              parameters involved may affect the dynamical properties of an iet  (or an itm).
              (The diophantine properties considered are often "generic," leading to "global"
              results.) For some dynamical systems of topological entropy zero, an accurate
              asymptotic estimate on the corresponding "block growth" is needed that is
              better than merely subexponential, and in some cases, is even polynomial. These
              problems are often difficult, more difficult than in the measure-theoretic
              setting, and many presently available positive results in this direction (of
              Katok, Yomdin, Gutkin, Haydn, Goetz, and others) are generally believed to be
              far from best possible. For example, even for itm's, the conjecture on linear
              block growth (which is supported by computer computations) remains open, and an
              affirmative resolution of the conjecture would have important consequences.
              Boshernitzan is also involved in the study of dynamical systems  (symbolic
              flows) of low (in particular, of linear) complexity, as well as various
              strengthenings of the notion of unique ergodicity tailored to this context, as
              found in the work of Ferenczi, Cassaigne, Durand, and others.
   
Even though
              the emphasis of this project is on theoretical questions that arise in the
              study  of dynamical systems of low complexity, there are numerous natural
              connections with other fields of mathematics (number theory, probability, and
              combinatorics, to name three), as well as with statistics, computer science
              (complexity theory, for one) and physics (quantum mechanics). The recent
              discovery made by Boshernitzan and his collaborator Kornfeld of "exotic"
              interval translation maps may prove to have applications in laser 
              technology.

