Title       : Optimizing Conjugated Polymer Films for Desired Applications: Controlling
               Interchain, Interfacial and Intensity-Dependent Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a9971842

Award Number: 9971842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin J. Schwartz Schwartz@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971842
Schwartz

This research describes a series of experiments designed to
              improve our understanding of conjugated polymers in three areas which are key
              to exploiting these materials to their maximum potential in practical devices:
              determining the role of interactions between polymer chains, understanding the
              interactions between polymer excited states, and exploring the chemical nature
              of the metal/polymer interface.  First, interchain interactions will be varied
              by casting conjugated polymer films from different solvents and/or annealing. 
              Ultrafast laser studies on these samples will monitor the relationship between
              single-chain excited states (through their emission) and interchain excited
              states (through their absorption), and will correlate this relationship with
              how the chains are packed as established by X-ray diffraction and/or atomic
              force microscopy.  Isolated and aligned polymer chains encapsulated in the
              nanoscale channels of a porous silica glass will also be studied.  Second,
              experiments that systematically vary both the excitation geometry while
              monitoring the time evolution of the excited state absorption and stimulated
              emission will provide information about the interactions between excited states
              in conjugated polymers.  Finally, surface-specific non-linear optical
              spectroscopies such as second harmonic and sum frequency generation will
              directly probe the chemical structure of the polymer/metal interface, and the
              results will be correlated with the behavior of such interfaces in practical
              polymer-based optoelectronic devices such as light-emitting
              diodes.

Optoelectronic devices can be created from conjugated polymers due
              to their nature as plastic semiconductors.  Unlike conventional inorganic
              semiconductors, conjugated polymers are lightweight and flexible, can be easily
              fabricated into desired shapes, and can be synthesized to have band gaps in any
              region of the visible spectrum.  The ease of processing and desirable
              mechanical properties of conjugated polymers offer enormous advantages compared
              to the technologies presently used in LED's, displays, and other applications
              that are widespread in society.  For example, conjugated polymers allow the
              construction of large-area, flexible light-emitting panels, and multi-color
              displays can be produced directly by ink-jet printing.  The proposed work is
              aimed at learning how to optimize these materials for desired applications in
              commercial devices or displays.  The results of the proposed experiments should
              provide a prescription for controlling the interactions between polymer chains
              to enhance desired electrical or optical properties; the understanding of
              excitations at high intensity may open the possibility for producing plastic
              diode laser; and the detailed knowledge of the polymer/electrode interface
              obtained from the experiments could lead directly to improvements in device
              performance.

