Title       : Asymptotic topology of metric spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a9971709

Award Number: 9971709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71529              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander N. Dranishnikov dranish@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS-9971709

Principal Investigator: Alexander
              Dranishnikov

Abstract:        
           
Dranishnikov is planning to
              study the asymptotic topology of metric spaces in particular, discrete groups
              and large Riemannian manifolds. The macroscopic view on unbounded metric spaces
              allows us to extract the essence of several important conjectures in modern
              mathematics. These conjectures are often called `The Novikov type conjectures',
              since the first in the list is the Novikov higher signatures conjecture. Among
              others conjectures of this type are the Baum-Connes conjecture, the Borel
              conjecture, the Gromov-Lawson positive scalar curvature conjecture,
              Zero-in-spectrum conjecture. Most of the above conjectures can be formulated in
              terms of the large-scale geometry of discrete groups. An asymptotic approach to
              investigation of metric spaces can be accomplished in rigorous frames of
              special category, called `Coarse category'.  There are parallels between the
              coarse category and the category of compact (metrizable) spaces. Partly this
              analogy is established by the Higson corona functor, partly this is due to
              Gromov's work on cultivating basics of dimension theory and of its dual,
              connectedness theory, in this new territory. One of the most difficult problems
              in the theory of compact spaces was the Alexandroff Problem about coincidence
              of geometric (Lebesgue's) and algebraic (cohomological) dimensions. The problem
              came from late 20s and it was completely solved only in late 80s by the PI.
              Suddenly Alexandroff Problem appeared to be important in the realm of coarse
              category. The corresponding equality for a discrete group would imply most of
              the above conjecture for that group.  

Thus a local technique of general
              topology such as dimension theory and absolute neighborhood retract theory can
              help to resolve problems of asymptotic (global) topology which in their turn
              would answer very important and difficult questions of `local mathematics'.
  
                      


