Title       : Entropy, Assembly and Novel Microscopy in Complex Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9971226

Award Number: 9971226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arjun G. Yodh yodh@dept.physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an experimental condensed matter physics project to investigate the
              particles in complex fluid environments. Complex fluids include colloidal
              suspensions, emulsions, polymer solutions, membranes, and their mixtures. Their
              study is motivated by their relevance to cell biology, their use in a vast
              range of commercial products such as paints, pigments, motor oils, foods,
              cosmetics, photonics, lithography, ceramics and sensor technology. The
              experiments will (1) explore entropic forces in suspensions of vesicles and
              DNA, (2) probe force fields in a range of suspensions, (3) probe diffusion
              phenomena at the molecular length scale, and (4) develop methods to achieve
              self-assembling colloidal aggregates. The project offers excellent training
              opportunities for students in the use state-of-the art microscopy techniques to
              pursue fundamental studies in areas which also relate to a vast range of
              technologies.
%%%
This is an experimental condensed matter physics project to
              investigate the particles in complex fluid environments, such as colloidal
              suspensions, emulsions, polymer solutions, membranes, and their mixtures. These
              materials arise in a range of contexts such as cell biology, paints, pigments,
              motor oils, foods, cosmetics, photonics, lithography, ceramics and sensor
              technology. The experiments will explore the forces experienced by the
              particles and the disorder of the suspensions. Another objective is to use this
              information to develop methods which will lead to controlled self-organization
              of the microscopic and molecular particles. The project offers excellent
              training opportunities for students in the use state-of-the art microscopy
              techniques to pursue fundamental studies in areas which also relate to a vast
              range of technologies.




