Title       : Topology of Three Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a9971660

Award Number: 9971660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153861             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc E. Culler culler@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. Shalen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9971660    

Principal Investigator: Marc Culler and Peter
              Shalen    

Abstract:    
Culler and Shalen are proposing to study the set
              of boundary slopes of a knot, both in the case of an arbitrary closed
              orientable 3-manifold and in the case of a manifold with cyclic fundamental
              group.  This is a topic of intrinsic interest, which Culler and Shalen believe
              is also related to some of the most difficult unsolved problems in 3-manifold
              theory.  Their program for applying results about essential surfaces in knot
              exteriors to 3-manifold theory have led Culler and Shalen to a number of
              questions about the character variety of a hyperbolic knot group, which they
              propose to work on.  These ideas also lead to an approach to the very broad
              problem of giving a quantitative version of Thurston's Dehn surgery theorem;
              this can be seen as the problem underlying most of the existent work on Dehn
              surgery.  The character variety has a distinguished 1-dimensional irreducible
              component X which is the one that contains the character of the representation
              that determines the hyperbolic structure on the knot. One question which will
              be addressed by Culler and Shalen is that of determining properties that
              distinguish surfaces associated to ideal points of the main component of the
              character variety from other essential surfaces in the knot exterior.  Another
              question involves the relationship between the hyperbolic volume of the knot
              complement and properties of a certain factor of the A-polynomial, this factor
              being the defining equation of a plane curve closely related to X.  There is a
              general notion of hyperbolic volume which applies to a representation whose
              character lies on X.  A third question is that of understanding what properties
              of an essential surface associated to an ideal point of X guarantee that this
              generalized volume tends to 0 at the ideal point.  Yet another relevant
              question is that of understanding how often it happens that the curve X is
              invariant under complex conjugation, and what it means, in terms of the
              topology of the 3-manfiold, for this to  happen.  In a somewhat different
              direction, Culler and Shalen have developed methods for relating the boundary
              slopes and the genera of essential surfaces in certain situations.  They are
              proposing to develop extensions of this theory.  Their techniques in this area
              may be relevant to the general question of whether every knot in a homotopy
              sphere has at least one nonzero integer boundary slope.

A fundamental
              problem in many areas of mathematics is to classify all examples of a certain
              type of mathematical object.  The objects of study in this proposal are
              3-manifolds, which are mathematical models of 3-dimensional spaces.  Since our
              universe is a 3-dimensional space, the classification of 3-manifolds is
              directly related to our understanding of nature itself.  The classification
              problem for 3-manifolds is far from solved, but the work of many mathematicians
              over the last 20 years has at least produced a conjectural answer.  The work
              supported by this problem forms part of the effort to verify the conjectured
              geometric classification of 3-manifolds.  

