Title       : Stability Problems in Plasma Physics, Stellar Dynamics and Classical Field
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9971306

Award Number: 9971306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yan Guo guoy@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research that is funded with this award will address problems in
plasma
              physics, stellar dynamics, and superconductivity.  The PI will
construct
              steady state solutions of the partial differential equations that
model these
              phenomena and will study their dynamic stability. Specifically, 
the Vlasov
              model for collisionless plasmas, models for polytropic galaxies,
and models
              for superconductivity and superfluidity that exhibit vortices will
be
              investigated. 

This award will fund research on mathematical models for
              phenomena in
which huge numbers of individual particles interact.  These
              phenomena 
can occur in plasmas, the physical state of the interior of
              fluorescent lights, 
manufacturing reactors for microchips,  and of the
              interior of the sun. In this 
case, atomic particles interact by means of
              electromagnetic forces.  Related 
phenomena also occur on cosmic scales, for
              instance in galaxies, where 
the interacting particles are entire stars and
              the interaction is by means of 
gravitation.  The mathematical models for
              these very different situations have 
similarities.  The research will study
              equilibrium configurations such as the 
steady state operation of a
              plasma-assisted manufacturing device or the steady 
rotation of a galaxy and
              seek to understand its stability or the ways in which 
stability is lost. 
              Instability may mean loss of efficiency for a manufacturing 
process or the
              formation of spiral arms in a galaxy.    

