Title       : Effects of Confinement on Quantum Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2001     
File        : a9971471

Award Number: 9971471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moses H. Chan chan@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an experimental condensed matter physics project that seeks to
              understand the effect of confining liquid helium into one and two dimensions.
              It has been shown that on a hydrogen surface, the inert layer, or the minimum
              helium coverage for the appearance of superfluidity in the T=0 limit, is half a
              liquid monolayer. This raises the question of whether the inert layer can be
              reduced further on an even weaker substrate, such as an alkali metal surface. A
              recent calculation predicted that on a cesium-silver compound surface, a dilute
              hydrogen layer will not solidify and will exhibit superfluid behavior. It has
              been found recently that helium-3 and other gases are easily adsorbed into the
              interior of single-wall-carbon-nanotubes. If helium remains liquids at low
              temperatures, as is predicted, this will be an experimental realization of one
              dimensional Luttinger liquid. Torsional oscillator, heat capacity and pulsed
              NMR techniques will be employed to study these confined quantum
              systems.
%%%
This is an experimental condensed matter physics project that
              seeks to understand the consequences of confining liquid helium in one and two
              dimensions. Liquid helium is an unique liquid in that its properties    are
              dominated by quantum mechanics at low temperatures and transforms into a
              superfluid. The physics of the superfluid state is analogous to the
              superconducting state of certain metals and alloys. By adsorbing atomically
              thin helium films onto solid surfaces an into the interior channels of recently
              discovered single-all-carbon nanotubes, the properties of superfluidity in two
              and one dimensions can be explored with highly sensitive mass decoupling and
              other techniques. In addition to addressing a number of fundamental questions
              of quantum systems in reduced dimensions, these experiments will also shed
              insights on the physics of high temperature superconductors and on artificially
              engineered nanoscale structures. Students associated with this project will
              receive excellent training, with state-of-the-art instrumentation, that will
              prepare them for careers in academia or industry.

