Title       : Approximations of Functions from Scattered Data: Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9971276

Award Number: 9971276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87179              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph D. Ward   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposer is particularly interested in representing and analyzing scattered
              data both on n-dimensional space and on certain compact manifolds such as the
              
m-dimensional sphere by positive definite and related functions. There are
              now 
several results related to approximation by positive definite (and
              related) 
functions on compact manifolds for which there are no known
              analogues on  
n-dimensional Euclidean space for scattered points. For
              example, 
quasi-interpolation approximation methods, Marcinkiewicz-Zygmund
              inequalities
leading to quadrature formulas associated with scattered points,
              
some approximation rate estimates for multilevel approximation methods and
              many other results known to be true on spheres do not have good counterparts on
              
n-dimensional Euclidean space. Establishing some corresponding results on
              
these  spaces  with the idea of better understanding the 
approximation
              potential of positive definite functions and their applications is of special
              interest to us. In addition, we wish to address some of the 
inadequacies of
              radial basis function (RBF) approximation applicable to all 
manifolds;
              namely, the limitations of the "native space" theory for RBF's in 
terms of
              convergence of interpolants,  and questions concerning the ability of
              
globally supported RBF's to approximate locally. In addition, the proposer
              
wishes to investigate certain questions about constrained approximation.

A
              major goal of our proposed research is to develop better methods to both
              
represent and analyze data obtained from scattered sites located either in 
              
space or from sphere-like objects. For example, imagine temperature readings
              
obtained at scattered sites over a particular region of the earth. One aim is
              to obtain temperature readings (or smog density readings, ozone readings etc.)
              
over the the entire region by creating an appropriate model(function). Such a
              
model makes "predictive" readings at unsampled sites possible. Also taking an
              
increasing number of samples over a given region should yield a "better"
              model 
to the underlying phenomena. We propose the study of such questions
              from a 
mathematical point of view. We note that better understanding of the
              
representation and analysis of data would have potential benefits to
              
meteorology, oceanography and satellite-based systems such as the Global
              
Positioning System (GPS).


