Title       : NMR in a Diamond Anvil Cell, Ruby Fluorescence, and the Ultra-high Pressure
               Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9971326

Award Number: 9971326
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359781             (Estimated)
Investigator: Isaac F. Silvera silvera@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971326
Silvera

This project has three thrusts in high pressure diamond
              anvil cell (DAC) physics: NMR; extension of the ruby pressure scale and the
              physics of ruby. A promising new geometry for NMR in a DAC has already extended
              the pressure range for this technique by more than a factor of 2 to a few
              hundred kilobars.  The technique will be developed to extend to megabar
              pressures. Ortho-para conversion, important for the understanding of the
              properties of high pressure hydrogen will be studied directly by NMR to these
              high pressures. High pressure phases involve orientational ordering.  Phase
              lines can be observed by the collapse of the Pake doublet in hydrogen to a
              singlet in going from the ordered to disordered phase.  Theoretical
              calculations of metallization of hydrogen predict that the molecular bond
              shrinks then grows with increasing pressure.  The bond length can be studied
              from the splitting of the Pake doublet.  In a DAC the ruby fluorescence
              spectrum is the most important means of determining pressure.  Currently, the
              quasi-hydrostatic scale is only calibrated to 80 GPa; we shall extend this to
              the multi-megabar range at a synchrotron, doing simultaneous measurements of
              the ruby spectrum and the equation of state of known pressure markers under the
              same pressure.  We shall also study the solid phases of ruby as predicted phase
              changes have received little attention in this region and can also impact on
              the ruby pressure scale.
%%%
High pressure research extending into the
              megabar pressure range is a rapidly growing field of physics. In this program
              both graduate and undergraduate students are trained in methods of generating
              high pressure in Diamond Anvil Cells (DACs) on a table-top. Methods of nuclear
              magnetic resonance will be extended to megabar pressures, studying samples of
              hydrogen and its isotopes. Ruby will be studied in the megabar pressure range
              at a synchrotron radiation source to understand its structure, also producing
              an important new calibration of pressure in the megabar range.
***


