Title       : Stratified Spaces and Controlled Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9971367

Award Number: 9971367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72810              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Bruce Hughes bruce.hughes@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Proposal:  DMS-9971367

PI:  C. Bruce Hughes

Abstract: This project
              applies techniques from controlled topology to solve problems in three broad
              areas: stratified spaces, nonpositively curved manifolds, and ends of
              complexes.  An important tool developed previously by the principal
              investigator is the theory of manifold approximate fibrations.  It will be used
              to attack several problems.  A stratification presents a decomposition of the
              space into manifold pieces. Since the space need not be a manifold itself,
              geometric methods cannot be applied until it is understood how the manifold
              pieces fit together.  One of the most important aspects of this project is the
              uncovering of the geometric structure used to join together the manifold
              pieces. This structure is not only subject to classification and
              quantification, but can also be applied for the development of new geometric
              tools for studying stratified spaces. The structure on the neighborhoods of the
              strata is a bundle theory, namely manifold stratified approximate fibrations,
              in the category of controlled topology. Thus, controlled topology becomes the
              vehicle for transforming and applying classical manifold techniques to study
              these more intricate manifolds with singularities.  In addition to stratified
              spaces, both manifolds of nonpositive curvature and ends of complexes lead to
              controlled topology and approximate fibrations. The geometry of nonpositively
              curved manifolds give boundedness in their universal covers which can then be
              converted into controlled information. Ends of complexes lead to obstructions
              for the existence of approximate fibrations near infinity. This is then related
              to the topology of stratified spaces near the singularities.

Topology's
              ultimate goal is to classify manifolds, the spaces which are locally
              homeomorphic to euclidean spaces.  Controlled topology has become the most
              powerful new technique toward achieving this goal regarding high-dimensional
              manifolds since the development of surgery theory.  Even more dramatically,
              controlled topology is showing its full force in the study of stratified
              spaces, or manifolds with singularities.  In controlled topology, the objects
              of study come equipped with a map to a metric space, called the control space.
              The classical topics of topology (e.g., homotopy equivalences, h-cobordisms,
              and ends) are studied with sizing estimates measured in the control space (so
              that classical topology is recovered when the control space is a point). 
              Problems in many different areas of mathematics lead to questions about
              manifolds with singularities. It is expected that the research proposed here
              will give new and useful tools for dealing with such spaces.

