Title       : Influence of Defects on Magnetic Hysteresis: A Synthesis of Electronic Structure
               Theory and Micromagnetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a9971573

Award Number: 9971573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall H. Victora victora@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. MacLaren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971573
Victora
This award supports research and education in the magnetic
              properties of materials and involves a collaborative effort between Tulane
              University and the University of Minnesota.  The research seeks to develop
              simulation techniques to describe macroscopic magnetic properties, such as
              hysteresis loops, of materials where these are influenced by atomic-scale
              defects.  In films of thickness 5-50 nm, the influence of defects in nucleating
              domains or pinning domain walls prevents ordinary micromagnetic simulations
              from achieving quantitative accuracy without introducing adjustable parameters.
               Technologically important materials,e.g. magnetic recording media and
              permanent magnets, exhibit behavior that is strongly defect driven.  With
              increasing storage density, the resistance of the material to exhibiting
              superparamagentism depends on the interaction between thermal fluctuations and
              defects.  To enable the reliable simulation of the magnetic properties of these
              materials, the PIs will use simulation techniques that include thermal
              fluctuations and information on defects (local exchange and anisotropy)
              obtained from electronic structure calculations. 

This award supports a
              research effort that addresses fundamental problems as well as problems of
              interest to magnetic recording and data storage industries.  It is a
              collaborative effort between the University of Minnesota and Tulane University.
               The PIs seek to develop methods to include information from atomic-scale
              calculations in computer simulations of large-scale magnetic properties of
              materials for which defects play an important role.  The research contributes
              to the training of students in electronic structure and simulation
              techniques.



