Title       : Designed Local Segmental Motions and Their Interactions with Nonlinear
               Mechanical Deformation in Glassy Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9971569

Award Number: 9971569
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert F. Yee afyee@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9971569
Yee

The ultimate goal of the research proposed by the group at the
              University of Michigan is to discover and manipulate the fundamental
              relationship between the chemical structure of polymer molecules and their
              mechanical properties.  The process of discovery can be divided into two steps.
               In the first the intrinsic thermally excited motions that the polymer
              molecules are capable of in the solid state is clarified.  In the second the
              effect of external stress on these intrinsic motions is determined.  In
              previous NSF-supported work the Michigan group discovered that the specifics of
              how parts of polymeric molecules rotate or twist have critical effects on the
              key mechanical properties.  They showed that if longer pieces of the main-chain
              of the polymer are able to move together then the polymer is more likely to be
              ductile rather that brittle.  They then synthesized a polyester-carbonate
              polymer with impact fracture resistance superior to BPA-polycarbonate,
              heretofore the toughest of all glassy polymers.  The key to this synthesis is
              the insertion into a BPA-polycarbonate chain cyclohexylene (c-C6) linkages
              capable of bi-stable (chair-boat-chair) conformational transitions.  The second
              step is to be carried out in the present proposal:  To discover how intrinsic
              mobility facilitates the relaxation of stresses that results in ductile or
              brittle behavior.  C-C6 groups will be used to link various rigid molecular
              segments with limited native mobility, which will allow testing of the ability
              of c-C6 to be the "engine" for providing mobility to segments which are
              otherwise quite immobile.  The resulting molecular motions will be monitored by
              solid state NMR, dynamic-mechanical spectroscopy, dielectric relaxation, and
              positronium annihilation.  Furthermore, the cooperative motions will be
              systematically modified with intra-chain and inter-chain  constraints to alter
              the ease of segmental rearrangement under applied stress.  The effect can be
              revealed by following the transient nature of the holes formed when chain
              segments slip past each other by positronium annihilation lifetime spectroscopy
              (PALS).  PALS data will be acquired synchronously with oscillating stress of
              systemically increasing magnitude and frequency.  In this way the time scale of
              chain movement and its variation with mechanical stress can be
              determined.

Polymeric materials are key constituents in applications as
              diverse as medical implants, microelectronics, compact disks, stealth aircraft,
              not to mention major household appliances, automobiles, civilian aircraft,
              bridges, and highways.   In such applications, the mechanical strength and
              durability of the polymer are both extremely important.  Yet designing polymers
              with desirable mechanical properties remains an art.  Successful conclusion of
              the present research should allow the rational design of polymers with high
              resistance to fracture while maintaining other desirable physical properties. 
              Ultimately, this should lead directly to higher performance, more durable and
              energy efficient engineering systems using polymers.  In educating scientists
              about polymers the traditional approach has been to teach them either to
              chemically synthesize polymers, or to use polymers as materials.  Consequently
              a culture and language gap typically exists between industrial polymer
              scientists trained as chemists and those as materials engineers.  This creates
              barriers to innovation and successful application of polymers.  The present
              proposal requires students to learn both aspects of polymer science thus
              providing society with more scientists that are able to bridge the gap.  The
              fundamental understanding developed have been and will continue to be
              incorporated into graduate taught by the PI.

