Title       : Combinatorial and Geometric Problems in Knot Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9971244

Award Number: 9971244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morwen B. Thistlethwaite morwen@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS-9971244

PI:  Morwen Thistlethwaite

Abstract:
              Thistlethwaite's research is in classical knot theory, the study of embeddings
              of smooth simple closed curves in the 3-sphere.  The computer is an essential
              tool in his research, in that the problems he addresses are often suggested by
              careful observation of data.  Thistlethwaite will continue to investigate the
              rate of growth of the number of knots, following his collaboration with C.
              Sundberg, where the exact growth exponent was determined for prime, alternating
              links.  He will study optimal configurations of symmetric knots, and will
              investigate other geometric problems associated with knot complements, in
              particular hyperbolic knot complements containing essential4-punctured spheres.
               He will investigate the possibility that hyperbolic geometry might be used to
              provide a new, completely geometric proof of the Tait flyping conjecture.  The
              knot tables will be extended well beyond the 1,701,936 knots currently listed,
              and these new tables will be used to search for interesting examples. 
              Development will continue on the freely available software package "Knotscape",
              which provides a graphical interface to the knot tables and access to many
              invariants.

Thistlethwaite's specialty is classical knot theory, a branch of
              3-dimensional topology with origins in the nineteenth century.  A knot is a
              closed curve in 3-dimensional space; one can imagine a knotted rope with its
              ends joined together.  Two knots are considered to be equivalent if one can be
              deformed continuously to the other, and a knot is deemed to be trivial, or
              unknotted, if it is equivalent to a flat circle.  Knot theory is a rich
              subject, as it interfaces with geometry, topology, algebra and combinatorics. 
              In recent years it has aroused the interest of chemists and molecular
              biologists, particularlyin relation to the knotting of DNA. Knot theory abounds
              with problems which are simple to state, but hard to solve; for example, it is
              often difficult in practice to prove that two given knots are inequivalent, as
              it is hard to rule out the existence of some ingenious method of deforming one
              to the other.  It can even be hard to decide whether a given knot is trivial. 
              If a knot is laid down on a flat surface with as few crossovers as possible,
              the resulting number of crossovers is called the crossing-number of the knot. 
              To date, Thistlethwaite has classified by computer the 1,701,936 knots of up to
              16 crossings; this classification was confirmed by an independent tabulation
              carried out by J. Hoste and J. Weeks.  As part of this project, he will extend
              the tables to 17 or 18 crossings, thereby expecting to find many new examples
              with exciting properties.  He will continue to investigate the fundamental
              problem as to how fast the number of knots grows in relation to
              crossing-number.  Thistlethwaite will use hyperbolic geometry, a form of
              non-Euclidean geometry, to investigate hidden symmetries of knots, and to
              determine the structure of alternating knots (a knot is alternating if it can
              be arranged so that the rope goes alternately over and under at successive
              crossings.)  He will continue to develop the software package "Knotscape",
              which provides a graphical interface to the knot tables.

