Title       : Nonlinear Surface Waves on Water of Finite Depth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a9971764

Award Number: 9971764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shu-Ming Sun sun@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971764

NONLINEAR SURFACE WAVES ON WATER OF FINITE DEPTH

Shu-Ming Sun 


                    The project concerns nonlinear capillary-gravity waves on water of
              
finite depth. By ``water'', it means that an incompressible, inviscid 
fluid
              with constant density is moving under the influence of the gravity 
with
              surface tension on the free surface and the flow is irrotational. 
The
              proposed research focuses on the mathematical theory of nonlinear
              
capillary-gravity waves on water bounded by a rigid horizontal bottom 
and a
              free surface. It consists of two parts. The first part intends to 
give a
              mathematical proof of the existence of three-dimensional propagating 
waves
              bifurcating from a two-dimensional solitary wave with large surface 
tension.
              The second part deals with the motion of capillary-gravity waves 
on the free
              surface of water in a two-dimensional rectangular region. 

      The theory
              of water waves plays a crucial role in the development of 
fluid mechanics.
              Apart from being important in various branches of 
engineering and applied
              sciences, many water-wave phenomena happen in 
every-day experience. Waves
              generated by ships in rivers or reservoirs 
and waves generated by wind or
              earthquakes in oceans are probably the 
most familiar examples. This work
              focuses on certain wave motions on the 
free surface of water in oceans or
              reservoirs and intends to give some 
conditions for generating certain kinds
              of waves and obtain the large-time 
behavior of these waves. The results
              obtained from this research may 
present explanations of some natural
              phenomena, such as wave propagation 
in oceans generated by earthquakes, and
              provide descriptions of some wave 
motions in reservoirs that can be observed.
              Such understanding of those 
wave motions in oceans or reservoirs can be used
              to predict certain natural 
phenomena for preventing human disasters caused by
              them as well as 
benefiting from them, such as generating more electricity.

