Title       : Wetting and Superfluidity on Weak and Intermediate Strength Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a9971519

Award Number: 9971519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $910000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Taborek ptaborek@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Rutledge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971519
Taborek

This is a low temperature physics project to study the
              properties of quantum fluids that weakly physisorbed on metal surfaces. A
              principal goal is to exploit the tunability of alkali metal substrates to study
              the interaction of prewetting and superfluidity, and to study superfluid onset
              on substrates of controlled strength and randomness. In analogy to the
              metal-insulator transition, the project seeks to identify substrates which span
              the range from supporting a highly localized Bose glass to those which serve as
              extremely weak and uniform substrates with no localized atoms. The experiments
              employ measurement of adsorption isotherms using microbalances, with particular
              attention to development of longitudinal mode oscillators which are sensitive
              to both the super and normal fractions. The research provides exceptional
              opportunities for graduate students to investigate fundamental issues in
              quantum fluids, and to gain experience in the development of new
              instrumentation.
%%%
This low temperature physics project investigates the
              unusual properties of quantum fluids, principally helium, but also hydrogen,
              that condense in monolayer films on various metal surfaces. The research
              involves experiments of superfluidity on unusual substrates with very weak
              interactions. This experimental system provides extremely clean tests of our
              understanding of fluids interacting with a wall. This is important for issues
              ranging from lubrication to crystal growth. We will also exploit the many
              analogies between superfluidity and superconductivity to gain insight into both
              types of behavior. Novel types of silicon micromachined oscillators will be
              developed which can detect single layers of adsorbed atoms. The research
              provides exceptional opportunities for graduate students to investigate
              fundamental issues in quantum fluids, and to gain experience in the development
              of new instrumentation.

