Title       : Cooperative Research in Statistical Estimation and Asymptotic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9971608

Award Number: 9971608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafail Z. Khasminskii rafail@math.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pao Liu Chow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gang George Yin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971608
Khasminskii

	To facilitate the cooperative research opportunity,
              this proposal presents a continuing effort to carry out in-depth study and
              collaborations for a number of Russian leading experts and researchers at Wayne
              State University.  The proposed project encompasses the following topics:
              statistical approach to ill-posed problems for ordinary and partial
              differential equations (ODEs and PDEs), analysis of optimal input signals for
              parameter estimation, and averaging and singularly perturbed systems with
              transient and null-recurrent diffusions.  To treat the ill-posed problems, the
              techniques will be based on statistical approaches. Assuming that the
              observation is the solution of an ODE or a PDE plus a white Gaussian noise with
              small intensity, the attention will be devoted to the estimation of the unknown
              source of nonlinear PDEs and certain coefficients appearing in linear
              differential equations.  The nonparametric estimation approach to
              reconstruction of initial/boundary conditions for PDE with partial observations
              in white noise will be studied. Focusing on analysis of optimal signals for
              parameter estimation, the main effort is to find asymptotically efficient
              adaptive estimation procedures. Asymptotically stable, neutral, and unstable
              systems will be examined.  A two-step estimation procedure will be adopted. 
              The first step builds a preliminary estimator based on input signals, and the
              second step fine tunes the estimate using a Newton-Raphson type correction. 
              Analyzing asymptotic properties of diffusion processes where the fast changing
              process does not possess a finite invariant measure, both null-recurrent cases
              and transient processes will be treated.  In addition to obtaining certain
              results on limit distribution of integral functionals of null-recurrent
              diffusions, the asymptotic properties of the singularly perturbed systems will
              be examined in detail.  The proposed topics are motivated by various
              applications in control, optimization, image processing and other related
              fields. The expected results will have a wide range of applications.

	The
              fast-paced progress in technology and the complexity of modern systems
              necessitates communication, exchange of ideas and cooperative research at the
              international level.  The proposed project presents an effort of cooperative
              research between researchers from Wayne State University and outstanding
              scientists from Russia.  By combining force and expertise, asymptotic analysis
              for singularly perturbed stochastic systems will be examined and statistical
              estimation problems will be studied.  The results of the research will be
              useful for many applications in manufacturing systems, data analysis, image
              processing, control and optimization of stochastic systems.  The continued and
              increased collaborations will bring both short and long term fruitful returns. 
              The proposed project will be successful and effective in accelerating progress
              in these fields.  The cooperative research project will also foster the
              establishment of long term significant collaborations among the researchers in
              the U.S. and Russia, which will also be beneficial to the international
              scientific community.

