Title       : Methodology For Analyzing Spatial Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a9971206

Award Number: 9971206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157275             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan E. Gelfand alan@stat.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9197,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Recently, considerable interest has begun to focus on 
spatial data problems.
               The statistician finds an exciting
opportunity to expand the current
              analytical repertoire, 
which is dominated by descriptive summary and ad hoc
              inference
procedures.  Bringing formal stochastic modeling and the 
resultant
              full inference which becomes available, to the 
analysis of spatial data
              becomes attractive.   Fully model-based
approaches offer challenges both in
              supplying a sufficiently
flexible framework and fitting models within such a
              framework.
The proposed research considers three such challenging
              problems.
They are (i) the handling of misaligned data layers which
              arises
when there is interest in relating variables which are collected
from
              different sources and these sources use different areal
partitions of a
              region, (ii) the handling of bivariate (and, more
generally, multivariate)
              spatial processes arising for the
observed data or as latent (second stage)
              processes in a 
hierarchical model, and (iii) the handling of large
              spatial
datasets within the so-called "geostatistical" perspective
which,
              using first or second stage Gaussian specifications,
presents a likelihood
              whose evaluation requires high-dimensional 
matrix inversion.


Spatial
              data arises in many fields of application.  For instance,
in ecology and
              evolutionary biology, investigation of the process
of deforestation is an
              important area.  Such a process inherently
exhibits spatial pattern which
              evolves over time and hence connects 
to federal strategic interest in
              environmental and global change
(EGCH).  It is of interest to use
              socioeconomic information in
addition to physical features of the land area to
              understand this
process.  In financial/real estate applications it is of
              interest
to index residential propery values.  The familiar maxim,
              "location,
location, location" anticipates spatial association in housing
              prices.
In epidemiology one seeks to identify spatial patterns/clustering
              of
disease incidence in order to assess areas of high risk.  Incidence
rates
              have to be adjusted to reflect differences in population
size and exposure to
              risk factors.  In all of these applications 
simple descriptive summary of the
              collected data will not be adequate.  
Rather, one needs to make inference,
              e.g., to assess which factors 
explain the deforestation, to predict the price
              of a home when it 
goes on the market, to conclude that a particular area is
              at a 
significantly higher risk for a particular disease.  The research 
              
under this grant support proposes the use of probabilistic modeling 
to
              address these questions.  Appropriate specification of, fitting 
of and
              drawing inference under such models are the objectives.

