Title       : Geometry of Random Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1999        
File        : a9971493

Award Number: 9971493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57276              (Estimated)
Investigator: Almut Burchard burchard@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9971493

Principal Investigator:  Almut Burchard

Abstract: 
              Random curves constructed on a lattice will be considered from the perspective
              of the (continuum) scaling limit where the lattice spacing is taken to zero. 
              The first problem is to characterize scaling limits of rather general systems
              of random curves.  One aspect of the problem is to determine the regularity and
              dimension of a given (not necessarily random) curve without actually
              parametrizing it. Moreover, a sequence of scaling exponents which are relevant
              for regularity and tightness will be studied. The second problem is concerned
              specifically with random spanning trees in two dimensions. Precise conjectures
              exist regarding the values of the exponents in a number of examples. The object
              is to confirm or contradict those predictions, especially for the first three
              non-trivial exponents. A related question is whether the scaling limits of two
              standard examples, called the Minimal (Random) Spanning Tree, and the Uniformly
              Random Spanning Tree, differ or coincide in the limit. Moreover, existing
              methods should be extended to cover a class of tree processes on random graphs
              which has natural conformal invariance properties. Work on these questions will
              be part of a continuing collaboration.  The third problem is to try to
              establish any non-trivial bound on the dimension of self-avoiding random walks,
              adapting techniques that were successful for random spanning trees  and
              loop-erased walks. Finally, the investigator will participate in a
              collaborative effort aimed at understanding the connecting curves in
              high-dimensional critical percolation. 

Random curves provide some of the
              most natural examples of fractal sets. They appear in random spanning trees
              (where every pair of points is connected by a unique curve), in critical
              percolation clusters (where two points are in the same cluster, if they are
              joined by a path along occupied bonds), as random walks, and as interfaces
              between random subsets of the plane (such as the Frontier of Brownian Motion,
              or level sets of random functions). These systems of random curves are
              typically constructed on a fine lattice within some box of finite size.
              Simulations suggest that in many models of interest, a meaningful continuum
              limit emerges as the lattice spacing is taken to zero. It is widely believed
              that these limits have remarkable symmetry properties, and that they should
              admit simple descriptions. However, there are only partial results guaranteeing
              that such limits even exist, and many questions about their properties remain
              open. 

