Title       : The Role of Multiple Potential Energy Surfaces in Chemical Reactions and
               Photodissociation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a9971810

Award Number: 9971810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383745             (Estimated)
Investigator: Millard H. Alexander mha@mha-ibm4.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Dagdigian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Millard Alexander of the University of Maryland at College Park and Paul
              Dagdigian of Johns Hopkins University are supported by the Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program to continue their collaborative studies of the
              dynamics of chemical reactions and molecular photodissociation, with an
              emphasis on electronically nonadiabatic processes. The theoretical research
              involves the development and application of new methodology for the study of
              molecular collision and dissociation dynamics. The experiments will measure
              state-resolved electronically and rotationally inelastic cross sections
              involving open-shell diatomics, with special attention on highly excited
              rotational levels, photolytically prepared. The project goal is the elucidation
              of how the interplay between more than one potential energy surface, and the
              coupling between these, governs the dependence of reaction cross sections and
              rate constants on the fine-structure levels of the reactants, and product
              internal state distributions and orientation after collisions or
              photodissociation. The dominant theme of this project is the influence of
              electronic angular momentum and/or spin on chemical reactions, inelastic energy
              transfer and photodissociation. Progress toward full understanding is achieved
              by investigation of a few exemplary systems, with theory and experiment in
              close collaboration. 

Radicals are atomic and molecular species that have
              unpaired electron spins.  This property leads them to be chemically reactive,
              and in fact radical reactions underlie all of chemical kinetics.  Collisions
              that involve radicals, as well as light-induced dissociation that leads to
              radical fragments, are complex processes whose description is inherently
              quantum mechanical.  This effort seeks to achieve fundamental understanding of
              radical reaction systems with the goal of improving overall knowledge of
              chemical reaction dynamics and kinetics. 

