Title       : Operads and Homotopy Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a9971434

Award Number: 9971434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander A. Voronov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971434
Voronov
     There are two objectives of this project.  One is to work
              on and
eventually prove the following conjecture of Deligne: There exists
              the
(natural) structure of an algebra over a chain operad of the little
disks
              operad on the Hochschild complex of any associative algebra.
The other
              objective is to study holomorphic line bundles over the
moduli space of
              algebraic curves with a holomorphic disk and prove the
analogue of
              Borel-Weil-Bott Theorem for this space, considered as
homogeneous space for
              the Virasoro algebra.  The significance of the
project on Deligne's Conjecture
              consists in studying presumably deep
connections between one complex variable
              and associative algebras.
The proof of Deligne's Conjecture will also further
              simplify the proof
of the existence of a deformation quantization of a Poisson
              manifold,
originally proved by Kontsevich and simplified by Tamarkin. 
              The
completion of the Borel-Weil-Bott part of the project will
              establish
important relationship between the geometry of the moduli space
              and
the representation theory of the Virasoro algebra.
     The structure of
              an algebra over a chain operad indicates, usually
explicitly, the presence of
              a ``homotopy something'' algebra, an
algebra with certain identities, such as
              associativity, satisfied in
only an approximate way known as ``up to
              homotopy.''  Such structures
have been used by Stasheff and May in their study
              of loop spaces,
Beilinson and Ginzburg and Hinich and Schechtman in the study
              of
deformation theory of algebraic varieties and vector bundles over
them,
              and by Kontsevich toward knot invariants.  Witten and Zwiebach
have
              effectively used the homotopy Lie structure in string theory.
Deligne's
              Conjecture may be reformulated as the existence of a certain
string theory
              associated to every associative algebra.  Thus, the
proof of the conjecture
              will create ground for considerable progress
in studying applications of
              algebra to geometry and theoretical
physics.  The significance of the moduli
              space part of the project is
in extending the fundamental relationship between
              the geometry of a
homogeneous space and the representation theory of a
              semisimple Lie
group to the case of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces and
              the
Virasoro algebra, respectively.  As in the classical case, the
completion
              of this project would contribute mutually to the two
subjects: the geometry of
              the moduli space and the representation
theory of the Virasoro algebra.  Both
              subjects are much more
complicated and less studied than those in the
              classical situation.
The project aims to advance the general understanding of
              each.  In
general, the study of the geometry and topology of moduli spaces
              has
recently become very important, as moduli spaces play now a
significant
              role in four-dimensional topology (Donaldson and
Seiberg-Witten invariants),
              knot theory (Vassiliev invariants),
higher-dimensional topology (Gromov-Witten
              invariants), and
deformation quantization (Kontsevich's quantization of
              Poisson
manifolds).  Moreover, although moduli spaces have been
              classical
objects of algebraic geometry (since the seminal work of P.
              Deligne
and D. Mumford), their topology has not been understood yet and
              has
presented a challenge for algebraic geometers for the last twenty
years. 
              Thus unraveling the topology of moduli spaces seems to be very
important for
              progress in both topology and geometry.
***


