Title       : Probablility and Geometry: Applications of Stochastic Models to Geometric
               Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9971004

Award Number: 9971004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald N. Goldman rng@cs.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There is a deep and fundamental connection between the classical theory of
              discrete probability distributions and the parametric curves and surfaces
              currently in vogue in Computer Graphics and Computer Aided Design (CAGD). The
              Bernstein polynomials were introduced long ago by Bernoulli to represent the
              binomial distribution, but they are now ubiquitous in scientific and
              engineering applications as the blending functions for Bezier curves and
              surfaces. Similarly, B-splines were known and applied by 
Laplace in
              Probability and Statistics long before they were adopted in Approximation
              Theory and CAGD for representing non-uniform rational B-spline (NURB) curves
              and surfaces.

The Poisson distribution is the limit of the binomial
              distribution and the Gaussian density function is the limit of uniform
              B-splines. The proximity of these classical densities and distributions to the
              binomial and B-spline distributions suggests that they too have wide ranging
              applications in Scientific Visualization and Geometric Modeling. The purpose of
              this proposal is to apply these and other classical probability distributions
              to model freeform curves and surfaces which represent solutions to problems in
              the natural sciences and engineering that cannot be satisfactorily modeled by
              standard Bezier and B-spline techniques. Applications include devising
              numerically stable approximations to high order polynomial curves and surfaces,
              and investigating classical partial differential equations such as the heat
              equation. New Gaussian 
wavelets for rapid data compression and reconstruction
              of complex shapes will also be developed.

A prototype design/modeling system
              based on curves and surfaces generated from Poisson, Gaussian, and other
              classical densities and distributions will be built to investigate these issues
              as well as to study additional applications in computational science and
              engineering. This research is likely to reinvigorate Geometric Modeling and
              Computational Geometry by introducing novel methods and representations from
              Probability and Statistics, increasing the range of shapes that can be
              represented analytically and the scope of problems that can be solved
              computationally.  The research is also expected to shed new light on some
              classical probability distributions by applying to them techniques borrowed
              from Approximation Theory and CAGD. 

