Title       : Nonlinear Systems and Numerical Methods for HJB Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1999       
File        : a9971546

Award Number: 9971546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. McEneaney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971546
McEneaney

The research is proceeding along two directions within the
              general area of 
control and estimation for nonlinear systems. The first
              direction involves a 
new class of numerical methods for such problems.
              Specifically, note that 
one of the most persistent difficulties with control
              and estimation of 
significantly nonlinear systems has been computational
              cost. Dynamic 
programming methods for H-infinity control and risk sensitive
              stochastic 
control lead to nonlinear PDEs (typically Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
              
equations) which must be solved over some region of the state-space. 
Since
              the number of state variables can be quite high, the dimension of the 
regions
              over which one needs to solve these PDEs increases. This restricts 
the set of
              problems for which one can compute such controls to those with 
very low
              state-space dimension. By changes in the underlying definitions 
of addition
              and multiplication certain classes of nonlinear Hamilton-
Jacobi-Bellman
              equations are transformed into problems with linear semi-
groups. This
              property has led us to new methods that exploit this linearity. 
For instance,
              certain steady-state problems lead to spectral methods for 
linear problems
              (over the new algebras). It is hoped that the possible 
improvements in speed
              with these methods will lead to an ability to solve 
a wider range of
              problems. Some simple examples are already being 
tested. The second direction
              involves risk averse limits in nonlinear 
control systems. It is now well
              known that risk averse limits of risk 
sensitive controllers lead to
              robust/H-infinity controllers. However, the 
classes of systems for which this
              has actually been proven is rather small, 
and does not include most typical
              problems. We have recently obtained 
some uniqueness results that should allow
              one to extend the risk sensitive 
limit results for infinite time-horizon
              problems to a reasonably wide class. 
Analogous work on risk sensitive limits
              in the estimation problem is 
beginning as well.

Many modern systems, from
              active automotive hydro-suspension systems 
to fighter aircraft, behave in a
              significantly nonlinear manner. These 
systems require active control in order
              to perform at increasingly 
competitive levels. There is a serious technical
              challenge in that the design 
of nonlinear controllers requires extremely
              heavy computational loads. In 
fact, the computation of controllers where the
              number of system state 
variables is more than two or three has been
              unattainable in general. The 
difficulty is that these computations require
              the solution of a nonlinear 
partial differential equation over a space whose
              dimension is that of the 
number of state variables. A recent advance is the
              observation that, despite 
the nonlinearity, the propagation of these
              solutions is often still linear IF 
one switches to the max-plus algebra in
              place of the traditional definitions 
of addition and subtraction. In the
              max-plus algebra, traditional addition is 
replaced by maximization, and
              traditional multiplication is replaced by 
addition. One of the goals of this
              project is to exploit this max-plus 
linearity to extend the class of
              nonlinear systems for which we can design 
active controllers.

