Title       : Study of Growth/Etch Front Roughening at Far-From-Equilibrium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9971265

Award Number: 9971265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwo-Ching Wang wangg@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Toh-Ming Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971265
Wang 

The formation of interface roughness during the etching/growth
              of surfaces under far-from-equilibrium conditions cannot be described by
              conventional statistical mechanics. Recent development of the dynamic scaling
              hypothesis coupled with simulations and continuum theory point to an exciting
              and new direction in the area of non-equilibrium physics research. A number of
              experimental systems will be used to explore quantitatively the roughening
              phenomena at far-from-equilibrium and are designed to test the dynamic scaling
              hypothesis. The systems include etching of surfaces (plasma etching, ion
              sputtering, and reactive ion etching) and growth of films (including polymers)
              on surfaces. State-of-the-art techniques will be used to span a wide length
              scale both in the vertical (interface width) and horizontal (lateral
              correlation) directions to measure the interface roughness in real-time. The
              roughness and morphology will be simulated using noise-induced and other growth
              mechanisms including sidewall growth and anisotropy growth. The roughness
              exponent and interface growth exponent measured from experiments and
              simulations will be used to establish the universality class of dynamic scaling
              phenomenon. It is anticipated that a fundamental understanding of the
              growth/etch front roughening phenomena coupled with characterization techniques
              to monitor the surface in real-time will allow the control of interface
              roughness in practical applications.
%%%
Interface roughness is one of the
              central issues in thin film and device processing and it directly controls many
              physical and chemical properties of films and devices. This research
              investigates fundamental aspects of the formation of interface roughness during
              growth/etching of surfaces under far-from-equilibrium conditions. In the
              etching area, semiconductor-processing techniques such as plasma etching, ion
              sputtering, and reactive ion etching will be used. A new effort in the growth
              area will be initiated to study the morphology and evolution of polymer film
              growth by vapor deposition. Students will utilize atomic force microscopy,
              light scattering, x-ray diffraction and electron diffraction to measure and
              quantify the interface roughness. The time dependent roughness data will be
              analyzed using dynamical scaling theories with fractal dimensions. Students
              trained under this research program will have a smooth transition to either an
              academic or an industrial environment.
***

