Title       : Studies in Numerical Solution of Ordinary Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9971164

Award Number: 9971164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zdzislaw Jackiewicz jackiewi@math.la.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Jackiewicz

It is the purpose of this project to study various acceleration
              
techniques for continuous and discrete waveform relaxation
iterations. These
              techniques include exponential, polynomial or
Toeplitz preconditioning and/or
              overlapping components of the 
system. We will also study the construction and
              implementation 
of novel numerical methods for ordinary differential
              equations
which are special cases of general linear methods. Such methods
              
are appropriate for nonstiff or stiff differential systems in a
sequential
              or parallel computing environment. These methods have
also higher potential to
              preserve qualitative properties of the 
solution than classical methods. This
              potential will be exploited
to integrate wave propagation problems with
              absorbing boundary
conditions.

The research supported by this proposal will
              lead to the development
of modern software for the solution of many problems
              in science and
engineering which are governed by large differential systems.
              This
software will be based on novel numerical methods developed in the
past
              few years by the principal investigator and his coworkers and 
will utilize
              modern computer architecture by splitting the underlying
large problem into
              smaller subsystems or subproblems which can then be 
solved in parallel by
              allocating them to different processors. 
Numerical experiments on many
              problems, for example, acoustic wave
propagation, chemical reactions,
              movements of a plate under the load
of a car passing through it, catastrophe
              model for the nerve impulse
mechanism, model that describes the dynamics of a
              system with large
number of particles which can form clusters, and
              reaction-diffusion
systems, indicate that these novel methods are more
              efficient and 
robust and better suited to take advantage of the
              state-of-the-art
computer architecture than the methods which are currently in
              use for
these problems.

