Title       : Non- and Semi-parametric Identification and Prediction of Autoregressive Models,
               with Applications to Econometrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1999    
File        : a9971186

Award Number: 9971186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77508              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lijian Yang yang@stt.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on (1) data-driven estimation, testing, and multi-step
              prediction for non- and semi- parametric autoregressive conditional
              heteroscedastic (ARCH) models, in order to combine the exponentially decaying
              feature of classic ARCH models with nonparametric flexibility; (2) estimation
              and lag selection using plug-in bandwidths for non- and semi- parametric
              seasonal autoregressive models, with improved efficiency for the semiparametric
              models; (3) test of higher order interaction terms and a linearity test that
              leads to simpler models with easier interpretation, and improved estimation
              accuracy; (4) lag selection for multivariate time series and volatility
              functions, which aids in identifying parsimonious models and hidden structures
              among variables; and (5) nonparametric multi-step prediction for additive and
              functional coefficient autoregressive models.

A time series consists of
              numbers observed over time.  Economic indicators such as the daily exchange
              rate of the Euro against the US Dollar and the monthly rate of unemployment in
              the United States are important financial time series. In the study of crimes,
              the number of crimes committed each month over several years are useful for
              finding patterns of crime victimization.  Time series analysis attempts to
              discover from the data how future observations relate to past ones, usually
              through some elementary functions.  Recent research efforts, however, have
              demonstrated the disadvantages of imposing simplistic structures on the series.
               This research develops flexible new methods to understand the dynamic
              structure of a much broader class of time series data for which the
              relationship among observations are nonlinear, infinitely dependent and/or
              seasonal.  For instance, monthly unemployment rate data usually exhibit
              seasonal patterns that are best described by a semiparametric seasonal model. 
              This research enables one to predict future observations based on past
              information much more accurately. Improved forecasting of foreign exchange,
              stock and other volatile prices will provide crucial information about the
              future state of the economy.  New insights into the interaction of various
              economic indicators could lead to a more informed strategy of economic
              development.  The tools developed through this research have the potential for
              analyzing non-economic time series data as well.  For instance, seasonal
              forecasts of future crime rates may help law enforcement agencies to create a
              more effective crime prevention plan.   
