Title       : A Noninformative Bayesian Approach to some Finite Population Problems when
               Auxiliary Variables are Present
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9971331

Award Number: 9971331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen D. Meeden glen@stat.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971331

In finite population sampling in addition to the characteristic of
              interest, there are often auxiliary variables present which contain information
              about the characteristic.  For example, a priori the population means or some
              of the population quantiles for these auxiliary variables could be known. 
              Classical theory has developed a variety of methods to exploit this information
              with different levels of overall effectiveness.  The Polya posterior was
              developed as a noninformative Bayesian approach to finite population sampling
              when little or no prior information is available.  The goal of the proposed
              research is to extend the Polya posterior to problems where auxiliary variables
              are present.  This will be done by restricting the Polya posterior in a natural
              way so that given a sample simulated copies of the entire population can be
              generated which satisfy the constraints induced by the prior knowledge about
              the auxiliary variables.  Statistical inference can then be carried out using
              the simulated populations in the usual Bayesian manner. The two main technical
              problems will be to develop the underlying theory and the techniques for
              implementing the simulations which are consistent with the prior information at
              hand. This allows for a coherent approach to problems which standard theory
              must now consider individually.  Several problems will be identified were
              certain types of prior information which are often presently ignored can be
              used in an objective and effective way.  The resulting noninformative Bayesian
              procedures should have good frequentist properties.

A fundamental problem of
              statistics is making inferences about a population when information is
              available only about a sample or subset of the individuals making up the
              population.  For example, we may want to estimate how many days a typical
              worker is absent because of illness during a year in a given industry.  In
              addition to the information in the sample, we may also know the average age or
              median education level for all the workers in the industry.  Statisticians have
              developed various methods to handle such problems depending on what kind of
              information beyond the sample is at hand.  Some methods work much better than
              others. In this research we will study a general approach which can effectively
              make use of a variety of types of information. This is done by using the data
              in the sample and the prior information to construct simulated or random copies
              of the entire population which are consistent with both the sample data and the
              prior information.  By considering the variability among these randomly
              generated copies of the population one can find not only an estimate of the
              quantity of interest but a measure of uncertainty associated with the estimate.
              



