Title       : Quantum Fluids at Low Temperatures: 2D and Dilute Bose Gas Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a9971124

Award Number: 9971124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Reppy jdr13@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971124
Reppy

This is a condensed matter physics project that is concerned
              with the Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) in the context of films of Helium-4.
              The project is complementary to the recent demonstration of the BEC in the
              atomic gas systems of alkali vapor and spin polarized hydrogen. The study of
              the dilute Bose gas regime for helium adsorbed on the 3D connected substrate of
              porous Vycor glass provides a valuable alternative to the systems of trapped
              atomic gas.  The He-4 in Vycor system allows access to a wide range of particle
              densities, ranging from the dilute Bose gas regime to the high-density,
              strongly-interacting regime, a regime that is currently inaccessible to the
              atomic gas systems. An initial project will be to examine the variation of
              transition temperature with increasing density. Graduate students participating
              in the project benefit from exposure to exciting fundamental physics research
              and experience with state-of-the-art instrumentation. The provides excellent
              training for a wide range of careers. 
%%%
This is a condensed matter physics
              project. The demonstration of Bose Einstein Condensation (BEC) in low density
              atomic gases confined to electromagnetic traps has created great excitement in
              the scientific community. In the work proposed here, an alternative approach to
              BEC will be investigated utilizing 4He atoms adsorbed at low density on the
              surface of a porous substrate, Vycor glass. At very low temperatures the
              quantum wavelength of the atoms becomes comparable to the separation between
              the mobile atoms and the phenomena of BEC occurs. A real advantage to BEC
              studies in the 4He-Vycor system, is that the particle density can be tuned over
              the entire range from the very low density regime to high densities comparable
              to bulk superfluid helium. Graduate students participating in the project
              benefit from exposure to exciting fundamental physics research and experience
              with state-of-the-art instrumentation. The provides excellent training for a
              wide range of careers.
*** 




