Title       : Dynamics, Thermodynamics and Spin Transport in Random Quantum Spin Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a9971541

Award Number: 9971541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kun Yang kunyang@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971541                                                                         
                                                                                             
                     Yang                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               This award is comprised of a number of
              theoretical projects that are aimed at enhancing our understanding of the
              long-distance, low-energy properties of various random quantum magnetic
              systems, especially random spin chains. The motivation for these theoretical
              studies comes from both the extensive experimental activity with these types of
              systems, and the general interest in understanding the physics of quantum
              many-body systems with strong interaction/correlation and strong
              disorder.

In general, strong interaction and disorder in many-body systems
              cannot be treated using standard perturbation theory, especially when the
              dimensionality of the system is low. Random quantum spin chains are typical
              examples of such systems. Powerful nonperturbative theoretical tools have been
              developed recently to study quantum spin chains, taking advantage of their
              one-dimensional nature. These tools include mapping onto effective quantum
              field theories, bosonization, real space renormalization group, etc.

In the
              projects studied here, one uses and extends these tools to uncover important
              new information about the physical properties of these systems, including: the
              spin dynamics and transport properties of various stable phases supported by
              random spin chains; whether there exist new stable phases in random quantum
              spin chains that have not been studied before, when more general couplings
              (other than those studied thus far) among spins are allowed; the effects of
              transverse couplings between the chains on the physical properties; the effects
              of disorder generated by dynamical degrees of freedom in the system, etc.
              Attempts will also be made to develop new theoretical tools to study these
              systems, such as describing spin chains using field theories in terms of some
              novel non-local order parameters.

Progress made on these projects is
              expected not only to deepen our understandings of the physics of various random
              quantum systems, but also to shed light on the properties of strongly
              interacting many-body systems in general. 
%%%
This award is comprised of a
              number of theoretical projects that are aimed at enhancing our understanding of
              the long-distance, low-energy properties of various random quantum magnetic
              systems, especially random spin chains. The motivation for these theoretical
              studies comes from both the extensive experimental activity with these types of
              systems, and the general interest in understanding the physics of quantum
              many-body systems with strong interaction/correlation and strong
              disorder.

Progress made on these projects is expected not only to deepen our
              understandings of the physics of various random quantum systems, but also to
              shed light on the properties of strongly interacting many-body systems in
              general.
***

