Title       : Symplectic Topology and its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9971454

Award Number: 9971454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45182              (Estimated)
Investigator: Weimin Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9971454 

Principal Investigator: Weimin Chen

Abstract:  This
              project will center on three topics in symplectic topology and geometry.  In
              the first part the principal investigator (joint with Y. Ruan) will establish
              the Gromov-Witten invariants for symplectic orbifolds. This work aims at
              computing the Gromov-Witten invariants of a symplectic manifold by decomposing
              it into two pieces. Such an operation will in general introduce orbifold
              singularities, so the establishment of Gromov-Witten invariants for symplectic
              manifolds with orbifold singularities will lay the foundation for a program of
              computing Gromov-Witten invariants, which has great potential applications in
              symplectic topology as well as other related fields such as birational
              geometry.  Other motivations come from mirror symmetry and string theory of
              theoretical physics, in which there is a demand to consider spaces with
              controlled singularities such as orbifold singularities. In the second part of
              this project the principal investigator will continue his work on the
              3-dimensional Reeb dynamical systems by exploiting a potential connection
              between Seiberg-Witten Floer homology and the contact homology. The last part
              concerns symplectic structures on smooth 4-manifolds with vanishing second
              homotopy group. Currently very less is known about them. 

In recent years,
              one has witnessed some great interactions between different branches of
              mathematics in the area of geometry and topology, with the input of ideas from
              theoretical physics. This project seeks to exploit the intimate interplay
              between these different fields to investigate some very interesting or
              fundamental questions in such areas as quantum cohomology, birational geometry,
              the existence of periodic orbits of Reeb dynamics on a 3-dimensional space, and
              symplectic 4-manifolds. The principal investigator believes that a successful
              outcome of this project will make a significant advancement of knowledge in the
              areas listed above, which are important not only within mathematics but also in
              real life problems. For example, the importance of Reeb dynamics is seen in the
              following example. The motion of a satellite in the presence of the
              gravitational forces of the sun, the planets and the moon is described
              mathematically as a Reeb dynamics. The relevant part of this project aims at
              solving the 20-year-old Weinstein conjecture for Reeb dynamical systems on a
              3-dimensinal space, which is one of the most important conjectures in the
              field. 

