Title       : Proposal to Instrument an Endcap Electromagnetic Calorimeter for Spin Physics
               with STAR at RHIC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a9971947

Award Number: 9971947
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2350000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Vigdor vigdor@iucf.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie C. Bland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott W. Wissink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Sowinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971947
Vigdor
	These funds will be used to construct a detector that will
              enable a qualitative advance in understanding of the internal structure
              of
protons.  Protons are known to be composed of smaller particles called
              quarks, antiquarks and gluons, particles that have never been observed in
              isolation.  The contributions of the gluons and the antiquarks to the proton's
              properties are important, but elusive.  For example, it has been inferred that
              the gluons dominate the mass of the proton, and hence the mass of the universe.
               One goal of research with this new detector is to measure the contributions of
              gluons and antiquarks to the proton's overall spin, a fundamental property
              associated with its intrinsic magnetism.  These measurements are critical
              because other experiments performed during the past decade have suggested that
              the quarks and antiquarks combined account for less than a third of the
              known
proton spin.
	The detector proposed is an Endcap Electromagnetic
              Calorimeter (EEMC) to be added to the major STAR (Solenoidal Tracker at RHIC)
              detector system currently being commissioned at the new Relativistic Heavy Ion
              Collider facility.  RHIC and STAR were originally designed to search for new
              phases of strongly interacting matter in collisions of very energetic heavy
              nuclei.  The EEMC would
critically enhance their capabilities as a platform
              for a complementary
class of experiments, utilizing colliding beams of
              spin-polarized
protons at unprecedentedly high energies.  It would do so by
              providing detection of high-energy gamma rays, electrons, positrons and neutral
              pi-mesons in a kinematic regime of optimal sensitivity to unmeasured
              contributions to the proton's intrinsic spin.  The enhanced STAR detector would
              allow the world's best measurement of the integral gluon spin contribution, by
              detecting gamma rays from hard polarized proton collisions in coincidence with
              "jets" of hadrons -- products when a polarized quark in one proton beam strikes
              a polarized gluon in the other.  In addition, the EEMC will facilitate
              important tests of the Standard Model of elementary particle properties,
              including the fundamental theory (quantum chromodynamics) of the interactions
              among quarks, antiquarks and gluons. 

