Title       : Free Boundary Problems in Volatile Multi-fluid Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a9971383

Award Number: 9971383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121062             (Estimated)
Investigator: Burt S. Tilley tilley@m.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for "Free boundary problems in volatile multi-fluid flows" by
B. S.
              Tilley

This proposal centers on the fundamental description of
              nonparallel
axisymmetric countercurrent core-annular flow regimes. The
              mathematical
methods of solution consist of a systematic asymptotic reduction
              of the
continuity, Navier-Stokes, and energy equations in each fluid to
              a
simpler evolution equation that describes the interfacial evolution
when
              the radius of the tube is much smaller than the interfacial
variation along
              the tube's axis.  This equation will contain the
physical effects of viscosity
              and density stratification, axial and
azimuthal components of surface forces,
              shear, inertia, buoyancy,
thermocapillarity, volatility, latent heat and
              thermal transport.  In
the isothermal situation, parallel flow is possible,
              conditions under
which the parallel flow solution can be unstable to a
              large-amplitude
solitary wave will be considered.  This wave is seen in
              experiment.
The remainder of the proposal centers on nonparallel flows, since
              the
spatially varying solutions in the volatile case cannot be parallel,
and
              the isothermal problem experimentally is susceptible to
instabilities from
              inlet and outlet disturbances.  The flow patterns
that are of interest include
              that hanging annular film, in which
gravity is balanced by the presence of an
              adverse shear in the core
fluid, an annular drop, and slug formation. 
              Stability will be
investigated through direct numerical simulation of the
              evolution
equation under conditions similar to those found in
              experiment.

In a variety of engineering applications, the transfer of heat
              is the
limiting factor of the functionality of the entire engineering
              system,
such as electrical generators, electronic equipment cooling
              arrays,
boiler tubes, and liquid-cooled turbine blades.  The systems used
              to
transport heat away from the underlying application use multiple
              fluid
layers to increase the rate of heat transport.  These fluid systems
              are
prone to hydrodynamic instabilities, which can greatly reduce
              the
heat-transport properties, leading to a breakdown in the
              entire
application.  A theoretical and experimental understanding of
              these
instabilities is critical to enhancements in design.  The
              proposed
research considers a mathematical model of a common fluid
              arrangement
in these heat-transfer systems as a paradigm for a better
              understanding
of the dominant instability mechanism.  Once this mechanism is
              well
understood, it will be possible to enhance the performance of
              the
underlying application.  Further applications are seen in the
              medical
field, with the understanding of instabilities of the mucus covering
              of
the airways in the lungs.  Understanding under what physical
              conditions
these instabilities occur can eventually lead to better
              medical
treatments of some respiratory ailments.


