Title       : High Field Ultrasound Studies of Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a9971123

Award Number: 9971123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bimal K. Sarma bksarma@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Ketterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971123
Sarma

The project uses high frequency sound (ultrasonic) waves to
              probe the electronic properties of highly correlated electron systems in the
              presence of the high magnetic fields supplied by the two sites of the NSF
              National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL), which are located in
              Tallahassee, Florida and Los Alamos, New Mexico. The selected metals belong to
              two scientifically important families: 1) the high transition temperature (high
              Tc) superconductors and 2) the heavy fermion intermetallic compounds.  The
              heavy fermion metals selected  (UPt3, UPd2Al3, UBe13, and URu2Si2) are thought
              to have an unconventional superconducting ground state.  Ultrasonic waves, as a
              probe, complement other thermodynamic probes such as the specific heat,
              magnetization, and field-dependent dimensional changes (dilatometry), etc. Via
              their frequency dependence, ultrasonic studies also yield dynamical information
              (e.g., that associated with internal "vibrations" of the superconducting order
              parameter or relaxational behavior near a phase transition or on approaching
              and entering a highly correlated ground state as the temperature is lowered). 
              Of special interest will be the compound Sr2RuO4, which has recently attracted
              attention as a time reversal breaking superconductor (and hence belonging to a
              specific class of unconventional superconductors). The proposed work involves
              studies of and searches for special magnetic behavior in other
              highly-correlated electron systems, with ultimately up to the highest (non
              destructive) fields available at the Los Alamos site.  This project offers
              students and postdoctoral research associates an excellent opportunity for
              training in cryogenics, ultrasonics and with magnetic fields. 
%%%
This
              research deals with fundamental aspects of strongly correlated electron systems
              that may show unconventional superconductivity as one of the ground states. 
              These systems will be probed with high magnetic fields and ultrasonic waves,
              and the study will lead to a better theoretical understanding of these systems.
               This research will provide students with a broad training in areas of
              cryogenics, ultrasonics and magnetic fields.
***


