Title       : Mathematical Issues in the Modeling and Simulation of Self-Consistent Charge
               Particle Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2000    
File        : a9971779

Award Number: 9971779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene M. Gamba gamba@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research concerns mathematical problems in the theory 
of  self-consistent
              charged-particle transport  systems at different scales.
Of particular
              interest is to address the mathematical issues in kinetic
transport under
              strong forcing (a high built-in electric field due to  
inhomogeneities of the
              flow region), and the hierarchy of anisotropic 
hydrodynamic models derived
              under these conditions. These models arise 
naturally when non-equilibrium
              current flow in heterogeneous structures 
such as semiconductor devices is
              studied. Similar models are used to describe 
biological transport in ionic
              channels, due to significant electrical activity through 
cellular membranes. 
              One of the new aspects of the planned research is the 
mathematical and
              computational understanding of transition layers  
that involve the linking of
              scales through kinetic and macroscopic levels for 
transport models, both
              under low and high electric field effects. In both 
cases, analytical studies
              are to be complemented by numerical simulation
of solutions of the
              corresponding model equations.
  
This research addresses mathematical models
              that are used to describe
electron and ion transport in semiconductors and in
              biological membranes.
One of the main challenges comes from the fact that in
              these phenomena, processes 
that occur at very different length and time scale
              are coupled and influence 
each other.  The mathematical work will lead to
              faster computational methods 
for the simulation of such phenomena which are
              at the same time more accurate. 
Technological areas which are as different as
              microelectronics and pharmacology 
will ultimately benefit from this work.


