Title       : Elliptic and Parabolic Equations for Partially Ordered Materials in Applied
               Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a9971974

Award Number: 9971974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia E. Bauman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical models for superconducting and liquid crystal materials
in the
              presence of applied fields will be analyzed. First, the
behavior of solutions
              to the Ginzburg-Landau system of steady-state
and time-dependent nonlinear
              equations with realistic boundary
conditions in the presence of an applied
              magnetic field will be
investigated.  Second, the behavior of solutions to the
              system
describing liquid crystals in applied fields is to be analyzed.
The
              mathematical models for these problems are systems of partial
differential
              equations. Methods to be employed in this project 
include maximum principles,
              bifurcation theory, regularity, 
energy estimates, and large-time analysis of
              partial differential 
equations, as well as numerical methods. 

Modern
              technological devices such as superconducting films and
liquid crystal
              displays typically are operated in the presence of electric or
magnetic
              fields. It is therefore necessary to understand how these fields affect
their
              performance.  In the case of superconductors, external magnetic
fields are
              present.  This can result in nonsuperconducting sites
in the material (called
              vortices) which move and therefore degrade 
the device performance.  Engineers
              have tried to control these losses
by introducing inhomogeneities in the
              material that curtail the
motion of vortices, but it is not well understood
              how all of these
effects interact and how best to use inhomogeneities to
              achieve
stability.  In the case of liquid crystals, magnetic and
              electric
fields are used to change optic orientations.  This is essential to
              the 
operation of display devices and visual screens.  The materials in this
              case
are mixtures of liquid crystals and polymers, resulting in more
              complicated 
phenomena than in the case of superconductivity.  Still, the
              mathematical
issues are closely related.  The award will support research on
              mathematical 
models that will give basic insights into both types of problems
              and help to 
devise effective numerical simulations. 



