Title       : Raman Spectroscopy of Molecules Adsorbed on Solid Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2001     
File        : a9971002

Award Number: 9971002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Campion campion@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the mechanism of Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) is the
              focus of this research project.  With the support of the Analytical and Surface
              Chemistry Program, Professor Alan Campion and his coworkers at the University
              of Texas are carrying out studies which probe the detailed mechanism of the
              SERS effect.  Based on an observation that suggests a connection between charge
              transfer excitations in adsorbate species and a resonance enhancement mechanism
              for the Raman spectrum, Campion is exploring this chemical enhancement effect. 
              A series of molecular adsorbates probing various aspects of this charge
              transfer mechanism are being examined.  In addition, surfaces with controlled,
              characterizable atomic scale roughness are being examined, in order to probe
              the physical aspects of the enhancement mechanism.  A detailed understanding of
              the SERS process is likely to increase the widespread use of this method for
              the quantitative molecular analysis of adsorbed layers on surfaces.

In order
              for Raman spectroscopy to be a useful analytical probe of surface structure, a
              more detailed understanding of the mechanisms of surface enhancement must be
              obtained.  This research project focuses on the development of this
              understanding, by probing the effects of charge transfer excitation in adsorbed
              species on the surface enhancement process.  Coupled with a systematic study of
              other factors contributing to the surface enhancement effect, the understanding
              gained should enable a broader use of this important structural probe. 


