Title       : Statistics and Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9971738

Award Number: 9971738
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Per Mykland mykland@galton.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971738

It is proposed to continue the research initiated by the P.I. on how
              to use confidence and prediction sets for stochastic differential equations to
              set hedging strategies for derivative securities.  The study will investigate
              both the statistical methods used to set such sets, and how to trade for a
              given set.  The plan is to compare sets based purely on nonparametric
              prediction with those based on confidence statements, and also to look at
              hybrid methods, involving neighborhoods of parametric models.  The latter will
              also provide guidance on how to conduct model selection in such circumstances. 
              Several inference methods will be investigated, ranging from excursion based
              methods to profile likelihood.  In terms of the interface between sets and
              trading algorithms, it is proposed to extend the present theory to non-European
              options.  It is also the plan to investigate the multiple comparison issues
              that arise if one wishes to revise prediction intervals in the course of a
              trading strategy.  Finally, it is the intention to look into alternative models
              to stochastic differential equations, models that can be used for hedging and
              that are closer to the data than continuous processes.  Derivative securities
              -- options, futures, and similar instruments -- have emerged as a major feature
              of the contemporary economic environment.  They are a versatile and efficient
              mechanism for trading risk, thus lowering its cost.  There is, however, a dark
              side to derivatives, in that it can be hard to assess the real risks involved. 
              This is not only the case for `naive' market participants, as evidenced by a
              number of incidents involving major financial institutions.  These difficulties
              are, to an important extent, caused by the absence of a connection between
              statistical methods and the evaluation of financial risk.  There is a
              substantial literature on the statistical analysis of financial data.  Apart
              from short-term considerations, however, there is little knowledge on how to
              use statistical results based on historical data to quantify the risks
              associated with derivatives.  The aim of this project is to change this
              situation by providing ways of tying up statistical results and the trading
              strategies on which the values of derivative securities depend.  This will
              provide ways of setting contingency reserves and fallback liquidation
              strategies without interfering in the day-to-day operation of the financial
              institutions trading in options.

