Title       : GOALI: Multilayered Oxide Fiber Coating Concept for Environmentally Durable
               SiC/SiC Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a9971623

Award Number: 9971623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278924             (Estimated)
Investigator: Woo Young Lee wlee@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hongyu Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew R. Libera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI project, a collaboration between Stevens Institute of Technology and
              General Electric Corporate Research and Development, will explore a novel fiber
              coating concept which may enable the reliable use of SiC/SiC ceramic matrix
              composites in high-temperature environments encountered in aircraft engines,
              space propulsion systems, utility gas turbines, and industrial heat exchangers.
               Unlike traditionally brittle ceramic materials, SiC/SiC composites are made to
              be tough and damage-tolerant by incorporating a BN fiber coating which serves
              as a weak interface to deflect cracks at the fiber/matrix interface region. 
              The Principal Investigator and his collaborators have recently made intriguing
              observations that an oxide fiber coating can provide the desired weak interface
              behavior for SiC/SiC composites without apparent degradation of fiber strength.
               Such characteristics have never been reported previously for an oxide-based
              fiber coating.  The basis of this new discovery was a rather unconventional
              concept of using two dissimilar, but thermochemically compatible oxide
              materials to form a multilayered oxide coating.  For example, initial results
              with a fiber coating containing SiO2/ZrO2/SiO2 layers prepared by chemical
              vapor deposition (CVD) showed definitive evidence for "graceful" tensile
              behavior and extensive crack-deflection within the multilayered interface
              region, presumably due to the significant mismatch in the coefficient of
              thermal expansion (CTE) of the SiO2 and ZrO2 layers.  Furthermore, as expected
              of the oxide-based fiber coating, much of the composite characteristics was
              retained after stress oxidation.  From a technological perspective, this new
              coating concept may offer an unique solution to the stress oxidation problem,
              particularly if the generality of the concept can be tested prior to practical
              development.  This GOALI project will: (1) prove that the apparent weak
              interface behavior is caused by the CTE mismatch, (2) evaluate how this type of
              proactive interface control can be sustained up to 1200 degrees C by selecting
              appropriate oxide constituents, and (3) determine the effect of the CVD SiO2
              layer on fiber strength. 

In the spirit of the GOALI program, unique
              research skills and facilities at Stevens and GECRD are integrated.  Coating
              process optimization and interface characterization studies will be conducted
              by Profs. Lee and Libera, respectively, at Stevens.  An atmosphere-controlled
              tensile tester at GECRD will be available to Stevens' graduate students under
              the direction of Dr. Wang, the industrial scientist. More importantly, GECRD's
              industrial expertise in manufacturing SiC/SiC components will be used to
              project the viability of this high-risk, high-gain coating concept for solving
              the stress oxidation problem for the U.S. industry.  This project is co-funded
              by the Ceramics Program of the Division of Materials Research, the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate, both at NSF, and the Ceramics Research Group at the Air Force
              Research Laboratory at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.
***

