Title       : The Structure of Smooth 4-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a9971667

Award Number: 9971667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald J. Stern rstern@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9971667

Principal Investigator:  Ronald J.
              Stern

Abstract:
The recent constructions of smooth 4 dimensional manifolds
              by the PI and R. Fintushel have shown out that there are many more smooth
              4-manifolds than previously expected. These examples also indicate that the
              current technologies, i.e. the Donaldson and Seiberg-Witten invariants, are
              insufficient to provide a classification of smooth 4-manifolds. The goal of
              this research is to develop new constructions of smooth 4 manifolds in the hope
              that a general picture begins to emerge.  To begin, there is a conjectured
              classification (up to blow-up) of (simply-connected) symplectic 4-manifolds;
              namely they are the fiber sums of holomorphic Lefschetz pencils along
              holomorphic submanifolds. Surprisingly, most of the new constructions of
              symplectic 4-manifolds can be shown to be obtained in this manner. The veracity
              of this conjecture will be the focus of the first part of this proposed
              research. A very effective method, introduced by the PI and R. Fintushel, which
              retains the homeomorphism type of a smooth 4-manifold X which contains a
              homologically essential torus with trivial normal bundle but alters its
              diffeomorphism type is the "knot surgery construction". Here, given a knot K in
              the 3-sphere, there results a 4-manifold X(K) homeomorphic to X with the
              following properties: 1) X(unknot)=X, and  2) if X(K) is diffeomorphic to X(J),
              then the Alexander polynomials of J and K are the same. The second part of this
              proposal is to better understand the role that the isotopy classes of knots
              play in this knot construction.   

With time included, our world is four
              dimensional, but the large-scale structure of our four-dimensional space is
              still unknown. The underlying mathematical issue is to provide a complete list
              of four-dimensional manifolds; i.e. objects which are locally modeled on
              Euclidean 4-space. This turns out to be an important unsolved problem in
              mathematics. Strangely enough, manifolds of dimension larger than 4 are very
              well understood; yet it is the dimension in which we live and operate that
              provides major mathematical challenges. Using difficult techniques from
              analysis, geometry, and topology, the PI and R. Fintushel have developed
              surgery techniques and workable topological strategies for counting solutions
              to differential equations (the Yang-Mills and Seiberg Witten equations) which
              effectively distinguish four-dimensional manifolds. Prior NSF supported
              research allowed for the construction of an unexpectedly large number of
              four-manifolds which provided counterexamples to all the conjecture
              classification schemes. This project will more closely examine these techniques
              and create new constructions in the hope that a general picture begins to
              emerge.  

