Title       : RUI: Synthesis in Applications of Optimal Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9971747

Award Number: 9971747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111854             (Estimated)
Investigator: Urszula Ledzewicz uledzew@siue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Edwardsvill
	      Campus Box 20
	      Edwardsville, IL  620250020    618/692-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9971747
Ledzewicz

The project consists of two parts which both address the
              question of a 
regular synthesis for optimal control problems arising in
              applications. In 
the first part sufficient conditions for optimality of
              abnormal extremals 
will be investigated in the context of field theory. A
              generalization of the 
perturbation feedback control law that allows
              incorporating abnormal 
trajectories into the classical framework will be used
              to construct a local 
regular synthesis around an abnormal reference extremal.
              These 
constructions should shed some light on the connections between optimal
              
abnormal extremals and singularities (including discontinuities) in the
              
value function for the problem. It is expected that this part of the project
              
will contribute to both theory and application of perturbation feedback
              
control, regular synthesis, and sufficient conditions of optimality by
              
providing generalizations that complement the classical results and 
become
              important new tools in applications. The second part addresses 
precise and
              complete solutions to a class of nonlinear optimal control 
problems in low
              dimensions arising in mathematical models for cancer 
chemotherapy. In the
              models the cell cycle is controlled by clustering its 
different phases into
              compartments and using phase specific killing agents. 
In this project a full
              analysis of two- and three-compartment models will 
be pursued. So far these
              models were only analyzed numerically, but no 
qualitative or analytic results
              about the structure of optimal controls have 
been obtained. It is expected
              that these results, interesting also from a 
theoretical point of view, will
              find applications in mathematical models 
for scheduling cancer chemotherapy
              protocols.

The project consists of two parts which both address the question
              of 
finding full solutions to optimal control problems arising in
              applications. 
The first construction is motivated by the perturbation
              feedback control 
scheme, a classical tool in engineering, especially in
              aircraft control 
design. The proposed construction aims to incorporate
              so-called abnormal 
trajectories for which the conventional scheme is
              ineffective. It is expected 
that this part of the project will contribute to
              both theory and application 
by providing generalizations that complement the
              classical results and 
become important new tools in applications. In the
              second part of the 
project models of optimal control of cancer chemotherapy
              will be 
investigated. The goal is to maximize the number of cancer cells that
              a 
cytostatic agent in the drug kills while keeping the toxicity to the normal
              
tissue acceptable. Some of the models that were only analyzed 
numerically
              before will be investigated in this project with the aim of 
obtaining a full
              analytic solution.  It is expected that these results, 
interesting also from
              a theoretical point of view, will find applications in 
mathematical models
              for scheduling cancer chemotherapy protocols.

