Title       : Viscosity and Relaxation Approximations of Hyperbolic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9971934

Award Number: 9971934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Athanasios E. Tzavaras tzavaras@math.wisc.edu@  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is concerned with several aspects of the theory of 
weak
              solutions for hyperbolic systems, with the objective to develop
techniques for
              understanding the emergence of shock waves from 
smooth approximate solutions
              in the small viscosity and small 
relaxation-time limits.  Such questions are
              intimately tied to the 
mechanical issue of the passage from one
              thermomechanical theory 
to another, and appear in models of continuum
              physics, kinetic theory,  
and in the interface of the two. The goal is on the
              one hand to exploit 
ideas from the kinetic theory of gases in developing
              theory for hyperbolic 
systems, on the other hand in applying recent advances
              from the theory 
of hyperbolic equations in studying the passage from
              microscopic theories 
(of interacting particles) to mesoscopic theories (at
              the kinetic level) 
to macroscopic (continuum) theories. 

Shock waves are
              coherent structures that appear in situations involving 
high speed supersonic
              flows. Their mathematical modeling involves 
nonlinear hyperbolic partial
              differential equations. Understanding the 
theory of these equations is very
              important in the design and implementation 
of numerical algorithms for
              computing.  The emphasis of this proposal is 
in situations involving shock
              waves in transitions from rarefied to dense 
gases.  A  typical application is
              air flow in high altitude supersonic flight,
for example during reentry of a
              space shuttle into the atmosphere.


