Title       : Three Topics in Statistics with Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1999      
File        : a9971791

Award Number: 9971791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108175             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhiliang Ying   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971791 

This project contains three topics: (1) survival analysis with
              multiple event-time data, (2) growth curve analysis and, (3) computerized
              adaptive testing.  Topic (1) develops new parametric families for multiple
              event times that satisfy marginal proportional hazards requirement and proposes
              semiparametrically efficient estimator for regression parameter in the marginal
              Cox model. It establishes nonparametric estimation and testing procedures and
              their large sample properties for gap-time data, which cannot be handled
              directly by existing methods due to (informative) right censorship.  It also
              introduces a class of semiparametric transformation models for recurrent event
              times and develops inference procedures that are easy to implement and valid
              under general assumptions.  Topic (2) deals with random growth curves and
              develops nonparametric testing and semiparametric estimation procedures.  A
              crucial issue being handled there is how to correct bias cause by
              incompleteness of the growth curves.  Topic (3) develops statistical methods in
              design and analysis of computerized adaptive tests.  It proposes novel
              approaches to item selection through suitable stratification to improve
              efficiency, item exposure rate distribution and test security.

The three
              topics are motivated directly from scientific and educational applications. 
              The first two topics are applicable to many biomedical studies including
              modeling of disease development, testing superiority of a new treatment and
              estimation of treatment efficacy.  The third topic originates from the recent
              emergence of computerizing standardized tests, which include such widely
              available tests as GRE and GMAT.  The new statistical methods provide more
              accurate and efficient tools for measuring educational achievements.

