Title       : Mineralogical Characterization of Archaeological Materials using a Portable
               Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9971179

Award Number: 9971179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59509              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah U. Wisseman wisarc@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Duane M. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall E. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Emerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Sarah Wisseman and her
              collaborators will test the feasibility of applying near-infra red spectrometry
              to archaeological analysis. She will purchase a PIMA  reflectance spectrometer
              to determine artifact minerological composition. Because many sources for clay
              or other materials used by prehistoric peoples are minerologically distinct, it
              is often possible through chemical analysis to match finished artifacts
              recovered in archaeological sites to their raw material source and thus
              reconstruct prehistoric trade routes and interaction patterns. PIMA has the
              potential to solve many of the problems that have led to a decline in the use
              of mineralogical analyses by archaeologists. The instrument is completely
              nondestructive and portable, and its light weight and "pistol grip" mean that
              it can be used in virtually all field settings. The relatively low cost of the
              instrument and its rapid, one per minute analysis time mean that large samples
              sets can be acquired at field sites, in museums and for geologic screening of
              possible source localities. 

Because it has not been widely used in
              archaeological contexts Dr. Wisseman has designed a project both to address a
              significant anthropological question and to test the feasibility of this
              approach. She will focus on stone figurines and effigy pipes from sites
              occupied in the US Midwest over the last 2,000 years. Associated with Middle
              Woodland and Mississippian cultures, these artifacts have been interpreted by
              archaeologists to indicate the existence of a long distance trade network which
              extended from the northern Midwest to the Gulf coast. Because most were used in
              ritual contexts a form of hierarchical social organization associated with
              religious/ritual control has been hypothesized. Source information which Dr.
              Wisseman will collect can serve to address this issue directly. Preliminary
              data suggest that much of the material is of relatively local rather than
              distant origin.

This research is important for several reasons. It will
              assess the utility of new instrumentation which has high archaeological
              potential. It will also shed new light on the development of complex societies
              in the prehistoric United States.

