Title       : Statistical Mechanics of Sequence Matching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a9971456

Award Number: 9971456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence T.-L. Hwa thwa@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9971456
Hwa
This is a new grant funded jointly by the Divisions of Materials
              Research and Molecular and Cellular Biology with the Directorate of
              Mathematical and Physical Science's Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. 
              This theoretical project will apply the methods of statistical mechanics and
              nonequilibrium dynamics to elucidate the statistics and phase diagram of DNA
              and protein sequence matching problems.  In a series of recent studies it has
              been found that the widely used sequence alignment algorithms, e.g., the
              Smith-Waterman algorithm, are analogous to some familiar problems in
              statistical physics, namely, the pinning of a directed path in random and
              correlated media, and the nonequilibrium roughening of growing surfaces in a
              noisy environment.  This analogy suggests an approach to sequence alignment
              that is very different from the current one taken in computational biology. 
              New analytical methods will be developed to calculate the approximate form of
              the phase diagram and the magnitude of various charcteristic scales for the
              alignment of random and mutually correlated sequences.  The shift in phase
              diagram due to sequence correlations will be used to pinpoint the optimal
              parameter regime for detecting homologous sequences.  Also, an empirical method
              will be used to extract the rare-event statistics quickly from the alignment of
              individual sequence pairs (rather than collecting statistics from an ensemble,
              say, via the random shuffling of sequences).  This method should lead to
              efficient determination of the statistical significance of each alignment.
              Subsequent optimization of this significance value by varying score parameters
              should then yield the desired high-fidelity alignment sensitive to weak
              sequence homologies.  Extension of existing algorithms to take into account
              long-range intra-sequence correlations, long segments of insertion/deletions,
              and multiple regions of near-optimal matchings will also be studied.  Lastly,
              the conceptual approach and mathematical methods being developed for sequence
              alignment can also be applied to understand the physical association of long
              DNA molecules.  The latter suggests a number of novel problems of statistical
              mechanics which are interesting to study in their own right.  This subject
              provides an excellent training ground for a new generation of interdisciplinary
              physicists, who will learn and apply the sophisticated methods of modern
              statistical mechanics, and at the same time, appreciate and discover
              interesting current problems in molecular biology.
 
This is a new grant
              funded jointly by the Divisions of Materials Research and Molecular and
              Cellular Biology with the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Science's
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.  This theoretical project will apply
              the methods of statistical mechanics and nonequilibrium dynamics to elucidate
              the statistics and phase diagram of DNA and protein sequence matching problems.
              The grant provides an excellent training ground for a new generation of
              interdisciplinary physicists, who will learn and apply the sophisticated
              methods of modern statistical mechanics, and at the same time, appreciate and
              discover interesting current problems in molecular biology.


