Title       : Creation and Stability of Vortices in a Dilute Trapped Bose Gas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2001   
File        : a9971518

Award Number: 9971518
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander L. Fetter fetter@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971518
Fetter
This grant will support theoretical research which investigates
              the connections between concepts developed for superfluid helium and stationary
              and rotating Bose-Einstein condensates formed from cold alkali atoms.  One of
              the major current issues in this field is the creation, stability, and
              detection of quantized vortices in a simply connected condensate and quantized
              circulation in a multiply connected condensate.  This research will use the
              known general theoretical description of a dilute Bose gas at low tempertaure
              to study the critical angular velocity for the creation of a vortex in rotating
              nonaxisymmetric condensates, where the rotating trap walls impart angular
              momentum to the atom, both in the nearly ideal limit of a small condensate and
              in the opposite limit of a large condensate.  This introduces seveal new
              conceptual features.  The analysis will be extended to include the creation of
              quantized circulation in a similar doubly connected nonaxisymmetric
              condensate.

For a nonrotating axisymmetric condensate containing a singly
              quantized vortex, one single normal mode has a negative frequency, which
              indicates a potential instability.  An external rotation raises this frequency
              and eventually makes it positive (thus stabilizing the vortex).  This situation
              has been analyzed in detail for a vortex in a small nearly ideal condensate,
              where the negative-frequency normal mode involves a motion of the vortex core
              relative to the center of mass of the condensate.   The opposite limit of a
              vortex in a large axisymmetric condensate has been studied with several
              different methods.  The proposed generalization to a rotating nonaxisymmetric
              condensate is especially important in connection with possible experimental
              schemes for vortex creation, both in the small-condensate and large-condensate
              limits.

For this superfluid helium films, the vortex lines become simply
              two-dimensional pancake vortices.  This behavior makes it interesting to
              investigate the behavior of pancake vortices in a nearly two-dimensional
              condensate with extreme axial symmetry.  In addition, there is the intriguing
              question whether such trapped systems can ever attain the strict
              two-dimensional limit.
%%%
This grant will support theoretical research which
              investigates the connections between concepts developed for superfluid helium
              (a fluid which flows without resistance) and stationary and rotating
              Bose-Einstein condensates formed from cold alkali atoms.  Bose-Einstein
              condensates were predicted many years ago, but only recently have been observed
              in the laboratory.  One of the major current issues in this field is the
              creation, stability, and detection of quantized vortices in a simply connected
              condensate and quantized circulation in a multiply connected condensate.  This
              research will study various configurations of  these condensates.
***

