Title       : Interpretation of Computer Simulations and Experimental Data from Chaotic
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9971798

Award Number: 9971798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59091              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Sauer tsauer@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sauer
9971798

The investigator studies computational aspects of nonlinear
              dynamical systems, with emphasis on questions that have multidisciplinary
              implications in the sciences and engineering.  The first main area involves the
              validity of long-term computer simulations of typical nonhyperbolic chaotic
              systems.  The question is whether long simulation trajectories can be assumed
              to approximately match true system behavior.  This is a far-reaching question
              that goes to the heart of numerical computation.  Numerical analysis is
              typically concerned with algorithm properties that are local in time, but the
              possibility of chaotic trajectories in nonlinear systems is causing this view
              to shift markedly.  The project involves the development of quantitative laws
              for the expected time between breakdowns, or mismatches, between computer
              simulation trajectories and the correct trajectories of computer models, and
              investigation of statistical quantities that may be severely miscalculated
              because of the mismatch.  The second major area is ongoing work by the
              investigator on the interpretation of laboratory experiments that generate
              aperiodic data streams.  Using univariate or multivariate time series or
              inter-event time intervals produced by a deterministic physical process, the
              phase space of the process can be faithfully reconstructed as the basis for
              applications such as system identification, filtering, prediction and control. 
              The mathematical foundations of these applications has been the topic of
              ongoing research by the investigator and coworkers.  The project attempts to
              widen the areas of validity of these methods, and increase their power for the
              study of complex systems, especially in the presence of observational
              noise.

Computer simulations are an essential part of modern science.  The
              importance of the correct interpretation of long-term computer simulations of
              nonlinear  models is increasing as modeling replaces experiments and expensive
              traditional methods of design in areas as diverse as biotechnology, rational
              drug design, meteorology, satellite orbit trajectory design, wind tunnel
              testing, and neurophysiology.  The questions explored in this project are
              critical to the fundamental understanding of the results of complex simulations
              of nonlinear processes.  One goal of this project is to explore these questions
              in physically relevant models, and in particular to isolate and quantify the
              limitations of these representations, especially for the purpose of long-term
              modeling.  The second focus of this research is the interpretation of data
              collected from chaotic systems in laboratory experiments and nature.  Complex
              deterministic time series are being explored as key information in physical,
              chemical, engineering and biological/medical settings.  As an example, neuron
              firing data from hippocampal cells of mammals and other small neural systems
              are studied by the investigator in conjunction with a group of medical
              researchers who have recently relocated at George Mason University, with the
              purpose of detecting deterministic information processing in the brain.  The
              investigator has done previous work on expanding these conceptual foundations
              and developing related computational implementations, and plans to widen their
              areas of validity and increase their power for the study of complex systems in
              natural, experimental, and engineering-related contexts.  New techniques for
              these applications are developed in this project, involving new computation
              techniques used in conjunction with existing signal processing methods.

