Title       : The Algebra of Spectra, Group Actions, and Classifying Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9971953

Award Number: 9971953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarence W. Wilkerson   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. McClure  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey H. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brooke E. Shipley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971953
Wilkerson
     Wilkerson will continue his work with Dwyer on the
              extended Steenrod
problem of understanding spaces with properties at a prime
              similar to
those of the classifying spaces of connected compact Lie groups. 
              He will
also work with Jeff Smith on homotopy automorphism groups of
              finite
nilpotent complexes and actions of finite groups on such complexes. 
              In
addition, he will work with Jim Turner and Avramov on analogues of
              the
Serre theorem that establishes that non-trivial simply connected
              finite
complexes have nontrivial homotopy in an infinite number of
              dimensions.
McClure will work with Jeff Smith on higher centers of associative
              ring
spectra.  He will also investigate a large class of spectral
              sequences
that should admit chain-complex models that facilitate calculation. 
              A
step in this project that should be interesting in its own right is to
show
              that certain homotopy categories of module spectra can be modeled by
chain
              complexes.  Shipley will develop a new model for equivariant stable
homotopy
              theory; this will provide algebraic models for rational
equivariant stable
              homotopy theory over compact Lie groups.  She will
also study (with Dwyer) a
              cobar spectral sequence and its convergence
properties.  With Rezk and Schwede
              she will study a way to replace
arbitrary model categories by simplicial model
              categories.  Smith will
continue his work on using the theory of model
              categories as a tool
for the study of ring spectra and of commutative ring
              spectra.  In
particular, he will study the homotopy theory of ring spectra
              over a
fixed ring R, the homotopy theory of coalgebras of R-bimodules, and
              the
bar construction.  He will improve his theory of combinatorial
              model
categories to make it a more effective tool.  In joint work with Adem
              he
will study the homotopy theory of group actions on homotopy products
              of
spheres.
     As can be seen from this summary, this project will involve
              research
in many different directions within homotopy theory.  Several of
              the
problems to be investigated have been important for a long time
              (for
example, the Steenrod problem and the joint work of Smith and Adem
              go
back to the 1960's), while others involve very recent
              developments
(especially the theory of strictly associative and commutative
              ring
spectra; Smith and Shipley were pioneers in this area, and
              McClure's
work makes heavy use of it).  The joint work of McClure and Smith
              has
applications to mathematical physics, since it is closely related
              to
recent work of Kontsevich and Tamarkin on deformation
              quantization.
***



