Title       : Periodicity Phenomena at the Chromatic Edge, the Chromatic Splitting Conjecture,
               and the Chromatic Segal Conjecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9971850

Award Number: 9971850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Sadofsky sadofsky@math.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971850
Sadofsky
    The ``chromatic splitting conjecture'' of Mike Hopkins
              concerns a
decomposition of the localization with respect to the
              (n-1)st
Johnson-Wilson theory of the localization with respect to the
              nth
Morava K-theory (of a finite CW-complex).  This is a useful step
              in
trying to understand stable homotopy theory, since the decomposition
              is
expressed in terms of simpler localizations.  In particular,
              the
conjecture would generalize the very beautiful relationships
              known
between the 0th, 1st, and 2nd chromatic levels.  Similarly,
              the
``chromatic Segal conjecture'' (due in various forms to combinations
              of
Mike Hopkins, Mark Mahowald, and Doug Ravenel) deals with a
decomposition
              of the Tate cohomology of the localization of a finite
CW-complex with respect
              to the nth Morava K-theory.  Again, this
conjecture intertwines different
              chromatic levels in a beautiful way;
together they give some techniques for
              inductively determining
information about higher chromatic levels from lower
              ones (like
rational homotopy theory and K-theory).  These conjectures both
              also
give data about how the cohomology of the different Morava
              stabilizer
groups are related.  The tool used to attack these conjectures is
              a
spectral sequence based on ideas from work of Goerss that computes
              the
BP-homology of various spectra involved in this calculation in terms
of
              the derived functors of inverse limits of comodules over the Hopf
algebroid of
              BP-operations.  Surprisingly, at least in the first
interesting cases, the
              higher inverse limits seem to be tractable.
     This research is concerned
              with understanding ``homotopy classes of
functions.''  A simple example of the
              sort of problem studied is given
by considering knot theory.  Take a ``knot''
              in space to be a loop of
string embedded in space in some way.  One is not
              really interested in
*all* ways of embedding that loop of string; if one can
              get from one
way of embedding the loop to another just by moving the string
              a
little bit, one considers those two embeddings to be equivalent.
Similarly,
              if one looks at all ways of putting a loop of string in the
plane with the
              origin removed, one considers two ways the same if the
loop of string is wound
              around the origin the same number of times.
As the second example makes clear,
              it is critical to understand
``holes'' in the space to which one is mapping,
              and how the space from
which one is mapping interacts with those holes.  There
              are different
sorts of holes, though; a circle has a hole one can pass
              something through,
while a (hollow) sphere has a different sort of hole.  The
              ``holes''
associated to a map (or to a space) can be sorted into
              different
flavors (usually referred to as different chromatic
              components).
These components do not appear to be independent for spaces and
              maps
arising from geometric considerations, and the goal is to
              understand
these dependencies.  Solutions to this sort of problem are
              potentially
related to questions from geometry, but at the same time,
              surprisingly,
to objects arising in number theory, something that gives this
              work far
greater importance than would either aspect alone.
***

