Title       : Exact and Asymptotic Solutions to Applied Stochastic Models Arising in Queueing
               Theory and Other Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a9971656

Award Number: 9971656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Tier tier@math.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Knessl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of our research is to develop and apply new mathematical
methods
              for constructing solutions to difference, differential-difference,
integral,
              and integro- differential equations.  These asymptotic and
singular
              perturbation techniques are based on the WKB method, boundary
layer analysis
              and matched asymptotic expansions.  New nontrivial
extensions of these methods
              have previously been developed to solve
problems in a wide variety of
              applications, which led to remarkably
accurate results.  We plan to continue
              the development of these methods,
and to apply them in particular to models
              arising in the performance
evaluation of queueing systems.  Several aspects of
              the project are
directly related to problems arising in the analysis of
              high-speed
communication systems.  We also propose to study problems in
              mathematical
physics, related to diffusion-convection, bifurcation, and
              tunneling
through potential barriers.

An important aspect of our research
              program is the study of queues or
lines.  In its simplest form, a queueing
              system consists of a server and a
queue or waiting room.  Customers arrive,
              possibly at random times, and
request service of random length from the
              server.  If the system is empty,
an arriving customer is sent directly to the
              server.  Otherwise, the
customer is relegated to wait in the queue.  One is
              interested in
developing mathematical models of the queueing system and
              computing
performance measures, such as the average number of customers
              waiting, the
average waiting time, the utilization, etc., to help understand
              the
behavior of the system.  For complicated queueing systems, the
              performance
measures are difficult to compute and a major goal of our research
              is to
construct useful approximations to them.  The main application of our
              work
in queueing is to high-speed communication networks such as the Internet.
               
Here the customers are packets of information (bits), such as data
              files,
voice messages, or video.  The server is hardware such as a router
              or
switch, which transmits the packets along the Internet.  At each
              switch,
the packets are stored in a queue, if needed, before transmission. 
              These
buffers can only a fixed number of packets.  Arrivals finding a
              full
buffer are lost and hence the system performance is degraded. 
              The
performance measures, average buffer size, average packet delays, and
              the
probability of losing information, is important in the design and
              tuning
of high-speed communication networks.  Our research provides
              network
designers with mathematical tools for approximating these
              performance
measures.




