Title       : State-Sum Methods in Low-Dimensional Topology and Quantum Gravity - Categorical
               Underpinnings and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9971510

Award Number: 9971510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Yetter dyetter@math.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis Crane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

9971510
Yetter
     This project pursues a number of interrelated and
              complementary
lines of research related to state-sum techniques in
              low-dimensional
topology and quantum gravity.  Some of these involve the
              categorical
underpinnings of state-sum techniques: the investigation of the
              algebraic
structure of TQFT's, of the deformation theory of categories
              with
structure, and the categorical underpinnings of ``state-integrals,''
              i.e.,
measure theoretic analogues of the familiar state-sums.  Others aim
              at
applications of the techniques to topology and quantum gravity:
              the
extension to the Minkowskian signature of the Barrett-Crane
              state-sum
formulation of Euclidean quantum gravity, the investigation
              and
construction of topological invariants related to the Barrett-Crane
              and
Crane-Yetter state-sums and their generalizations, and the
              investigation
of the relations between categorical deformation theory and the
              theory
of Vassiliev knot and link invariants.	           
     This project
              seeks to investigate the structure of 3- and
4-dimensional spaces, both the
              abstract spaces of topology, and the
structure of physical space-times in
              certain proposed models for a
quantum theory of gravity.  The problem of
              quantizing gravity is probably
the deepest unsolved theoretical problem in
              physics.  It points to the
most fundamental unknowns in our understanding of
              the universe, such as
the origin of the universe and black hole physics.  Its
              apparent
intractability by using traditional methods suggests that a radically
              new
type of mathematics may be necessary to solve the problem.  The
              structure
of operators on spaces of quantum states, the algebraic
              structures
describing the assembly of spaces or knots and links from simple
              pieces,
and the algebraic data needed to construct state-sums with
              suitable
invariance properties to investigate both topological structures and
              to
construct ``spin-foam'' models of quantum gravity, can all conveniently
              be
described in terms of generalizations and extensions of the theory
              of
monoidal categories first introduced by MacLane in the early 1960's.
These
              facts, together with recent progress with the interrelated problems
mentioned
              above, lead to the hope that the theory of monoidal categories
may be the
              missing tool.  Thus, much of the work uses category theory,
not as a
              substitute for set theory as a foundations of mathematics, but
as the
              appropriate sort of algebra for the investigation of spaces
abstracted from
              the one in which we live.
*** 

