Title       : RUI: Physical Properties and Atomic Arrangements in Several Glass Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2001     
File        : a9971659

Award Number: 9971659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Feller sfeller@coe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mario Affatigato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coe College
	      1220 First Avenue NE
	      Cedar Rapids, IA  524025008    319/399-8000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9971659
Feller
 
Coe College has an exceptional and growing undergraduate
              research program in glass science.  Substantial expertise and new experiments
              in optical characterization and laser ablation time of flight (TOF) mass
              spectrometry have been added during the last three years.  The students have
              expertise in preparing glasses under extreme conditions (rapid cooling with
              simultaneous dry box protection) and   they measure many physical properties on
              the resulting samples.  Many of the associated spectroscopic experiments on
              these glasses are performed in-house at Coe College.  The purpose of this
              research is to quantitatively relate  observed physical properties with models
              of atomic arrangement.  Glasses will be prepared over wide compositional ranges
              and studied during the active period of this grant,.  The following systems
              will be investigated: Alkaline-earth borates and borosilicates; alkali and
              alkaline earth germanates; alkali borogermanates;  alkali vanadates; and alkali
              borovanadates.  Thermal, mechanical, and optical properties and various
              spectroscopic measurements will be performed on these glasses.  Besides the
              TOF, FTIR and NQR techniques will also be used in the experiments done at Coe
              College.  This program enjoys active collaborations with several other, major
              research groups.  The students will actively participate in this collaborative
              research using neutron scattering  at the Rutherford-Appleton Laboratory in
              Harwell, England, and the Institut Laue-Langevin reactor lab in Grenoble,
              France.  Typically, the research materials are the glass samples prepared by
              the students.  Also, magnetic resonance (NMR and QMR) and vibrational
              spectroscopic studies will be done with the groups at Indiana University,
              Sandia Laboratory, and Iowa State University.  The short range structure of
              newly discovered vanadate glasses will be determined by x-ray scattering.  In
              addition to the scientific research, there will also be significant
              contributions to the education of undergraduates.  The students will be
              involved in all aspects of scientific work including experimental design,
              performing experiments, doing repair work, giving talks at national meetings,
              and writing papers,  They will be engaged in this activity over a period of
              several years and thus contribute to the introduction and  training of the next
              generation of students entering this research enterprise.  The students will be
              prepared to enter top level graduate programs in science and
              engineering.
%%%
Undergraduate students and faculty at Coe College will
              jointly do research on newly discovered glasses.  The goals of this project are
              fourfold: 1) Form new glasses from novel chemical formulations; 2) Characterize
              the physical properties of these new glasses.  These include the glass
              compositional limits, density, thermal effects, and optical property measures; 
              3) Use spectroscopic means to determine models for the ways in which atoms
              group together, and use this information to predict how the properties change
              with composition; and  4) Involve undergraduates in significant roles in
              original and publishable scientific research.  The bulk of this research will
              be done in-house at Coe College.  Collaborations with other research groups
              will allow students to extend their knowledge of techniques.  These
              collaborations will involve student participation in research done at the
              Rutherford-Appleton (England) and Institut Laue-Langevin (France) laboratories,
               in nuclear magnetic resonance studies at Brown, Indiana and Iowa State
              Universities, and the Sandia National Laboratory, and in vibrational
              spectroscopy at Iowa State University.  Through any or all of these research
              activities and interactions, the students will be prepared to enter graduate
              programs for advanced studies in various scientific or engineering fields for
              training in advanced subjects.  This experience will enable them to be
              productively employed in scientific/technological areas during the next few
              decades of the 20th Century.
 
 


