Title       : Estimating Parameters in Spike-convolution Models and Mixture Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9971698

Award Number: 9971698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79866              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lei Li   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9971698

This research links the parametric deconvolution problem in the
              spike-convolution model with the estimation problem in finite mixture models. 
              It aims to weave together good results on algorithms and asymptotics from both
              sides, and develop new methodologies, which are implementable in computation
              and efficient in theory.  The first object of this research, the
              spike-convolution model, is introduced as part of the models proposed for DNA
              sequencing by the PI and his collaborators.  The current sequencing scheme
              named after Sanger combines three techniques: enzymatic reactions, gel or
              capillary electrophoresis and fluorescence-based detection.  This biochemical
              procedure produces a four-component vector time series for each DNA fragment. 
              The task of DNA base-calling is to recover the underlying DNA sequence from the
              above time series.  Most of the base-calling errors are caused by the diffusion
              effect of electrophoresis.  It is found that this diffusion effect can be well
              described by the so-called spike-convolution model.  It arises when a sparse
              Dirac spike train is convolved with a fixed point spread function, and additive
              noise or measurement error is superimposed.  In this model, deconvolution is
              nothing but a standard parameter estimation problem, where the parameters
              include the number, locations and heights of the underlying spikes, the
              baseline and the measurement error variance.  The second object of this
              research, the finite mixture model, is the framework of many statistical
              analyses like robustness checking, clustering, estimating density functions,
              etc.  However, the estimation of the parameters in mixture models can be very
              troublesome, especially when many components are involved.  It is believed that
              a broad class of finite mixture models is closely related to the
              spike-convolution model.  No simple solution exists to the estimation problems
              in these two models because of the complexity.  This research proposes to
              combine the method of trigonometric moments with a two-stage model selection
              procedure, Gauss-Newton algorithm, or EM algorithm depending on the situations.
               The numerical and statistical aspects of the new methods and their variants
              are examined and compared with those of existing methods.  The Toeplitz forms
              constructed from trigonometric moments and their statistical properties play a
              key role in the proposed methods, and are investigated in full detail.

This
              research studies the newly proposed spike-convolution model and the
              long-standing finite mixture models from a unified perspective.  The former is
              motivated by the large scale and high throughput DNA sequencing, which is one
              of the most important aspects of the ongoing Human Genome Project and other
              genome projects.  The lack of satisfactory deconvolution techniques and
              statistical models has made DNA base-calling---the data analysis part of
              sequencing---a bottle neck of these projects.  An effective deconvolution
              technique, a target of this research, is a fundamental prerequisite for rapid
              and reliable DNA base-calling.  In fact, similar deconvolution problems arise
              in many other scientific disciplines like geophysics, spectroscopy, and
              chromatography.  The research results are also expected to enrich the
              understanding and methodologies of finite mixture models, which have
              applications to a diversity of fields such as physics, medicine, and biology.

