Title       : Nonperiodic Sampling Theory, Deconvolution, and Wavelet Applications to
               Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9971697

Award Number: 9971697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Walnut dwalnut@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971697
Walnut

This project will study applications of new results in
              sampling theory to 
certain deconvolution equations.  For example, it has been
              known for 
many years that a function of two variables can be recovered
              completely 
from its averages on three squares whose sidelengths are pairwise
              
irrationally related. Since convolution by characteristic functions of
              
squares is a standard model for remote sensing of images by arrays of
              
photodetectors (e.g., electronic cameras), this fact suggests that a
              high-
resolution image can be recovered from low-resolution images sensed by
              
arrays of photodetectors placed at three distinct distances from the image.  
              
Recent results of the principal investigator and collaborators indicate a
              
strong link between the theory of sampling on unions of regular grids of
              
irrationally related sizes.  Several aspects of this type of nonuniform
              
sampling are to be investigated.  Specifically, (1) higher dimensional
              
sampling with applications to high resolution tomography and to
              
deconvolution from averages over rotated squares, (2) sampling for
              
functions bandlimited to circular domains with applications to
              
deconvolution of images blurred by photosensors with circular apertures,
              
and (3) higher order sampling with applications to deblurring when the
              
blurring function is a smooth spline. A second focus of the research is in
              
wavelet applications to tomography. The principal investigator and
              
collaborators have shown that the wavelet transform is a valid theoretical
              
and practical tool for analyzing local aspects of the Radon transform, the
              
primary mathematical model in CT.  The principal investigator proposes 
to
              continue this analysis by studying the recovery of edge information in 
images
              directly from a wavelet-based edge analysis of their CT images.  
This would
              have the advantage of constructing an accurate edge picture of 
the original
              image without the loss of SNR inherent in any reconstruction 
or
              backprojection scheme.  The natural noise-reduction properties of 
wavelets
              should also help in reducing noise in the measured CT data.

This research
              has two foci.  The first is related to the problem of super-
resolution of
              digital images.  Any digital black-and-white image consists 
of individual
              pixels on which the image intensity is a fixed shade of gray. 
In this case,
              features of the image at scales smaller than one pixel in size 
are invisible
              to the imaging apparatus.  For example, in a satellite image of 
New York City
              in which the pixel size corresponds to one city block, it 
will be impossible
              to distinguish different buildings in a given block.  All 
of the buildings
              (features) will be blurred into a single shade of gray on 
that block. Such an
              image is a blurred version of a hypothetical "perfect 
image." The goal is
              always to get as close as possible to this perfect 
image.  It has been
              observed that certain classical mathematical results can 
be interpreted as
              saying that it is theoretically possible to take several 
blurred images of
              different pixel sizes and combine them in such a way as 
to recover the
              perfect image exactly.  Perfect deblurring is not possible in 
any realistic
              system but it is possible to significantly improve the 
resolution in an image
              by combining several blurred images in a specified 
way.  The principal
              investigator has contributed to this program by 
observing that the deblurring
              problem here described is actually very 
closely related to the well-studied
              signal and image processing problem of 
interpolation from samples.  The
              principal investigator's work has 
demonstrated that it is possible to provide
              very simple deblurring 
formulas.  The current research project focuses on
              finding practical 
schemes to implement these formulas on computers. The
              second focus of 
this project is on applications of the technique of wavelet
              analysis to 
problems in tomographic imaging.  The term tomographic imaging"
              refers 
to devices such as medical CAT scanners that form very sharp (much
              
sharper than x-rays) non-invasive images of the inside of an object.  Such
              
imaging techniques are also used in industrial applications such as
              
detection of cracks in metal structures.  The principal investigator
              
proposes to study the recovery of edge data in images directly from a
              
wavelet-based edge analysis of their tomographic data.  This would have 
the
              advantage of constructing an accurate edge picture of the original 
image
              without the distortion inherent in standard reconstruction schemes.

