Title       : Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Continuum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  2000    
File        : a9971978

Award Number: 9971978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhouping Xin xinz@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will support research on nonlinear evolution partial
              differential
equations arising from continuum mechanics.  Examples include the
              
Euler and Navier-Stokes equations for compressible and incompressible
              inviscid 
and viscous fluids, the equations of electro-magneto field dynamics
              for electrically 
conducting compressible viscous fluids, the equations of
              elasticity, nonlinear 
Boltzmann type equations in kinetic theory of rarefied
              gases, and equations for 
combustion, multiphase flows, and fluids with
              chemical reactions.
The main objective is to gain better qualitative and
              quantitative understanding 
of the behavior of solutions, using mathematically
              rigorous analysis and numerical 
simulations.  The focus will be on
              understanding the effects of small scale dissipations and
relaxations on the
              large scale fluid motions; development of singularities
and their stuctures
              from smooth flows; nonlinear stability or instability 
and interactions for
              basic linear and nonlinear waves; design and analysis of
high resolution
              numerical methods for large scale calculations of discontinous
              flows;
fluid-dynamic limit problems for various kinetic models; and problems
              in multi-space
dimensions and in thermo-nonequilibrium.  One of the main ideas
              is to 
overcome the difficulties that are encountered at the macroscopic level
              by
designing and analyzing approximate models which are physically more
              
fundamental and mathematically tractable. 
  
Many interesting phenomena in
              the mechanics of continua can be described by 
mathematical models that
              involve nonlinear partial differential equations. 
A better understanding of
              these models has important applications in many sciences such as 
mechanics,
              turbulence theory, geophysics, meteorology, aeronautics, chemical
              
engineering, etc. This award will support work on these fundamental
              models.
The goal is to gain better qualitative understanding and to improve
              the foundations
for effective and accurate numerical simulations.


