Title       : Effects of Polarization-mode Dispersion on Fiber Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9971712

Award Number: 9971712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9060               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianke Yang jyang@emba.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to study the effects of polarization
              mode
dispersion on fiber communication systems. Polarization mode dispersion
              (PMD)
is caused by random birefringence of optical fibers. As the bit rate per
              channel
is reaching tens of gigabytes per second, PMD has become a major
              limiting 
factor on the system performance. The awardee will study the
              
effects of PMD on both linear and soliton communication systems. In
              particular, 
he will investigate the probability distribution of the
              differential group 
delay for various birefringence models as a function of
              arbitrary fiber length 
in a linear transmission system. He also plans to
              examine the combined 
effects of PMD and weak nonlinearity on the statistics
              of the transmission
spectrum measured through a polarizer at the output of a
              test fiber. 
In addition, he will assess the effects of PMD on a soliton
              communication system.
He will examine the statistics of PMD-induced timing
              jitter, polarization
fluctuations and dispersive radiation, and estimate
              limitations imposed by PMD 
on soliton transmission. These problems are
              different but inter-related. 
The results of these studies will provide
              theoretical guidance on various 
aspects of communication system design.
              

This project studies the effects of polarization mode dispersion (PMD) on
              fiber 
communication systems. This is a phenomenon that degrades the
              performance of 
optical fiber communication systems.  It occurs randomly along
              optical fibers, 
changes with time and is hard to control.  Therefore it is a
              major limiting factor for the 
performance of optical telecommunication
              systems. The work will directly address the 
realistic problem of PMD effects
              on current fiber communication systems
through the develoment and analysis of
              mathematical models and will thus lead to 
design recommendations and
              performance bounds for such systems

