Title       : Experimental Partnerships: Multifacet: Exploiting Prediction and Speculation in
               Multiprocessor Memory Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9971256

Award Number: 9971256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1081850            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Hill markhill@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 4725,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9971256
Hill, Mark D.
Wood, David A.
University of Wisconsin -
              Madison

CISE Experimental Partnerships:  Multifacet: Exploiting Prediction
              and Speculation in Multiprocessor Memory Systems

The goal of this research
              is to improve the performance of multiprocessor servers that form the
              computational infrastructure for internet web servers, databases, and other
              demanding applications.  It broadly examines exploiting prediction and
              speculation, heretofore limited to processor cores, in processors, memory, and
              the interactions between them.  A driving focus of the work is multicast
              snooping, a new cache coherence approach that uses prediction to both increase
              effective bandwidth over a classical symmetric multiprocessor and reduce
              latency over a traditional directory-based system.  Multicast snooping uses
              prediction to "guess" which processors have copies of a block and multicast
              address transactions
to those processors.  A novel network organization
              combines simultaneous multicasts to disjoint multicast sets while still
              providing ordering guarantees.  A simplified directory verifies the prediction
              and takes
corrective action when incorrect.  Refining multicast snooping
              provides research challenges in areas such as hardware and software mask
              prediction, network implementation, forward progress, high availability, and
              a
theoretical foundation for protocol and network behaviors.

The
              application of prediction and speculation to multiprocessor systems also
              exposes research opportunities applicable to multiprocessors more generally,
              including upgrade speculation, false sharing speculation, lock
superposition,
              and speculation implementation issues.  Hardware only, as well as
              hardware/software solutions strategies are being explored.  The research plan
              encompasses design (refinement of existing ideas and development of new ones),
              evaluation (pruning the design space and comparing with existing alternatives),
              validation (ensuring designs work, including a new application of Lamport's
              logical clocks), demonstration (transferring technology to industry), and
              infrastructure development (tool adaptation and construction).


