Title       : Rigidity Phenomena in Differential Geometry and Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2001       
File        : a9971556

Award Number: 9971556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97308              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralf Spatzier spatzier@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Spatzier

The research proposed lies at the interface of dynamical
              systems and differential geometry.  Its principal goal is the investigation of
              the dynamical and geometric structures of "higher rank" systems.  Such systems
              naturally appear both in dynamical systems and geometry.  In particular, the
              investigator will study rigidity properties of hyperbolic actions of higher
              rank abelian and semisimple Lie groups and their lattices with the ultimate
              goal of classifying such systems.  The investigator also plans to investigate
              Riemannian manifolds (especially higher rank ones) and their geodesic flows. 
              Geometric, dynamical and group theoretic tools will be used in this
              research.


Dynamical systems and ergodic theory are relatively new fields
              that investigate the evolution of a physical or mathematical system over time
              (e.g. turbulence in a fluid flow).  New ideas and concepts from dynamics (e.g.
              chaos, fractals) have changed our perception of the world fundamentally. 
              Dynamics and ergodic theory provide the mathematical tools and analysis for
              these investigations. Dynamical systems have had a major impact on the sciences
              and engineering.  Symbolic dynamics for instance has been instrumental in
              developing efficient and safe codes for computer science.  Tools and ideas from
              smooth dynamics are used as far afield as cell biology and meteorology. 
              Geometry is one of the oldest fields in mathematics, and generally studies
              curves, surfaces and their higher dimensional analogues, their shapes, shortest
              paths, and maps between such spaces.  Differential geometry had its roots in
              cartography, and is now studied for aesthetic reasons and its close ties with
              physics and other sciences and applied areas (computer vision e.g.).  Geometry
              and dynamics are closely related as some important dynamical systems originate
              from geometry, and geometry also provides tools to study dynamical systems. 
              The main goal of this project studies when two dynamical systems commute, i.e.
              when one system is unaffected by the changes brought on by the other. Important
              examples of such systems arise from geometry. 

