Title       : Numerical Methods for Molecular Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9971830

Award Number: 9971830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Skeel skeel@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Heath  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of the research is to create more efficient
propagators for
              atomistic computer simulations
and thus to make possible more ambitious
              scientific calculations.
New deterministic and stochastic algorithms for both
              dynamics and sampling
are to be constructed using such techniques as operator
              splitting, modified
energy functions that compensate for finite steps,
and
              optimization of method parameters, together with physical insight.
Promising
              algorithms are tested and compared using mathematical analyses
and computer
              experiments.  Tools for mathematical analysis include the
concept of effective
              accuracy, the method of modified equations, linear
analysis, and KAM theory. 
              Computer experiments are performed on model
problems chosen to reveal
              unambiguously the properties of interest.
Faster algorithms are to be
              implemented in molecular modeling software
being developed for widespread use
              in a couple of projects at the
University of Illinois Beckman Institute.  Most
              of the work is
sufficiently general that is transfers to other types of
              problems such
as occur in astrophysics, wave phenomena, and mechanical
              engineering.
And many of the techniques can be abstracted and applied to
              generic problems.


Computer simulations of atomic detail are heavily
              employed in physics,
chemistry, materials science, and structural
              biology.
These calculations require the generation of sequences of
              atomic
configurations either for the purpose of modeling actual motion or for
              the
purpose of calculating averaged values and structures
from a wide range
              of representative samples.  The computing time ranges
from hours to months, so
              it can benefit tremendously from faster algorithms.
It is the objective of
              this research project to do this:
to create much more efficient propagators
              for dynamics
and sampling that reliably achieve acceptable levels of
              accuracy.
The construction of such algorithms employs ideas from
              mathematics
and computer science together with physical insight.
Promising
              algorithms are tested and compared using
mathematical analyses and computer
              experiments.
The successful ones are implemented in molecular modeling
              software
being developed for widespread use in a couple of projects at the
              University
of Illinois Beckman Institute.  These advances in methodology are
              also to be
disseminated in articles targeted to practitioners.
Many of the
              techniques will apply not only to molecular simulations
but also to
              simulations in astrophysics, structural mechanics, and fluids.
Potentially,
              the availability of accelerated propagation algorithms
will lead to a variety
              of scientific results that otherwise would not be
obtained.  The performance
              of the research will be
a valuable interdisciplinary experience for a graduate
              student.


