Title       : Patterns Arising Through the Continuous Spectrum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9971703

Award Number: 9971703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76496              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bjorn Sandstede sandstede.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971703
Sandstede

Nonlinear waves arise in a variety of applied problems.
              One important 
example is the propagation of pulses, and pulse trains, in
              optical fibers. 
Other examples are fronts and spiral waves that arise, for
              instance, in 
autocatalytic reactions or during cardiac arrhythmias. This
              project is 
concerned with investigating such patterns and their interactions
              using 
analytical techniques. Specifically, the existence and stability of
              multi-
bump pulses in partial differential equations with phase symmetries
              such 
as the complex Ginzburg-Landau equation is addressed. Another issue is
              
to understand the interaction between small Turing patterns and large
              
fronts or pulses that may lead to modulated time-periodic waves. While 
the
              interaction between pulses is amenable to a finite-dimensional (though 
not
              standard) perturbation analysis, it seems difficult to explain the
              
interaction between Turing patterns and fronts by a reduction to a finite set
              
of equations since this interaction involves the continuous spectrum.
              
Another problem where the continuous spectrum becomes important is the
              
interaction between a planar spiral wave and the boundary of a domain. It
              
is planned to explore this interaction in more detail in order to facilitate
              
the comparison of theoretical predictions for planar spiral waves with
              
experiments and numerical simulations that are carried out on bounded
              
domains.

Using optical fibers for the transmission of information bits
              over long 
distances has become an important issue in telecommunications. An
              
optical pulse that is sent through an optical fiber encodes a single bit of
              
information. If the fiber were capable of supporting multi-bump pulses in 
a
              stable fashion, these could be used to encode multiple bits of 
information.
              It is part of this project to study the propagation and 
interaction of pulses
              in certain nonlinear optical fibers taking loss along 
the fiber and
              amplification into account.

