Title       : Cohomology of Dynamical Systems, Rigidity of Smooth Group Actions, and Partially
               Hyperbolic Diffeomorphisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9971826

Award Number: 9971826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66753              (Estimated)
Investigator: Viorel Nitica   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Nitica

The proposed research has three goals.  One goal is to
              continue the study of cocycles with values in Lie groups and in diffeomorphism
              groups over hyperbolic actions.  In particular we would like to generalize
              Livsic's cohomological result, as well as the cohomological results of
              Katok-Spatzier and Katok-Nitica-Torok, about higher-rank abelian actions to
              various classes of non-abelian cocycles. The second goal is to use
              cohomological results as a tool in the rigidity theory of hyperbolic or
              partially hyperbolic abelian group actions, and higher rank lattice actions on
              compact manifolds. This goal is part of the rigidity program initiated by
              Zimmer, and developed by Hurder, Katok, Lewis, Margulis, Nitica, Qian,
              Spatzier, Torok, Zimmer, and others.  The third goal is to find generic classes
              of partially hyperbolic transformations with interesting dynamic and stochastic
              properties.  This is part of a program initiated by Pugh and Shub. The aim of
              the program is to show that stably ergodicity occurs much more frequently than
              expected, and that some partial hyperbolicity is sufficient to prove stably
              ergodicity. We are mostly interested in skew-products and perturbations of
              skew-products.  This project targets the field of dynamical systems. 

The
              theory of dynamical systems is a major mathematical discipline that is
              intertwined to all the other areas of mathematics. Concepts coming from
              dynamical systems have inspired researchers from other sciences (e.g.,
              statistics, mathematical physics, biology, engineering).  They also stimulated
              the emergence of a new area called nonlinear dynamics, or chaos theory. An
              important feature of the well understood examples with chaotic dynamics is the
              presence of hyperbolicity (i.e., expansion and contraction). Many natural
              examples of dynamical systems that appear from practical applications exhibit
              only partial hyperbolicity. One of the goals of the proposed research is to
              show that one can find chaotic behavior for these examples as well. Another
              goal is to find obstructions to chaotic behavior for partially hyperbolic
              systems.


