Title       : Dynamics of Semi-Dispersing Billiards; Geometry of Operator Symmetric Spaces;
               Rigidity of Higher-Rank Anosov Actions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9971587

Award Number: 9971587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69702              (Estimated)
Investigator: Serge Ferleger ferleger@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Ferleger


The proposer will continue his research in the following
              three directions: applications of non-regular Riemannian geometry to the
              dynamics of billiard systems, rigidity of Anosov actions of higher rank abelian
              groups and Banach geometry of non-commutative symmetric spaces. Specifically,
              in his study of dynamics of semi-dispersing billiards on Riemannian manifolds,
              the proposer plan to address the following questions: Is it possible to give
              any estimate for the topological entropy of the first return map of a
              non-degenerate semi-dispersing billiard with a ``finite horizon''? What can be
              said about the topological entropy of the billiards on manifolds without the
              non-positive curvature restriction? Most fundamental is the question about
              existence of universal unfolding space for arbitrary non-degenerate
              semi-dispersing billiards on non-positively curved manifolds of dimension
              greater than three, that the proposer plans to attack using the machinery he
              (jointly with D.Burago and B.Kleiner) has developed recently. Continuing his
              (joint with A.Katok) study of cohomological rigidity of Anosov actions of
              higher-rank Abelian groups, the proposer will attempt to establish
              cohomological rigidity of standard Anosov actions different from Weyl chamber
              flow; to obtain infinitesimal tensor rigidity of lattice actions on Furstenberg
              boundaries and differentiable rigidity of the projective actions of cocompact
              lattices. Central for proposer's program of studying the geometry of
              noncommutative operator spaces is certain generalization of Hilbert
              transformation and upper triangular projection at the same time, a spectral
              projection associated with a strongly continuous representation of a compact
              Abelian group on an arbitrary (UMD)-space. 

The prevalent theme and tool in
              the proposal is the theory of dynamical systems. The theory in general
              investigates the evolution of a physical or mathematical system over time.
              Theory of dynamical systems is intertwined closely with most of the major areas
              of mathematics and it often takes its basic examples from and applies its
              results to such different fields as physics, engineering, biology or sociology.
              Theory of billiard systems, for instance, lies at the interface of geometry on
              one hand and dynamics and theoretical mechanics on the other. Classical
              thermodynamics is essentially nothing else but mechanics of huge billiard
              systems. This is why a number of problems of the theory were first posed by
              physicists in their attempt to "justify" thermodynamics. Such justifications
              still is just a dream; but the proposer believes that his research brings us a
              little closer to its realization. One of these problems that has been open for
              almost half of the century (about existence of an estimate on the number of
              collisions between molecule of a gas) recently was solved with help of geometry
              of somewhat pathological spaces. Discovery of such an unexpected connection
              opened up several opportunities in the area that the proposer would like to
              pursue as outlined above.

