Title       : A Program of Measurements of High Energy Electron and Gamma Ray Interactions
               With Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9971942

Award Number: 9971942
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond G. Arnold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971942
Arnold
This proposal requests support for preparing, carrying out, and
              analyzing a series of measurements of electromagnetic structure of matter by
              the American University Group, primarily at the Stanford Linear Accelerator
              Center.  This work has as a common t hread the use of high energy (sometimes
              polarized) electrons and gamma rays to probe matter and the universe.  The work
              will be in three main areas.  The major work will be the completion of data
              analysis and publications for Experiments E155 and E155x t o measure polarized
              deep inelastic electron scattering from polarized proton and neutron targets to
              extract the quark and gluon spin distributions in the nucleons.  The high
              intensity and high polarization of the SLAC electron beam together with robust
              and highly polarized targets makes possible precise measurements of the spin
              asymmetries that provide unique and important information on the proton
              structure of the nucleons. Precise measurements make possible stringent tests
              of QCD theory from comparisons with next-to-leading-order calculations of spin
              structure, evaluation of the fundamental Bjorken sum rule, and extraction of
              the strong coupling constant at low momentum transfer.  Another major area of
              work will be the preparation for the data run for experiment E158 using the
              high intensity polarized electron beam to measure parity violating asymmetry in
              electron-electron scattering.  This high precision data will provide important
              tests of the Standard Model at low momentum transfer in the electron magnetic
              coupling via the interference between exchange of virtual photons and Z bosons.
              The American University Group will contribute to the design and implementation
              of the magnetic spectrometers, data acquisition system, and to the spectrometer
              calibrate ion systems. The third area of work will be to contribute to the
              development of the detector systems for GLAST, the Gamma Ray Large Area Space
              Telescope, an international project that proposes to launch a new generation
              large acceptance gamma ray observatory in a satellite for
gamma ray
              astrophysics measurements. The American University Group has joined the GLAST
              collaboration and will organize and help conduct the extensive calibrations of
              the prototype and eventually the full detector in the electron and gamma ray
              beams at SLAC.

