Title       : Populations of Complex Objects, Visualization and Smoothing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a9971649

Award Number: 9971649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Marron marron@stat.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9971649

The need for understanding the structure of populations of
              complex objects, including curves, images and surfaces, is becoming
              increasingly clear, especially as automatic data gathering capabilities are
              burgeoning in many fields.  Research into functional data analytic methods is
              proposed to address this need. An important part of this thrust will be in the
              direction of robust methods, where few of the standard methods are applicable
              because of the very high dimensionality coupled with small sample sizes.  New
              visualization methods are needed for functional data analysis, when the objects
              are images and surfaces.  Creative visualization ideas are proposed in a
              different direction in the proposed work on smoothing.  The central issue for
              real data applications of smoothing is which features in the smooth are really
              there? SiZer was one such methodology, and a variety of improvements are
              proposed.  New visual paradigms will be developed for the challenging and
              important cases of dependent data and two dimensional smoothing.  Work is also
              proposed on studying the mathematical statistical underpinnings of SiZer, and
              related methods.

The proposed work is motivated by problems in opthalmology,
              computer science, software engineering, and geology.  The work in ophthalmology
              and computer science is on finding statistical and visual methods for gaining
              insight into the structure of populations of complex objects. Possible types of
              objects are very diverse, with work under way on images representing corneal
              curvature and on shape representations of corpus collosa.  The methods
              developed are expected to be useful in many other fields, but an immediate
              benefit will be improved diagnosis of kerataconus and schizophrenia.  The work
              in software engineering and geology is a combination of visualization and
              smoothing methods to find, and verify, unexpected structure in data.  For
              example one newly developed method, both establishes a link between perfective
              maintenance and decreased fault rate in software engineering, and also provides
              the first statistically significant connection between glaciation and
              volcanism.  Another newly developed method shows how legacy software systems
              age, and also gives statistical proof of periods of extinction of mollusks, due
              to climatic changes.

