Title       : New Methods for the Simulation and Analysis of Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1999       
File        : a9971772

Award Number: 9971772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Hagstrom hagstrom@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              New Methods for the Simulation and Analysis of Waves
                          
               Thomas Hagstrom
                                 9971772

We will develop,
              analyze, implement and apply new methods for the solution
of wave propagation
              problems. Our primary focus is on numerical techniques 
which can efficiently
              and reliably utilize the capabilities of modern 
computers to simulate
              problems whose scale has hitherto precluded their detailed study.  
A large
              scale wave propagation problem will generally be given in an extended spatial
              
and/or temporal domain. In engineering applications, the domain will also
              usually 
involve bodies with complex shapes. These features all pose difficult
              challenges to 
numerical algorithms. The radiation of energy to the far field
              is a feature of 
most wave systems and is associated with large spatial
              domains. To make computational s
solutions feasible, the domain must be
              artificially truncated. This truncation introduces 
errors which have been
              difficult to estimate or reduce. In recent years, we, along with 
other
              researchers, have developed new techniques for imposing accurate truncations,
              which 
solve this problem in some special but important cases. As part of this
              project, we will 
extend the applicability of these new methods. Long time
              simulations also make special 
demands on the accuracy of numerical
              approximations. In particular, small inaccuracies 
in the wave speeds or the
              effects of numerical damping will generally accumulate to 
produce large
              errors. Therefore, highly accurate methods must be used. However, these are
              typically difficult to apply in complex geometries. We will work on the
              development 
and analysis of new methods with high orders of accuracy which
              can be more easily 
utilized near bodies with complicated shapes. Finally, we
              will study some basic
problems related to the existence, smoothness, and
              asymptotic approximability 
of solutions to the compressible Navier-Stokes
              equations, which describe the 
motion of most common liquids and gases. We are
              particularly interested in 
flows which are slow in comparison with the speed
              of sound. Such flows are 
typically modeled by the incompressible
              Navier-Stokes equations, whose 
mathematical theory, though still quite
              incomplete, is better developed. We, 
however, retain the compressible
              effects, and study both theoretically and by 
simulation the relationship
              between the solutions of the two systems.

     In our work we focus on some
              specific physical systems, primarily from the
fields of acoustics and fluid
              dynamics. As such, we hope to enhance our 
capability to use high-performance
              computing to predict the production and
interaction of sound with fluid flows.
              However, due to the general importance 
of wave theory and the underlying
              unity of its mathematical description, most 
of our results will be directly
              applicable in diverse areas such as 
electromagnetism and elasticity. In the
              long term, an improved capability to 
simulate waves will have important
              applications including the reduction of 
aircraft noise, the improvement of
              radar and sonar imaging, the predictability
of the effects of earthquakes, and
              the design of better communications systems.
 








