Title       : Statistical and Computational Methods in Genetic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9971770

Award Number: 9971770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shili Lin shili@stat.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Large and complex genetic data sets present a great deal of challenges to
              
standard data analysis techniques. In many cases, standard methods are
              
infeasible or even impossible for analyzing such data. This research
is to
              develop statistical and computational methods relevant to the analysis
of
              complex human pedigree data. The first main focus is to solve problems 
that
              involve large complex pedigrees, multiple polymorphic markers,
              incomplete
genotypes, and complex disease models. The second main focus is to
              study 
further the Chi-square (CHS) recombination models, to develop new
              techniques 
to incorporate CHS into methods of gene mapping to achieve greater
              efficiency
of data, and to apply this methodology to study genetic
              interference in the 
human genome. Most of the proposed research in this
              project is to be carried 
out using the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
              methodology. Exploration of MCMC 
methods in human pedigree analysis thus far
              shows that this methodology is 
highly suitable for estimating probabilities
              and likelihoods. However, because  
of special features of models and methods
              appropriate for modern human 
genetics, special modifications to the standard
              MCMC approach are required
for this technique to be effective in a variety of
              genetic mapping problems.
This project continues the work of making these
              modifications and exploring 
new applications.

The last decade has seen
              rapid advancements in the field of human genetics. 
Large and complex data
              sets are accumulating at an incredible rate. Some 
disease genes (most of them
              are for single-gene simple genetic disorders) have  
been identified and
              mapped. This includes the genes responsible for cystic 
fibrosis, Huntington's
              disease and some breast cancers. This has tremendous 
implication in genetic
              counseling, genetic testing and screening, drug 
discovery, and genetic
              therapy. Identification of genetic factors for complex 
diseases is a far more
              difficult task. Complex diseases may be genetically
heterogeneous caused by
              different susceptibility genes, or may be caused by
a combination of genes
              with possible environmental effects. Many common 
diseases have complex
              etiology, and are believed to be at least partially due 
to genetic
              predisposition. Common diseases such as diabetes, alcohol 
dependence, and
              some forms of cancer are examples of complex disorders. 
Methods developed in
              this research can handle complex genetic models and make 
use of available
              genetic data fully, thereby increasing the power to map 
genes for complex
              diseases.
