Title       : Correlated Electron Physics in Hexaborides: a Unique Experimental Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a9971348

Award Number: 9971348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274752             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zachary Fisk fisk@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971348
Fisk
This research concerns the question of how strongly correlated
              electronic behavior of an ordered lattice of atoms evolves from the single atom
              behavior against a background provided by some host lattice. Recent work has
              shown that the three-dimensional boron network in the cubic hexaboride
              materials provides what can be described as a robust and electronically inert
              background that is little perturbed by atomic substitutions for metal atoms in
              these materials.  In the present research the development of the dense Kondo
              lattice, the evolution of the Kondo insulator and the heretofore inaccessible
              ferromagnetism of the dilute free electron gas will be investigated.  The
              unexpected occurence of the this clean host lattice for experiments in strongly
              correlated materials gives confidence that other such host lattices can be
              found.  An important part of this research effort is the search for new
              materials with similar properties.  This research will involve graduate
              students and postdoctoral research associates who will be trained in an
              important area of condensed matter physics and materials science. 
%%%
An
              important goal of materials research is the design of new materials with
              specified properties which would be suitable for the advance of current as well
              as the discovery of new technology.  Towards this end, this research seeks to
              gain the understanding that will the prediction what properties a given
              arrangement of certain atoms will have.  The interesting materials contain in
              general combinations of what we can call active atoms whose properties depend
              sensitively on the environment they are in, in conjunction with atoms whose
              properties are much less sensitive.  In particular, many unusual properties and
              ones useful technologically are found in materials with active atoms that
              straddle the boundary separating magnetic from non-magnetic behavior.  A class
              of inter-metallic compounds called hexaborides has been found to provide an
              unusually clean host lattice for studying the interaction effects between the
              active atoms and their environments.  The study of these hexaboride systems
              will suggest directions for further research for the discovery of new and
              similar materials with equally unusual properties.  This research project is
              eminently suited for the training of the next generation of condensed matter
              physicists and materials scientists for employment in forefront areas of
              technology during the 21st Century.
***

