Title       : Weyl-Titchmarsh-Levinson Spectral Analysis of Sturm-Liouville Expressions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9971031

Award Number: 9971031
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51046              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dominic P. Clemence clemence@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9971031
ABSTRACT

This research will extend the Weyl-Titchmarsh-Levinson
              methodology in several directions.  The first area of focus will be the
              construction and analysis of the m-function to understand spectral behavior,
              particularly of systems with interior singularities and quasi-periodic systems.
              Further, analysis involving analytic continuation of the m-function across
              spectral bands will be pursued to understand resonance phenomena. The next goal
              will be the exploitation of the m-function to understand scattering behavior
              subject to various spectral behavior, with particular regard for coexisting
              absolutely continuous, singular continuous, and point continuous spectrum, as
              well as their perturbations. The final focus will involve using the m-function
              to obtain various estimates, such as Greens' function estimates, which are
              expected to be employed to develop an m-function based potential recovery
              scheme from scattering data. 

Since they are the basis for the modeling and
              subsequent study of many natural systems, the study of differential equations
              is the foundation for the scientific analysis and understanding of a variety of
              physical phenomena.  The problems addressed in this project are couched in the
              spectral and scattering theory of Sturm-Liouville equations, which arise in a
              variety of settings such as quantum mechanics, fluid wave mechanics, crystal
              structures, acoustics, quantum chaos, optic fiber design, photodissociation,
              shell structure deformation, and biological population modeling; the results
              obtained are in particular expected to significantly impact these areas. The
              theory facilitates probing deeply into the mathematical foundations upon which
              these physical systems are based, thereby increasing our scientific
              understanding of the various systems. The involvement of undergraduate students
              in this research  further ensures a continued knowledge base, which  is the
              essential foundation for developments in advanced technology, and hence the
              advancement of civilization.








