Title       : Interacting Graphical Models and Related Topics in Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9971016

Award Number: 9971016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lincoln Chayes lchayes@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971016

This research principally concerns a class of correlated
              (non-independent) percolation problems that arise as graphical representations
              of spin-systems.  These representations contain all of the information of the
              original spin-system and, in the best of cases, provide a definitive signal
              (percolation) for phase transitions or phase coexistence.  The most familiar
              example of such a representation is the random cluster representation for the
              q-state Potts model.  Recently, a number of new graphical representations
              associated with other models have emerged.  In addition to their intrinsic
              interest, the study of these problems is important for two reasons: (i) The
              representations provide a powerful analytical tool with which to study the
              underlying statistical mechanics problem.  (ii) The representations are the
              basis of the cluster methods, a modern class of Monte Carlo algorithms that
              allow for the rapid simulation of these (underlying) problems. To realize item
              (ii) and, for the most part item (i) as well, it is essential to achieve "the
              best of cases" i.e. demonstrate that the phase transition in the statistical
              mechanics problem is mirrored by a percolation transition in the graphical
              representation.  In general, the PI will continue research on the development
              of new graphical representations and cluster algorithms with an eye towards the
              construction of algorithms in equilibrium statistical mechanics and other
              problems that are computationally complex.

This research may be described as
              follows:  The primitive mathematical descriptions of interacting systems
              necessarily involves a great deal of superfluous information.  At best this
              information is simply of no importance and at worst, it can obscure the subtle
              effects that are the object of study. Graphical representations present an
              alternative description.  Although the mathematical content of the description
              is identical to the original, the form is quite different:  Much of the
              superfluous information is pushed into the background and the interesting
              features are often exhibited rather dramatically as geometric phenomena.  Of
              further importance is that these geometric representations are the key
              ingredient in a class of computer algorithms (cluster algorithms) that are used
              in statistical physics.  Until recently, only a handful of systems have
              admitted such descriptions but the situation has improved a great deal in the
              last few years.  Progress will continue in expanding the scope of the
              applicability of these methods both in equilibrium statistical mechanics an in
              other area where computational complexity forbids the straightforward
              approach.

