Title       : Loop and Path Space Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a9971036

Award Number: 9971036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce K. Driver driver@math.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971036 
Driver

	This research is primarily devoted to the study of the
              geometric analysis associated to heat kernel and Wiener measures on path and
              loop spaces of Riemannian manifolds.  The P.I. will continue his study of
              finite dimensional approximations to path integral formulas on path and loop
              spaces over compact Riemannian manifolds.  It is hoped that these
              approximations will lead to: 1) a rigorous interpretation of the heuristic path
              integral proofs of the Atiyah--Singer index theorem, 2) construction of
              Brownian motions on path and loop spaces, 3) construction of non-trivial
              harmonic differential forms on loop groups, and 4) construction of Dirac
              operators on loop spaces.  These goals are consistent with the principal
              investigators ongoing project to understand index theorems and the Hodge -- de
              Rham theorem for loop spaces.  It is also proposed to try to generalize a
              result (related to the Segal Bargmann transform) of L. Gross and the P.I. from
              complex finite dimensional groups to complex loop groups.

	Spaces of loops
              naturally arise in the mathematical study of surfaces and of higher dimensional
              manifolds.  For example, if there is a loop on a surface that can not be
              deformed to a point without tearing the loop apart, then the surface must
              contain a "hole." (Think of the surface of a doughnut versus the surface of a
              sphere.)  The physicists' string theory description of the fundamental
              particles of nature also use loops or "strings."  The quantum mechanical
              treatment of string theory leads to problems similar to those proposed for
              study by the P.I.  This proposal is devoted to answering basic mathematical
              questions about the (Feynman) path integral formulation of quantum mechanics on
              both finite dimensional curved surfaces and on the loops on such surfaces.  As
              a by-product of this research, the P.I. hopes to make rigorous the very
              beautiful physics argument for the so-called Atiyah-Singer Index theorem.  This
              index theorem is arguably one of the most striking mathematical developments of
              this century and it has had far reaching implications in both mathematics and
              in physics.

