Title       : Topics in Risk Sensitive Control and Financial Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9971307

Award Number: 9971307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomasz R. Bielecki T-Bielecki@neiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern Illinois Univ
	      5500 N Saint Louis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606254625    773/442-4670

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research will contribute to the development of new methodologies 
and
              models in the areas of mathematical control theory, stochastic
analysis, and
              financial mathematics for the purpose of solving complex
problems in financial
              decision making and financial engineering. It is
expected that this research
              will have the greatest impact on application
of mathematics in the areas of
              optimal portfolio management and asset
allocation, as well as in the area
              managing of credit risk. A fundamental
aspect of the research is the concept
              of risk sensitive stochastic control
theory for investment problems with an
              infinite planning horizon. This
kind of optimization objective is appealing
              because stationary trading
strategies are likely to be optimal and thus there
              is good potential for
being able to compute optimal solutions for meaningful,
              practical
problems. In addition, several classes of  finite planning
              horizon
problems can be reasonably well approximated by problems with an
              infinite
planning horizon. A second fundamental aspect of the proposed
              research is
the explicit consideration given to statistical estimation issues.
              Optimal
control methodologies are rarely used in the financial industry,
              largely
because of statistical difficulties associated with the estimation
              of
constant drift coefficients in diffusion process models of
              individual
securities. This research will serve to reduce the gap between
              theory and
practice by developing optimization models that incorporate
              exogenous
factors. By explicitly modeling the dependence of the assets on
              factors,
it will be possible to obtain more realistic models, to better
              understand
the statistical estimation difficulties, and to be in a position to
              apply
adaptive control methods. In addition, the proposed research will
              advance
our understanding of quantitative aspects of default credit
              risk,
which is a vital element in financial decision making.

Managing large
              sums of dollars of notional capital is as complex as
managing global
              communication networks or as managing  global
manufacturing enterprises. Thus
              common sense, intuition and experience
alone will typically not suffice to
              safely and efficiently manage
available financial instruments. This research
              is aimed at providing
formal mathematical support for financial management.
              Although the
research will require fundamental advances within the areas
              of
mathematical control theory, stochastic analysis, and
              financial
mathematics, it is anticipated that this research will lead to new
              and
practical tools that eventually become widely used in the
              financial
industry in order to enhance its competitiveness and efficiency.
              This is
particularly important given the impact the U.S. financial industry
              has on
the global economy. The big emphasis will be placed in this research 
              on
the development of computer algorithms for solving large-scale problems
              so
that the effective use can be made of high-performance computing.
              

----------------------

