Title       : Design Methodology for Mixed Analog/Asynchronous VLSI Implementations of
               Communications Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9971168

Award Number: 9971168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris J. Myers myers@ece.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yong-Bin Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian B. Schlegel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The PIs are exploring a new design methodology for mixed analog and asynchronous
              circuits. As transistor feature sizes move towards 0.1 micron and clock
              frequencies exceed one GHz, it is becoming increasingly difficult to maintain a
              globally synchronous paradigm. The goal of this project is to develop and apply
              a design methodology for mixed analog/asynchronous circuits. This project uses
              driving examples from the field of communications due to their challenging
              performance and power demands. The asynchronous nature of communications
              systems coupled with recent analog implementations of probability propagation
              algorithms (PPA), a key operation in such systems as turbo codes, makes this
              field a prime target for potential gains. This project extends the work in the
              area of iterative decoding using probability propagation to develop algorithms
              and architectures which can take advantage of the properties of a mixed
              analog/asynchronous system. This project also applies CAD tools for timed
              asynchronous circuits to design these systems. Finally, this project is
              developing a new circuit design methodology for the implementation of mixed
              analog/asynchronous systems.


