Title       : Risk Sensitive Control Theory and Financial Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1999      
File        : a9971424

Award Number: 9971424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86155              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley R. Pliska srpliska@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the research project is to continue the development of
new
              methodologies involving mathematical control theory, stochastic
analysis,
              statistics of random processes, and financial mathematics for the
purpose of
              understanding and solving complex problems in financial decision
making. The
              heart of the proposed research involves the development of
continuous time,
              risk sensitive control models for making optimal investment
decisions. Such
              models will feature underlying economic factors that are
modeled explicitly as
              stochastic processes, the infinite horizon criterion
of maximizing the
              portfolio's risk adjusted growth rate, and constraints on
the trading
              strategies. This basic theory will be extended in at least three
directions.
              The first is to analogous models in discrete time, thereby
leading to
              additional computational methods. The second is to continuous
time models
              which include transaction costs, thereby leading to the study
              of
quasi-variational inequalities. And a third extension will be to cases
              where
one or more of the underlying factors are not observable, thereby
              involving
in the case of discrete time the theory of hidden Markov models.


                 The research is important for two principal reasons. First, the
              new
mathematical methodologies are likely to enhance the competitiveness of
              U.S.
financial institutions. Second, the research will lead to a
              better
understanding about risk management and how investor decisions affect
              and
are affected by financial markets and the economy. For example, an
              important
special case of the basic model is where the assets are bonds and
              the
underlying factors are macroeconomic variables. The anticipated results
              will
elucidate the relationships between investors' buying and selling
              decisions,
the level of interest rates, and other macroeconomic variables such
              as
unemployment rates. By looking at cases where the underlying
              factors
correspond to financial derivatives, another likely by-product of
              this
research is a better understanding of how to manage risk by trading
              futures
and options. Additional versions of the model can be used to study
              the
interplay between macroeconomic variables and the stock market.
              Indeed,
likely to emerge from this project are new explanations of business
              cycles
and the long range dependence of stock market prices that have been
              reported
in the financial literature.

