Title       : Tunneling and Activated Transitions in Driven Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a9971537

Award Number: 9971537
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brage Golding golding@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark I. Dykman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971537
Golding

The condensed matter physics project will explore, by
              experiment and by theory, the effects of time-dependent fields on the motion of
              particles trapped in double, or multiple, potential wells, and will establish
              ways of controlling this motion. Responses of both quantum and classical
              multi-stable systems to an alternating field are expected to display
              dramatically strong nonlinearity, even for comparatively weak fields. The
              present investigation examines this response over a wide spectral range, from
              frequencies of order of the rates of interstate transitions up to the
              characteristic intra-well frequencies of the trapped particle. The effect of a
              high-frequency field on the rates of activated transitions is largely
              unexplored, and it is in this range that the most striking, selective control
              over particulate motion can be exercised. Two classes of experiments, with
              closely coupled theoretical elaboration, are chosen to demonstrate these and
              related phenomena. They include inter-well transitions of classical particles
              in a driven optical trap using optical "tweezers", and the quantum tunneling of
              hydrogen in disordered metals probed by large amplitude ultrasonic
              fields.
%%%
The goal of this research program is to explore, by experiment
              and by theory, the effects of time-dependent fields on the motion of particles
              trapped in double, or multiple, potential wells, and to establish ways of
              controlling this motion. The investigation examines this response over a wide
              spectral range, from frequencies of order of the rates of interstate
              transitions up to the characteristic intra-well frequencies of the trapped
              particle. Although fundamental, the ideas and methods can result in practical
              consequences for several areas of applied science and technology. One of the
              most exciting occurs in control of nonequilibrium crystal growth, where surface
              diffusion plays a crucial role. The degradation of electronic and optical
              components, brought about by defect and impurity migration in the presence of
              large amplitude oscillating fields, is another. Also, chemical and biological
              separation, an area of immense growth, depends upon discriminating among
              species diffusing in strong fields and field gradients. This research
              explicitly includes both graduate and undergraduate participation in both
              experimental and theoretical aspects. 

