Title       : Low-Dimensional Topology and Subdivision Rules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9971783

Award Number: 9971783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62640              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Floyd floyd@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9971783

PI: William Floyd

Abstract: This project is an
              attempt to prove the conjecture that a negatively curved group whose space at
              infinity is the 2-sphere has a properly discontinuous, cocompact, isometric
              action on real hyperbolic 3-space.  This is a major piece of Thurston's
              Geometrization Conjecture, which states that the interior of every compact
              3-manifold has a canonical decomposition into geometric pieces.  Previous work
              of the investigator and his collaborators has reduced the conjecture to a
              difficult problem (proving conformality) about recursive tilings of the
              2-sphere. The recursive structures of the tilings come from subdivision rules.
              From a subdivision rule one can define a branched surface and a self-map of
              this branched surface. A major aim is to prove that conformality of a tiling
              family is equivalent to the existence of a fixed point on the induced map of
              the Teichmueller space of the branched surface, and then to understand when
              this map has a fixed point. In the special case that the branched surface is a
              2-sphere, this is essentially what is done in proving Thurston's classification
              theorem for critically finite branched maps of the 2-sphere. A second aim is to
              understand further this connection between conformal subdivision rules and
              rational maps. A third aim is to develop the theory of twisted face pairing
              3-manifolds. This theory arose as a source of examples for testing the
              conjecture, but it has other potential applications in geometric group theory
              and 3-manifold topology.

This project is concerned with recursive families
              of tilings of the plane and the 2-sphere. Each family is determined by an
              initial tiling and a subdivision rule which are encoded by a finite amount of
              combinatorial information. A key problem is to determine when the limiting
              tiles, which may have fractal boundaries, stay "almost round". In special cases
              these families of tilings correspond to rational maps (quotients of polynomials
              with complex coefficients) on the 2-sphere. Through this correspondence, work
              of Thurston on the topological classification of rational maps suggests a
              promising approach to answering this problem. A principal aim of the project is
              to follow this approach to completion. If successful, the project would be a
              major step in proving Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture, which states that
              3-dimensional spaces (more precisely, compact 3-manifolds) can be naturally
              decomposed into geometric pieces. There are potential applications in complex
              variables, geometric group theory, 3-dimensional topology, and in the theory of
              biological cell growth.

