Title       : Theory and Applications of Random Cellular Automata and Related Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9971543

Award Number: 9971543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Griffeath griffeat@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971543
Griffeath

	On the theoretical side, the present proposal will
              further develop the investigator's rigorous theory of threshold growth, and
              related dynamics, for deterministic and probabilistic cellular automata (CA). 
              The theory of growth models has played a key role in the analysis of spatial
              complex systems, dating back to the middle of the century.  During the present
              funding period, Griffeath will seek to further that theory by focusing on five
              main research projects: scaling laws for critical monotone solidification,
              shape theory for random perturbations of threshold growth, a prototype of
              spinodal clustering, quantitative analysis of 'small-world networks', and
              asymptotics for von Koch - type CA solidification.  These studies are primarily
              theoretical, their goal being rigorous mathematical results.  On the
              experimental side, Griffeath has begun to examine more complex interactions
              which exhibit a wide variety of intriguing self-organizational effects not
              present in the simplest "linear" spatial systems.  Preliminary empirical
              modeling projects at present include digital biofilms, nonlinear spatial
              modeling of social interaction, CA pattern dynamics, and a simple CA paradigm
              for traffic jams.

	In broad strokes, the ongoing research of David Griffeath
              combines mathematical analysis and computer visualization in the study of
              complex spatial systems.  The investigator exploits this interplay for the
              theoretical and empirical study of deterministic and random cellular automata,
              local lattice dynamics which serve as prototypes for spiral formation in
              excitable media, the morphology of crystals, and various other nonlinear
              processes such as nucleation, flocking, host-parasite interactions, dendritic
              growth, and phase separation by surface tension.  The analysis of aggregation,
              shape, interfaces, and droplet interaction for such basic growth models sheds
              new light on many areas of applied science.  The investigator's research
              contributes to the mathematical foundations of such processes.

