Title       : Environment-Dependent Energetics of Ionically Bonded Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a9971476

Award Number: 9971476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anders E. Carlsson aec@wuphys.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971476
Carlsson
This grant supports theoretical research on the electronic
              structure of metal atoms with ionic bonding.  Metal atoms in ionic bonding
              configurations occur in a large number of technologically important materials
              ranging from ceramics to biomolecular materials.  Electronic effects are
              important in the structure and function of many of these materials, for example
              in determining the square coordination of copper in copper-oxide materials. 
              Existing simulations for ionically bound metals based on classical force fields
              treat electronic effects with energy terms of uncertain accuracy.  The research
              here uses an approximate quantum-mechanical analysis to develop force fields
              that treat electronic efects reliably.  For transition metals, a moment
              expansion based on the width of the d-complex is used to develop an energy
              function similar to the "modified embedded-atom method."  The angular
              dependence of the energy is obtained as a fourth-order polynomial in cosine
              theta, where theta is a bond angle centered on the transition metal.  For
              non-transition metals, a fourth-order perturbation expansion is used to
              generate angular potentials whose functional forms will be fit to results from
              accurate density-functional calculations, for crystalline structures and small
              molecules.  The resulting energy functions will be incorporated into existing
              force fields for metals in ionic materials and for metals attached to covalent
              frameworks.  The improved force fields will be applied to the analysis of the
              local structure around transition metals in zeolite structures and to the
              energetics of metal ions in self-assembled biomolecular materials. The research
              will be done in cooperation with the Danish Technical University, the National
              Institute for Standards and Technology and the Ford Motor Company.
%%%
This
              grant supports theoretical research on the electronic structure of metal atoms
              with ionic bonding.  At first glance, metal atoms in pure metals are bound
              together by the "metallic bond."  However, all metallic bonds have some degree
              of ionicity, or electrostatic attraction.  Metal atoms in ionic bonding
              configurations occur in a large number of technologically important materials
              ranging from ceramics to biomolecular materials.  This research will develop
              accurate methods to determine the interplay between metallic and ionic bonding.
               Two test cases will be considered: metal atoms in an intrinsically ionic
              environment (zeolites) and metal atoms in a covalent environment (biomolecular
              materials).  The research will be done in cooperation with the Danish Technical
              University, the National Institute for Standards and Technology and the Ford
              Motor Company.
***

