Title       : Third Sound in Superfuild 3He
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9971502

Award Number: 9971502
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $699147             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Davis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9971502
Davis

This is a condensed matter physics project that investigates
              quantum phenomena in liquid helium. Surface waves usually cannot occur on the
              thin liquid films which are adsorbed on solid substrates because viscosity
              inhibits their motion. However, in the special case of thin superfluid 4He
              films, these surface waves can exist and are given the name "Third Sound". This
              laboratory recently observed similar surface waves in thin superfluid 3He
              films. The discovery of third sound in superfluid 3He creates several exciting
              new opportunities because 3He is an unconventional p-wave
              Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superfluid. In some respects the complexities
              of the p-wave system are echoed in the more recently discovered d-wave high-Tc
              superconductors where the superconductivity may originate in a single
              2-dimensional (2-d) atomic layer (CuO2). Thus, understanding of 2-d
              unconventional superconductors is both of fundamental and practical interest.
              Superfluid 3He, in very thin films, is an unconventional 2-d  superfluid which
              will be investigated using third sound. Studies of quantum phase transitions
              are among the area of interest in this and related superconductor/superfluid
              research. The wide variety of experimental tools used in this research will
              provide an opportunity for training graduate students and post-docs in
              sophisticated research techniques. This experience will allow them to
              contribute to the nation's technological infrastructure.
%%%
This is a
              condensed matter physics project that investigates quantum phenomena in liquid
              helium. Waves on the surface of a fluid provide a powerful tool for studying
              the fluid itself and the surrounding physical environment. For example, the
              decreasing speed of ocean waves as they approach the shore reveals the depth of
              the sea and the strength of gravity. Although gravity is a common restoring
              force, others exist, including the electrostatic force which causes a thin
              liquid film to adhere to a solid. Such forces are the basis for all adherence
              of liquid films to solids. Previous investigations of surface waves in helium
              have been restricted to the 4He isotope where the superfluid waves are said to
              propagate via so-called 'third sound'.  However, this project is focuses on the
              recent discover of third sound in 3He. The quantum properties of 3He differ
              significantly from those of 4He and present a number of new research
              opportunities. The physics of the 3He surface is a close counterpart to a
              number of technologically important thin film systems including high-Tc
              superconductors and the 2-dimensional electron gas in MOSFET transistors. Third
              sound in 3He will be used as a tool to probe the fundamental quantum physic of
              thin liquid films. The wide variety of experimental tools used in this research
              will provide an opportunity for training graduate students and post-docs in
              sophisticated research techniques. This experience will allow them to
              contribute to the nation's technological infrastructure.




