Title       : Statistical Models of Two-Dimensional and Geostrophic Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a9971204

Award Number: 9971204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Turkington turk@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT   for NSF/DMS Applied Mathematics

Bruce E. Turkington
Department of
              Mathematics and Statistics
University of Massachusetts, Amherst


The
              research project concerns statistical models of turbulent fluid
motions.  In
              particular, these investigations focus on equilibrium
models of coherent
              structures in developed turbulent flows that are
either two-dimensional or
              quasi-geostrophic.  The principal motivation
for this work comes from
              applications in geophysical fluid dynamics.
Statistical equilibrium models
              defined by Gibbs ensembles are
constructed from the conserved quantities for
              the underlying fluid
dynamics.  The continuum limit of these lattice models is
              analyzed
using probabilistic techniques, especially the theory of
              large
deviations.  This approach furnishes rigorous derivations of
              the
constrained maximum entropy principles whose solutions are the
              most
probable macroscopic states of the systems.  These macrostates
represent
              long-lived, large-scale flows that self-organize in the
turbulent vorticity
              field.  For instance, they can be zonal shear
flows or embedded vortex
              structures.  In a variety of contexts,
including one-layer barotropic flows
              and two-layer baroclinic flows,
the variational problems governing these
              states are solved numerically
by means of a robust and accurate method.  In
              this way, quantitative
predictions about the macroscopic behavior of the
              system, which is
turbulent on the microscopic scales, can be made without
              resolving all
the scales of motion.  Another direction of the research is to
              extend
these equilibrium theories to a new class of
              quasi-equilibrium
theories determined by collective variables that are not
              necessarily
conserved quantities.  This extension allows the same general
              approach
to be applied in situations where the coherent states
              are
slow-varying, but unsteady.

Turbulent fluid flow remains one of the
              unsolved puzzles of physical
science.  A better theoretical understanding of
              turbulence would
greatly improve our ability to compute the behavior of
              natural fluid
motions.  In particular, geophysical fluid flows -- the
              large-scale
motions of the Earth's oceans and atmosphere -- are very difficult
              to
predict because of their turbulent fluctuations.  Nevertheless, these
flow
              systems, whose motions are mainly horizontal, have special
properties not
              shared by general fluid motions in three dimensions.
Consequently, they tend
              to exhibit organized behavior in their largest
features while they remain
              disordered and random on a range of smaller
length scales.  The research
              conducted in this project addresses the
mathematical and computational issues
              involved in modeling phenomena
of this type.  Specifically, the work seeks to
              develop the tools
necessary to calculate the persistent, predominant states of
              nearly
two-dimensional fluid systems without resolving the full complexity
              of
their detailed behavior.  With such tools in hand, the typical or
"most
              probable" states of geophysical flows can be characterized and
computed. 
              Besides being of fundamental interest in the field of fluid
dynamics, these
              states can used as building blocks in predictions
about the long-term trends
              in the ocean-atmosphere system, and hence
they are relevant to weather
              forecasting and climate modeling.


