Title       : Completing the Whately Telescope Upgrade for Undergraduate Infrared Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1990        
File        : a9051603

Award Number: 9051603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11644              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Skrutskie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Five Colleges Inc
	      97 Sprint Street
	      Amherst, MA  010022324    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Observational astronomy is both a science and an art.  While the               
              science can be taught in the classroom, real understanding of                  
              telescopes, detectors, and data acquisition requires hands on                  
              experience at an observatory.  Most undergraduate students receive             
              little direct exposure to observational astronomy with                         
              instrumentation and computing facilities comparable to those found             
              at major observatories.  Over the past two years the Five College              
              Astronomy Department has been supporting an upgrade of a local 40cm            
              Boller and Chivens reflector.  The goal this project is to provide             
              an environment for students which, in as many was as possible,                 
              simulates the key aspects of modern telescopic observing.  The                 
              availability of state-of-the-art infrared instrumentation which has            
              been installed on this small telescope not only provides                       
              undergraduates with invaluable laboratory experience but also enables          
              them to carry out research projects competitive in both quality and            
              significance to those performed at the largest telescope facilities.           
              The department is continuing the upgrade by incorporating a low-               
              light camera for remote source acquisition and guiding, upgrading the          
              data acquisition computer to accomodate a new high data-rate                   
              detection system, and providing students with access to professional           
              data reduction and analysis computing facilities.  The consortium is           
              matching the award with an equal amount of funds.//
