Title       : Improvements in the Physical-Analytical Sequence. Thermodynamic and
               Chromatographic Studies on Biological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1993  
File        : a9051730

Award Number: 9051730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1990     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71512              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry P. Hopkins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gabor G. Patonay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In the physical-analytical sequence at Georgia State University,               
              improvements are being made in studies on solution phenomena and               
              thermodynamic analyses, and high pressure liquid chromatography                
              (HPLC) is now the primary technique in the chromatography area.                
              Automated thermal and pH titration systems connected to personal               
              computers are being used by students to explore, in a biological               
              context, the thermodynamic and analytical aspects of proton                    
              transfer and metal ion binding.  Titrations with hundreds or even              
              thousands of data points can be performed on small volumes, thus               
              allowing use of costly biological samples and performance of up                
              to ten times more experiments than at present.  Students are                   
              using HPLC to perform separations of optically active components,              
              establish the molecular weight distribution for sonicated DNA                  
              samples and amylose mixtures, explore the analytical capabilities              
              of chromatography and determine the detection limits for a                     
              particular component in an analgesic.  Extensive data for several              
              biological systems will be combined with the latest mathematical               
              treatments to provide physical parameters and their associated                 
              errors for each system studied, and in some cases test the                     
              validity of chemical models.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The institution is contributing to this project and amount equal               
              to the NSF funds.
