Title       : Computer Laboratory for Undergraduate Research and Research Design Courses in
               Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1990        
File        : a9051323

Award Number: 9051323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30380              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Monahan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynda A. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Dunbar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hajime Otani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Sinclair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              79        Psychology Sciences NEC                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Undergraduate students in two research methods courses are being               
              provided with a computer lab to give them direct exposure to research          
              methods. The computer lab is used by research design students to               
              simulate experiments that illustrate fundamental design principles. The        
              lab is used by research applications students to perform replications          
              of some important recent experiments in a number of fields of                  
              psychology, and to select individual final experiments from a large            
              number of studies already in the literature or to create variations of         
              those studies. The equipment consists of a network of 12 stations and a        
              controller/file server as well as additional hardware and software to          
              conduct and simulate the experiments. Undergraduates can gain hands-on         
              experience with some of the most important psychological experiments           
              while learning the principles of research and research design. This            
              should help them learn problem solving and probabilistic reasoning as          
              well. Students should learn more and be more enthusiastic about                
              research as a result of using this lab. The university will contribute         
              an amount equal to the award.
