Title       : Use of NMR Spectroscopy to Improve Organic Laboratory Instruction at Harper
               College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9051317

Award Number: 9051317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31202              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Y. Oester   (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Macaulay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Rainey Harper Col
	      Algonquin & Roselle Roads
	      Palatine, IL  60067    312/397-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              For the past several years, the chemistry department has been                  
              engaged in a program to modernize its facilities and                           
              instrumentation.  A new organic lab has been built.  New                       
              instruments have been purchased including two infrared                         
              spectrometers, a UV-visible spectrophotometer and five computers.              
              The acquisition, through this project, of a NMR spectrometer was               
              the next logical step in the modernization program.  NMR                       
              spectroscopy had been taught entirely as a classroom subject at the            
              college.  Direct laboratory experience with the NMR added a new                
              dimension to learning this difficult subject, making it vivid and              
              real.  Since most four-year colleges and universities provide                  
              laboratory experiments in NMR for sophomore organic students,                  
              having the NMR spectrometer provides the sophomores with an                    
              educational experience equivalent to that of sophomores at other               
              schools.  The plan for using the NMR has three parts.  At the end              
              of the first semester organic course, students are introduced to               
              the instrument via a demonstration, computer simulation, supervised            
              practice and, finally recording the spectrum of an unknown.  During            
              the second semester students use NMR spectroscopy to characterize              
              the products of synthetic reactions.  Finally, at the end of the               
              second semester, students use NMR in doing qualitative organic                 
              analysis.  The institution has contributed to this project in an               
              amount equal to the NSF funds.
