Title       : Next-Generation McIDAS for Classroom/Laboratory Instruction and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1990    
File        : a9051548

Award Number: 9051548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marvin E. Kauffman                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance F. Bosart bosart@atmos.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Knight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Keyser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Volker A. Mohnen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Demerjian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The Department of Atmospheric Science at the State                        
              University of New York at Albany would like to improve the                     
              quality and breadth of its undergraduate teaching and laboratory               
              experience for both majors and non-majors through the purchase of              
              a next-generation Man-Computer-Interactive Data Access System                  
              (McIDAS).  With such a system users can effectively process and                
              analyze digital meteorological satellite images as well as more                
              conventional meteorological global surface and upper air                       
              observations for instructional, laboratory and research purposes.              
                                                                                             
                   McIDAS will fill two critical needs.  First it can be used                
              in the classroom to expose nonscience majors to scientific ideas,              
              concepts and methods that can have impact on their daily lives,                
              allowing them to become more informed citizens about global                    
              weather, climate and environmental issues.  Second is the need to              
              increase opportunities for undergraduate students majoring in                  
              atmospheric science to be exposed to fundamental meteorological                
              concepts and quantitative approaches to problems through                       
              independent study, undergraduate research projects, synoptic                   
              laboratory applications, classroom projects and problem sets, as               
              well as curriculum enrichment, by integrating McIDAS more                      
              effectively into day-to-day classroom and laboratory teaching.                 
                                                                                             
                   The next generation McIDAS addresses these critical                       
              Departmental needs because of the local computer power and                     
              enhanced graphics capability built into the wideword workstation.              
                                                                                             
              The quality of the undergraduate teaching and laboratory                       
              experience would be improved considerably because for the first                
              time instructors would be able to process, analyze and archive                 
              global weather and climate cases of interest for later                         
              instructional and research purposes.  Additionally faculty                     
              members and students wold be able to apply locally generated                   
              scientific software packages on McIDAS to real time or archived                
              datastreams as well as link into other local or national computer              
              systems for the processing and analysis of additional data in                  
              support of special laboratory and research projects
