Title       : Undergraduate Construction Materials Laboratory Computer-Based Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1991      
File        : a9051226

Award Number: 9051226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4175               (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Richardson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1365      PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The aim of the project is to teach microcomputer-based laboratory              
              instrumentation and data analysis techniques to civil engineering              
              undergraduates.  This includes the selection of the type and                   
              characteristics of instrumentation, and the use of statistical                 
              data analysis methods.  The major instruments to be utilized are               
              measurement devices such as LVDT's, a pressure transducer,  an                 
              extensometer, signal conditioners, an analog-to-digital                        
              converter, an IBM 286 computer with hard drive, a plotter,                     
              printer and associated software.  The applications of the                      
              equipment will occur in a required junior level undergraduate                  
              civil engineering course in construction materials.  The students              
              will be involved in monitoring load and deformation                            
              electronically, observing real time date display, using the                    
              microcomputer to manipulate and analyze the data, and to produce               
              hardcopy reports and plots.  The project is significant because                
              it will familiarize civil engineering students with modern                     
              electronic microcomputer-based instrumentation and                             
              microcomputers.  This instructional block is a logical extension               
              of the sophomore level Introduction to Computational Techniques                
              for Civil Engineering Course where students are introduced to                  
              various software tools and numerical analysis techniques.  In                  
              this way the student will acquired both software and hardware                  
              computer skills necessary in today's civil engineering                         
              profession.  Further, this equipment furthers to stated                        
              departmental goal of "replacing obsolete equipment with state-of-              
              the-art electronic date acquisition systems...?and! to stress                  
              communication skills, computer skills and statistical skills."
