Title       : Undergraduate Image Processing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1990   
File        : a9051047

Award Number: 9051047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. W. Van Citters                       
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37595              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc Davis marc@deep.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Welch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1218      ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES & INSTRM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In the past, the photographic plate provided the data for most of              
              optical astronomy.  Undergraduate students in astronomy                        
              laboratory classes were, therefore, introduced to equipment like               
              measuring engines and iris photometers.  Now, however, most                    
              detectors are electronic.  Most astronomical data resides in                   
              digital form and a new set of analytical tools has replaced the                
              old.  Improved access to these new tools by our undergraduate                  
              students will be provided.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The Department has recently increased its emphasis on laboratory-              
              based training so that students at all levels have exposure to the             
              trials of real data.  Newly-implemented laboratory courses                     
              concentrate not just on the analysis of data.  Rather, the                     
              students learn to collect data and to understand what the data can             
              yield as well as appreciate its limitations.  The Astronomy Program            
              Review Committee, appointed by the Chancellor to conduct a five-               
              year review, strongly recommended that the laboratory programs of              
              the department be continued and, even strengthened.                            
                                                                                             
              The Department has recently upgraded its student observing                     
              facilities at the Leuschner Observatory, which include remote                  
              observing capabilities.  An aggressive upgrading of on campus                  
              facilities with and emphasis on image processing as the tool of                
              modern astronomy will be carried out.  Students will be provided               
              with the opportunity to gather their own observational data at the             
              student observatory, to analyze it quantitatively, to draw their               
              own conclusions and to understand the uncertainties.                           
                                                                                             
              The concentration on image processing has many benefits: first of              
              all, it is intuitive; people are visual creatures and the                      
              extraction of quantitative data from pictures presents few                     
              conceptual difficulties.  Secondly, it is applicable to a wide                 
              range of astronomical problems in all wavelength regions.                      
              Lastly, it has applications which go far beyond astronomical uses.
