Title       : Computer Data Acquisition, Data Analysis, and Experimental Simulation in the
               General Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1990     
File        : a9051864

Award Number: 9051864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24892              (Estimated)
Investigator: L.Thomas Dillman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio Wesleyan University
	      
	      Delaware, OH  43015    614/369-4431

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Physics students have a declining interest in the traditional                  
              experiments which have been the mainstay of college general                    
              physics laboratory.  All too often they involve use of outdated                
              experimental techniques which students consider mundane and                    
              boring, even though the laws and ideas being considered are still              
              quite relevant to the modern world.  The physics department at                 
              Ohio Wesleyan is addressing this problem by introducing                        
              innovative experiments into the laboratory curriculum which make               
              extensive use of modern sensors, and involve computer control of               
              scientific equipment in the data gathering process.  The computer              
              is also being used to relieve the student of the tedious tasks of              
              manual analysis and graphical presentation of the data.                        
              Additionally, microcomputer spreadsheet techniques are being used              
              to simulate complex physical problems, or problems in areas of                 
              physics which are not easily accessible by direct                              
              experimentation.  The goal is to show students in an exciting way              
              that the principles they are studying are universally applicable               
              and transcend the artificially contrived problems of general                   
              physics texts.  While the emphasis in this project is on the                   
              general physics courses, the microcomputers and interfacing                    
              equipment purchased are also being used by upperclass pre-                     
              engineering and physics majors for sophisticated data analysis                 
              techniques and for special projects.                                           
                                                                                             
              The university will match the award with an equal amount.
