Title       : Undergraduate Training in Modern Techniques of Experimental Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9051880

Award Number: 9051880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Hoy rrh3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don W. McBride  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Neurobiology and                
              Behavior at Cornell University to help purchase equipment which                
              will be used to teach undergraduate biology students, and students             
              in allied fields such as physics, engineering and computer                     
              sciences, modern techniques in cellular neuroscience through hands-            
              on laboratory experience.  This will be accomplished by active                 
              research scientists in a series of three undergraduate courses                 
              entitled:  1) Principles of Neurophysiology, 2) Electronics for                
              Neurobiologists, and 3) Computer Interfacing for Neurobiologists.              
              In the first course, undergraduates will use the state-of-the-art              
              research equipment (computers, voltage clamp amplifiers,                       
              micromanipulators, microelectrode pullers, and perfusion pumps) in             
              laboratory exercises designed to teach the principles of electrical            
              signalling in the nervous system.  In these exercises, computer                
              data acquisition and analysis and teaching students the use of                 
              Macintosh II computers, along with the related hardware and                    
              software necessary for this purpose will be emphasized.  This                  
              course will replace all standard vertebrate preparations with                  
              invertebrate model systems.  In the electronics course, students               
              will learn fundamental principles of electronics as applied to                 
              electrophysiology and other biological fields to design simple,                
              relevant circuits such as those used for basic voltage and patch               
              clamp amplifiers.  The computer interfacing course will use the                
              Macintosh II computers to teach the technical details (hardware and            
              software) of computer interfacing methods in biological                        
              experiments.  This project has important significance not only in              
              providing undergraduates with training in new and powerful methods             
              of experimental neuroscience, but also in developing advanced                  
              teaching tools useful for other neuroscience training programs.                
              Through this project, undergraduate students will gain theoretical             
              and technical skills that will help them be productive scientists              
              in both corporate and academic research environments.  The grantee             
              is matching this award with non-Federal sources.
