Title       : Visualization Experiments for the Future in Chemical Engineering Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1991  
File        : a9051562

Award Number: 9051562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Zukoski zukoski@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard I. Masel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Stadtherr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Jepson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan J. Higdon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1365      PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              All existing chemical engineering laboratories are deficient in                
              the provision of visualization experiments.  Students have to                  
              conduct an experiment in the laboratory and then perform                       
              calculations before a clear understanding of the experiment is                 
              obtained.  Much of the opportunity for learning in the laboratory              
              is thus lost.  This project will considerably improve the                      
              learning process by the design and implementation reaction                     
              kinetics and mass transfer.  Each experiment involves the use of               
              color changes obtained by the illumination or chemical reaction                
              of dyes.  The color change allows the student to watch the                     
              experiment (e.g., as the reaction advances) and the change can be              
              measure by using either a spectrophotometer, interferometer or                 
              thermal imaging systems.  This change is directly proportional to              
              the extent of the reaction and quantitative results are readily                
              obtained. The result can be taken manually or with data                        
              acquisition systems.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Experiments in liquid Extraction, control and kinetics in plug                 
              flow and continuous stirred tank reactors, visualization of flow               
              around tubes, bends and fittings, heat exchangers and the                      
              temperature profiles in a glass distillation column are                        
              conducted.  Each experiment employs the latest advances in                     
              flowmeters, pressures transducers and other instrumentation.
