Title       : Integrated Interactive Electrical Engineering Workstation for Combining
               Theoretical Computation, Electrical Measure- ments and Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1990       
File        : a9051175

Award Number: 9051175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raghupathy Bollini   (Principal Investigator current)
              Oktay Alkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry D. Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Edwardsvill
	      Campus Box 20
	      Edwardsville, IL  620250020    618/692-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns the development of a standardized workstation            
              to assist students in the electrical engineering laboratories.  Each           
              workstation is centered around the NeXT computer coupled with                  
              automated test equipment and permits the students to make                      
              computations (numerical models), perform automated electrical                  
              measurements, acquire data, perform simulation and test designs from           
              one integrated workstation.  By unifying all of the above activities           
              via one standard computer interface (taught early in the junior                
              year), the student is able to concentrate on the engineering concepts          
              being taught throughout the rest of the laboratory courses.                    
              Workstation development concentrates on three specific applications.           
              Two areas deal with continuous and discrete signals and systems and            
              makes use of the GPIB equipment and storage oscilloscope and spectrum          
              analyzer software.  Theoretical and simulation results are easily              
              compared and contrasted with experimental measurements.  The third             
              area deals with development of innovative computer-mentored                    
              experimentation with microprocessor systems using logic analyzers.             
              These applications are intended to demonstrate the effectiveness of            
              the integrated workstation approach and lay a foundation for further           
              work. The award is being matched by an equal amount from the                   
              principal investigator's institution.
