Title       : Improving the Chemistry Curriculum with NMR Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1990       
File        : a9051885

Award Number: 9051885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian D. Humphrey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry M. Posin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Isidor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montclair State University
	      Valley Road & Normal Avenue
	      Montclair, NJ  07043    201/893-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The curriculum of the chemistry major at the Institution has been              
              improved in the area of instrumental chemical analysis by a                    
              significant expansion in the extent and scope of "hands-on" student            
              use of modern nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques in                   
              several required and elective laboratory courses.  These                       
              improvements have been accomplished with the acquisition of a                  
              modern NMR spectrometer capable of performing multinuclear,                    
              variable temperature, and pulse programming experiments.  Specific             
              experiments for student utilization of the NMR spectrometer have               
              been incorporated into the Experimental Organic Chemistry I & II,              
              Instrumental Chemical Analysis, Experimental Physical Chemistry,               
              and Experimental Inorganic Chemistry courses.  These experiments,              
              in a progressive way, move students through practical exposure to              
              NMR beginning with simple 1D proton and carbon experiments and                 
              ending with applications of dynamic, multinuclear, and 2D NMR in               
              the upper level courses.  Providing "hands-on" exposure to the many            
              capabilities of NMR experiments has significantly improved the                 
              program for undergraduate chemistry majors at the institution along            
              with other major chemical instrumentation in spectroscopy,                     
              electrochemistry, and chromatography.  The institution contributed             
              to the project in an amount equal to the NSF funds.
