Title       : Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry in Chemistry at Swarthmore College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1990     
File        : a9051630

Award Number: 9051630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1990     
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28658              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Hammons jhammonl@cc.swarthmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Charonnat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project has acquired a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer                
              which is being used throughout the college's chemistry program,                
              beginning with introductory Organic Chemistry.  The instrument is              
              central to the new junior-level laboratory course, in which                    
              students do several extensive projects, each of which is                       
              instrumentally oriented and modeled on original, published                     
              research.  The equipment is also playing an important role in                  
              student-faculty research project in organic synthesis in progress              
              in the Department.                                                             
                                                                                             
              More than half of the students who graduate from Swarthmore                    
              College with a major in Chemistry or Biochemistry go on to                     
              careers in scientific research.  The principal goal of the                     
              Department of Chemistry is to provide these students with the                  
              best possible experimental training for such a career.  A crucial              
              component of this preparation is the hands-on use of modern                    
              instrumentation in the context of chemically interesting                       
              laboratory projects.  The addition of experience in gas                        
              chromatography/mass spectrometry is significantly enriching the                
              education of this very talented group of future scientists.                    
                                                                                             
              The Department of Chemistry is publishing a description of their               
              new junior-level lab course with the expectation that is will be               
              a useful model for the chemistry curricula of other institutions.              
                                                                                             
              The institution has matched the NSF award with an equal amount of              
              funds.
