Title       : A Computer Classroom at Bryn Mawr College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1990 
File        : a9051943

Award Number: 9051943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: JANICE L ALEXANDER                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rhonda J. Hughes rhughes@brynmawr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                   This project will support the establishment of a computer                 
              laboratory in order to improve the manner in which mathematics is              
              taught by using the computer in a fundamental way to motivate                  
              concepts and involve students in the process of mathematics                    
              research and discovery.  It is being funded under the                          
              Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement (ILI) Program, which                
              has the goal of supporting projects to develop new or improved                 
              instrument-based undergraduate laboratory courses in science,                  
              mathematics, or engineering.  The Instrumentation and Laboratory               
              Improvement Program provides matching support for the                          
              instrumentation necessary to implement undergraduate                           
              instructional improvements at U.S. colleges and universities.                  
                   In particular, the main objective of this project is to                   
              engage students' interest in mathematics by using the computer to              
              motivate concepts and to involve students as active participants.              
              The major focus of this project will be a new course in Chaotic                
              Dynamical Systems which: (1) is designed to appeal to a wide                   
              spectrum of students interested in science and mathematics, (2)                
              is seen as the precursor of a first-year course that would                     
              combine dynamical systems and calculus, and (3) would bring to a               
              much broader audience the excitement and beauty of research-level              
              mathematics.  Other courses in which the computer is already used              
              would also be affected by the acquisition of the new equipment.                
              The long-range goal is the improvement of the participation of                 
              women and minorities in the scientific workforce, as well as the               
              role women play in our society as mathematically and                           
              scientifically literate citizens.
