Title       : Development of Undergraduate Curriculum in Groundwater Hydrology: Experimental
               Investigation and Computer Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1991      
File        : a9051744

Award Number: 9051744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14665              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Widdowson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Meadows  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony S. McAnally  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1365      PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Groundwater Hydrology project will establish a model                       
              laboratory component to undergraduate hydrology courses in which               
              basic principles of fluid flow and contaminant transport in                    
              porous media are presented.  In addition to receiving classroom                
              instruction, students will quantify and observe fundamental flow               
              and solute transport processes in both the laboratory and field.               
              Students will also participate in the numerical simulation of                  
              these processes.                                                               
                                                                                             
              Flow-through porous media apparatuses will be constructed for a                
              variety of flow geometries.  Experiments will be instrumented                  
              with pressure transducers and specific ion electrodes.  Students               
              will investigate Darcian flow, aquifer field tests and solute                  
              transport in homogeneous and heterogeneous porous media.  A                    
              computer data acquisition system will allow for simultaneous                   
              readings and data storage.  A high-speed microcomputer will                    
              allow rapid graphical representation of data and numerical                     
              simulation experiments.                                                        
                                                                                             
              The project is unique in that engineering hydrology at the                     
              undergraduate level has traditionally incorporated analytical-                 
              based laboratory exercises.  This state-of-the-art groundwater                 
              hydrology course will serve as a model for engineering programs.               
              Undergraduates seeking degrees in the areas of water resources,                
              environmental and geotechnical engineering will have a unique                  
              opportunity to experience laboratory and field experimentation                 
              combined with numerical simulation of flow and transport                       
              processes in the subsurface.
