Title       : Cell Fractionation: Introduction of Research Techniques intothe Biology
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9051795

Award Number: 9051795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49312              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Shinkle jshinkle@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence L. Espey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert V. Blystone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Koppenheffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782123104    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Trinity University provides many opportunities for undergraduates              
              to become involved with faculty research projects. They are                    
              encouraging students to take advantage of these opportunities to               
              learn research by modifying laboratory exercises in a manner that              
              will increase the students' familiarity with modern research                   
              instruments and techniques. They are purchasing a high speed                   
              centrifuge and ultracentrifuge for cell fractionation procedures,              
              and two UV-vis spectrophotometers and a scanning spectrofluorimeter            
              for fraction analysis. These instruments are being used to upgrade             
              laboratory courses in cellular and molecular biology, including a              
              sophomore level cell and molecular course, and advanced courses in             
              developmemtal biology, endocrinology and plant physiology. The                 
              centrifuges are being used for cell fractionation experiments and              
              competitive binding assays such as immunoassay. The UV-vis                     
              spectrophotometers are being used for marker enzyme assays, protein            
              and DNA measurement. The spectrofluorimeter is being used to                   
              introduce students to recently developed techniques using targeted             
              fluorescence probes. The incorporation of such procedures into the             
              curriculum should enhance the students' competence to enter                    
              graduate programs and careers in biological research. The                      
              university is contributing an amount equal to the award.
