Title       : Geotechnical Engineering Field Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1990     
File        : a9051295

Award Number: 9051295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey C. Evans   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project enhances the education of students in the critical area           
              of geotechnical engineering by their participation in field                    
              laboratory exercises.  This improves the present practice of                   
              classroom lectures coupled with only traditional laboratory                    
              exercises.  Without field sampling and testing experiments, the                
              student is left with only "textbook" knowledge of field aspects of             
              geotechnical engineering. The equipment purchased in support of this           
              project makes it possible for students to obtain soil samples from             
              the subsurface using a distributed sampling technique (the Split               
              Barrel Sampler and an undistributed one (the Shelby Tube).  Rock               
              samples are obtained using a rock recovery core barrel.  The students          
              conduct property tests on these samples in the geotechnical                    
              laboratory.  In addition to soil and rock sampling, the project                
              enables student to measure the in situ strength, compressibility and           
              permeability of soils using state-of-the-practice in situ testing              
              techniques.  These techniques include the standard penetration test,           
              the core penetration test with pore pressure measurements (the piezo-          
              cone), the flat-plate (Marchetti) dilatometer, and the vane shear              
              device.  Finally, the students acquire and analyze geotechnical data           
              using a field computer with data acquisition capability. The award             
              is being matched with a greater amount by the principal                        
              investigator's institution.
