Title       : Revitalized Undergraduate Chemistry with High Performance Liquid Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1990     
File        : a9051391

Award Number: 9051391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19759              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard L. McLean McLean@NEXTWORK.Rose-Hulman.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This undergraduate project implemented a versatile and reliable                
              analytical technique that has become the method of choice for                  
              many of today's more difficult chemical analysis problems.  A                  
              Shimadzu LC-6A High Performance Liquid Chromatographic system                  
              (HPLC), with refractive index, fluorescence, uv/visible                        
              absorption, and electrochemical detection systems, provided                    
              flexibility  high sensitivity, and low detection limits.  Trace                
              metal and organic analysis of various matrices are very important              
              in fully evaluating the quality of an industrial process and in                
              determining safe consumable projects.  Realistic and "real world"              
              opportunities are available to undergraduate chemistry and                     
              chemical engineering students interested in industrial and                     
              government careers that emphasize quality control and                          
              environmental investigations. Practical applications of HPLC                   
              involve the analysis of aqueous industrial effluents, natural                  
              products, polymers, forensic samples, and a host of commercial                 
              products including cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and pesticides.                 
              Chemistry and chemical engineering majors are able to vigorously               
              pursue undergraduate research projects by designing and                        
              developing separation and detection methods.  They utilize                     
              various detection systems, columns, solvent matrices, and                      
              chromatographic techniques like normal reverse phase, ion-                     
              exchange, and ion pair chromatography.                                         
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to this project in an amount equal to              
              the NSF funds.
