Title       : Construction Automation Computer Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1991  
File        : a9051202

Award Number: 9051202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21950              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Rodger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Construction management is a relatively new undergraduate discipline           
              with roots in Civil Engineering.  The emphasis is in teaching skills           
              necessary to organize, direct and control the construction process.            
              With construction automation becoming increasingly important in the            
              industry, it is equally important that undergraduates be given training        
              in computer applications to construction.  The two areas emphasized in         
              this project, construction cost estimating and project scheduling and          
              controls, are ideal for computer automation.  The project expands the          
              laboratory to provide twenty workstations equipped with microcomputers         
              and software for estimating and scheduling.  In addition, the                  
              laboratory has two plotters for printing schedule "networks" and five          
              digitizers for doing earthwork, roadway, and underground quantity take-        
              offs.  The assignments emphasize a "hands-on" approach with students           
              using actual construction blueprints from major jobs to do cost                
              estimating and scheduling of real-life projects.                               
                                                                                             
              The award is being matched by an equal amount from the principal               
              investigator's institution.
