Title       : The Integration of Computer Aided Engineering - Electronic Design Automation
               into Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1990     
File        : a9051790

Award Number: 9051790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60747              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Dingman tjdite@rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George H. Zion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to integrate leading-edge computer aided           
              engineering techniques for electronic (/digital) design into                   
              undergraduate education.  After being introduced to the basics of              
              design automation including graphics editors, schematic capture,               
              simulation, and validation tools, students in subsequent courses are           
              required to perform complete designs in the Electronic Design                  
              Automation environment prior to laboratory prototyping.  A new course          
              in the sophomore year teaches the basics of design automation.                 
              Automated design practice is then required in all junior and senior            
              level hardware oriented courses.  A major result of the design                 
              automation process is the amount of design work that can be required           
              and the advanced levels of sophistication made possible by design              
              efficiency tools.  The utilization of VALID Logic Inc. software running        
              on SUN workstations puts state of the art, professional quality design         
              tools in the hands of students, placing them in the forefront of design        
              automation practices.  This directly addresses emerging needs for              
              designers knowledgeable in the process of application specific                 
              integrated circuit design, and techniques involving VLSI design.  The          
              award is being matched by an equal amount from the principal                   
              investigator's institution.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     //
