Title       : Case Studies on Animals: Ethical Issues on Use of Animals by Humans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1992  
File        : a9121191

Award Number: 9121191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84997              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Barbara Orlans   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom L. Beauchamp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              This two year project allows a multi-disciplinary team of authors              
              to prepare a text book of case studies illustrating ethical issues             
              involved in human use of animals.  The cases will focus                        
              particularly on the use of animals in scientific experiments, but              
              will also include their use in numerous other settings.  Cases will            
              involve major historical events of the last decade, and others that            
              are composites of important social issues.  Authors include a                  
              physiologist, a philosopher, a lawyer and a veterinarian, to                   
              provide a range of expertise and viewpoints.  Consultants will                 
              review the manuscripts, to provide oversight and further views.                
              Major scholarly publishing houses will be solicited for interest in            
              publication, and wide distribution of the book is anticipated.  The            
              cases are intended to serve a broad range of educational purposes.             
              Target readership covers scientists, students, teachers and the                
              public.  Each have interest and need to understand the value                   
              judgments and conflicts surrounding human and animal interaction.              
              In particular, scientists whose careers involve animal                         
              experimentation usually receive no instruction about the ethical               
              dimensions of their work.  But, in order to train teachers to                  
              introduce this material into their courses, they need texts.                   
              Currently there are few suitable sources.  This project represents             
              a fresh approach that has been used successfully in other fields of            
              ethics.
