Title       : Signal Transduction in Cultured Neural Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9121540

Award Number: 9121540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56617              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark M. Rasenick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Nerve cells communicate with one another via chemical                          
              messengers (neurotransmitters) which bind to specific receptor                 
              proteins on the cell surface.  Since many of these                             
              transmitters do not penetrate the cell their message is                        
              carried by "second messenger" molecules generated in the                       
              interior of the cell on signal from the outer surface                          
              receptor-neurotransmitter complex.  These second messengers                    
              are often G-proteins of which there have been a variety                        
              identified.  The primary aim of this research is to determine                  
              which specific G-protein binds to which specific membrane                      
              receptor (on its interior aspect) to form the physiologically                  
              functional unit.  These studies will employ a detergent to                     
              permeabilize the membrane to allow the entrance of purified G-                 
              proteins and synthetic polypeptides that represent specific                    
              regions of the native G-protein.  The synthetic segments bind                  
              and inhibit inative G-protein binding to the receptor                          
              structure.  GTP associated with a photo-activated component                    
              that binds to the G-protein and irreversibly activates the                     
              receptor complex in the presence of the appropriate                            
              neurotransmitter will also be used to quantitate                               
              neurotransmitter activation.  The long-term goal of the                        
              research is to identify the specificity of the                                 
              neurotransmitter processes for specific cell and organ                         
              behaviors that lead to our understanding of the molecular                      
              processes associated with transmission and storage of                          
              information (learning and memory) in the whole organisms.
