Title       : A Study of Bit Wear and Origins of A Complex Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9121035

Award Number: 9121035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92896              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Anthony anthonyd@hartwick.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hartwick College
	      
	      Oneonta, NY  13820    607/432-4200

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Anthony will study archaeological specimens and also conduct               
              experimental research to determine when horseback riding first                 
              began in Asia.  While it is generally believed that the horse was              
              first domesticated in this region about 4,000 years ago, recent                
              evidence recovered by Dr. Anthony suggests that the true date is               
              at least 2,000 earlier.  What he has done is study the premolar                
              teeth from archaeological specimens to look for microscopic                    
              traces of bit wear.  When ridden, horses usually chew on the bit               
              with these back teeth and when bits are made from metal, they                  
              leave a characteristic type of wear.  The problem which Dr.                    
              Anthony faces is that the earliest bits were made not of metal                 
              but either leather or rope and it is unknown either whether these              
              softer materials leave traces or what they might look like.                    
              Therefore his research will consist of two parts.  First, he will              
              travel to museums in Russia and Hungary and make casts of horse                
              teeth recovered in archaeological contexts.  These are accurate                
              to the microscopic level and can be studied by SEM.  Secondly, he              
              will organize an experiment in which three horses will be ridden               
              with three different soft mouthpieces for one year.  High-                     
              resolution moulds of their premolars will be made monthly to                   
              track the nature and progression of wear.  These experimental                  
              results will then be applied the archaeological material.                      
                                                                                             
              The beginning and diffusion of horseback riding altered the                    
              course of human history in Europe, Asia and the Near East.                     
              Riding applied an alternate source of energy to the                            
              transportation of people and materials, a source that is still                 
              the standard by which the power of transportation technologies is              
              measured.  The social and economic changes caused by this                      
              innovation provide the earliest historical example of human                    
              societies transformed by the introduction of a new transport                   
              technology.  This project will examine in detail the origin of                 
              this process.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will increase              
              our understanding of the prehistory of a large portion of the Old              
              World.  It will shed new light on the long term effects of an                  
              important innovation and provide data of interest to a large                   
              number of archaeologists.
