Title       : Integration of Visual and Echoic Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1992      
File        : a9121331

Award Number: 9121331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis M. Herman lherman@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Bottlenosed dolphins have a highly efficient echolocation sense,               
              enabling them to examine their physical world through sound.  By               
              emitting short-duration pulsed sounds and listening to the echoes              
              received, dolphins are able to detect and identify objects.                    
              Because people lack this sense, it is difficult for us to                      
              appreciate the types of mental images or representations of                    
              objects that may be formed through echolocation.  Dolphins also                
              possess an efficient visual sense that is useful both underwater               
              and in air.  Are the images or representations formed through                  
              echolocation similar to those formed through vision?  Can a                    
              dolphin recognize through echolocation an object it has inspected              
              previously only through vision?  Conversely, can it recognize                  
              through vision an object it has inspected previously only through              
              echolocation?  These and related questions are addressed in a set              
              of experimental studies with dolphins at the Kawalo Basin Marine               
              Mammal Laboratory of the University of Hawaii.  By examining the               
              types or attributes of objects that may be recognized across the               
              two senses, the researchers will begin to develop ideas about                  
              what a dolphin "sees" with its echolocation sense.  More                       
              fundamentally, the research will also provide information on the               
              theoretical question of the degree to which information from                   
              different senses is integrated centrally--what may be called the               
              issue of the unity versus the independence of the senses.  Some                
              degree of unity is seen in studies with humans and nonhuman                    
              primates of the relationships between vision and active touch.                 
              Does a similar degree of sensory unity occur in the dolphin, a                 
              nonprimate mammal with many demonstrated intellectual                          
              capabilities paralleling those found for nonhuman primates?  What              
              might such ability in a dolphin add to ideas about the convergent              
              evolution of intelligence in cetacean and primate brains, which                
              have traced different paths for some 20 million years?  On an                  
              applied level, might the description of echoic "visualization" by              
              a dolphin offer fresh insights into the construction of                        
              intelligent sonar apparatus?
