Title       : Ruminative Thought
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1994     
File        : a9121276

Award Number: 9121276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242559             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard L. Martin LLMARTIN@arches.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Abraham Tesser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Unwanted, repetitive thoughts or rumination is a major symptom of              
              a number of psychological disorders, and may even instigate and                
              maintain some disorders, such as depression.  Previous research                
              on ruminative thinking has not fully addressed such questions as:              
              Where do such thoughts come from in the first place?  What                     
              motivates people to think at all?  Why do they think about one                 
              thing as opposed to another?  Finally, why do people ever stop                 
              thinking about something?  These researchers have developed a                  
              theory that addresses three basic questions about rumination:                  
              What starts it?  What stops it?  And what determines its content?              
              The theory suggests that the blockage of personal goals leads to               
              thought.  The content of thought is determined by several factors              
              including individuals' beliefs about what is important in the                  
              situation and what they have learned to associate with that                    
              situation.  A series of theory guided experiments and field study              
              will explore: the role of goals in initiating and terminating                  
              rumination; the role of people's own subjective theories about                 
              their goals in determining the content of rumination; the role of              
              goal non-attainment in producing analytical, problem solving                   
              thinking as opposed to feeling centered thinking; the relative                 
              effectiveness of blocked goals versus the environment                          
              ininitiating very long-term (i.e., years) rumination.  This                    
              research should yield a better understanding of the factors                    
              involved in activating spontaneous thoughts, determining their                 
              content, and reducing their power to intrude.
