Title       : Mechanisms of Associative Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1996   
File        : a9121094

Award Number: 9121094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George W. Uetz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan R. Wagner wagner@yalevm.cis.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Associative learning is one of the basic processes of knowledge                
              acquisition, and one that is generally recognized to be central                
              to the scientific understanding of human memory and cognition.                 
              Dr. Wagner's research follows in an approach to characterizing                 
              the fundamental mechanisms involved that is shared by a                        
              substantial group of investigators, namely the use of a simple,                
              experimentally well-controllable instance of associative learning              
              about which a great deal of supporting behavioral and biological               
              information is available (in this case, Pavlovian-like eyeblink                
              conditioning in the rabbit), and the attempted development of a                
              quantitative, "neural-network" account of the regularities                     
              observed.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The focus of Dr. Wagner's research at this juncture is on the                  
              manner in which associative learning appears to involve                        
              distinguishable emotional and non-emotional components that,                   
              although experimentally separable, may generally interact, with                
              emotional associations having the effect of modulating the                     
              behavioral consequences of non-emotional associations.  Studies                
              are aimed at providing a better understanding of the conditions                
              under which such modulation does or does not occur, the                        
              consequences it may have for observing related basic phenomena of              
              learning such as "long-term habituation," where in the stimulus-               
              response processing sequence it is effected, and whether it is                 
              limited to the modulation of performance, as has been observed,                
              or includes the modulation of associative learning as well.  The               
              answers to these questions are very basic to providing a                       
              computational neurobiological theory of associative learning.
