Title       : Establishment of a Material Research Group in High Pressure Materials Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1995      
File        : a9121570

Award Number: 9121570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: W. Lance Haworth                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2470000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. McMillan pmcmillan@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George H. Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Austen Angell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael O'Keeffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Petuskey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This grant is for the establishment of a new Materials Research                
              Group at Arizona State University.  The research of the group                  
              emphasizes use of high pressure in the synthesis of novel solid                
              state materials.  The high pressure regimes being explored include             
              1-50 kilobar range using piston-cylinder apperati, in-situ studies             
              of phase changes and materials properties up to approximately 1                
              megabar in diamond anvil cells, pressure and temperature multiple              
              anvil apperati capable of 230 kilobars at 2000 degrees centigrade              
              for synthesis of new materials.  The materials being studied                   
              include: (a) novel crystalline phases in the nitride system such as            
              alkali and alkaline earth nitrides, chalcogenide and oxide                     
              perovskites  (b) novel vitreous phases by pressure-induced chemical            
              stabilization of pure nitride glasses, pressure-induced                        
              destabilization of crystalline metallic and covalent phases, and               
              (c) novel ceramic phases from pressure stabilized plasma-enhanced              
              chemical vapor deposited precursors.  These new solid state                    
              materials are being characterized using x-ray and neutron                      
              diffraction, electron microscopy, micro-Raman and micro-infrared               
              spectroscopy, solid state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy,             
              electron microprobe chemical analysis, Auger electron spectroscopy,            
              and electron energy loss spectroscopy.  Theoretical guidance for               
              the synthetic endeavors is provided through ab initio quantum                  
              mechanical calculations and ab initio molecular dynamics                       
              techniques.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The Materials Research Group undertakes materials research of a                
              scope or complexity that would not be feasible through traditional             
              individual investigator research.  Progress is enhanced through a              
              group of investigators with diverse backgrounds participating in               
              interactive, collaborative research.
