Title       : Testing of an Improved Cumulus Parameterization in the NMC Global Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1993 
File        : a9121629

Award Number: 9121629
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Randall randall@redfish.atmos.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Dr. Randall has developed a new cumulus cloud parameterization            
              that has been run in a research mode with the general circulation              
              model at Colorado State University.  Early results with this                   
              parameterization are quite promising.  Under this award, the                   
              parameterization will be tested in an operational environment using            
              the National Meteorological Center's (NMC) global forecast model.              
              Proper representation of cumulus clouds in numerical models is                 
              essential for improving weather prediction.  Cumulus clouds are                
              important in releasing latent heat which drives the atmospheric                
              circulation as well as playing a major role in the development and             
              evolution of thunderstorms and tropical cyclones.                              
                   The new scheme has many features which make it attractive for             
              both practical and scientific reasons.  Unlike its predecessor, the            
              Arakawa-Schubert parameterization, this version allows penetrative             
              cumulus clouds to form at any level in the model.  It also allows              
              for the formation of shallow cumulus cloud convective downdrafts.              
              The new scheme thus brings the numerical model closer to what is               
              observed in nature.  Computationally, the new scheme appears to be             
              superior in terms of simplicity and speed.                                     
                   Forecasts with the new scheme will be compared with those made            
              with NMC's current cumulus scheme.  The principal investigator                 
              hopes to demonstrate the robustness and model independence of his              
              parameterization.                                                              
                   This project is being supported under the NSF-NMC Joint                   
              Program in Numerical Weather Prediction.
