Title       : The Policing of Developed Democracies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1992  
File        : a9121950

Award Number: 9121950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63054              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Bayley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Police in the United States and other developed democracies are in             
              a period of unprecendented rethinking of their basic purposes and              
              operational procedures.  The internationalization of policing is               
              a major current phenomenon, as a consequence of the growth of                  
              international crime problems and such developments as European                 
              integration.  Despite the fact that there is a general perception              
              among police professionals and observers that this is a watershed              
              period in policing, surprisingly little is known about patterns of             
              resource allocation, organization, and strategy.  This is not only             
              true on a comparative international basis, but for individual                  
              countries as well.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This grant will provide support for the completion of a comparative            
              international project on police operations in five developed                   
              democracies.  Specifically, Professor Bayley will compile data from            
              Great Britain, following the research design already followed in               
              Japan, Australia, Canada, and the United States; organize and                  
              analyze the data from the five countries; and write a book-length              
              manuscript on policing in developed countries.  Longitudinal and               
              cross-sectional data will be collected on police resources,                    
              personnel, dispositions, demands, workloads, and strategic plans               
              in three British forces as well as national data from the Home                 
              Office.  As in the other four countries, information will be                   
              collected about trends in allocations for the past twenty years and            
              about variations in allocations among different social settings                
              contemporaneously within each force.  In addition, interviews will             
              be conducted with key operational and managerial personnel.                    
                                                                                             
              This project will produce the most extensive collection to date of             
              information about the character of contemporary police operations              
              on a comparative basis.  It will increase our understanding of the             
              ways that differences in environment and organization of policing              
              affect the work police do.  As such, the study has practical                   
              relevance to public policies about police organization and service             
              delivery.  Also, the study will provide important theoretical                  
              insights into the linkage between policing functions and the                   
              organizational, administrative, and cultural milieu of police                  
              organizations.  Finally, it will provide a basis for examining                 
              other issues in law enforcement such as morals, attritions, police             
              values and attitudes, and the police subculture.  Understanding                
              these issues will contribute to basic knowledge about individual               
              rights and collective responsibilites as well as the proper                    
              relationship between government and the governed.
