Title       : Development of Neuronal Identity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1996     
File        : a9121366

Award Number: 9121366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John T. Edwards                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302497             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gunther S. Stent   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A central problem in developmental neuroscience is how individual              
              neurons acquire a constellation of idiosyncratic properties, such              
              as their location, shape, function and synaptic connections, that              
              define their uniqueness. This issue will be addressed in the                   
              nervous system of the leech embryo, a species that offers the                  
              advantages of having relatively few, stereotyped cells that are                
              easily accessible to experimental manipulation.  The mechanisms by             
              which segmentally repeated patterns of neuronal development are                
              modulated differentially among the 32 body segments to provide for             
              the specialized functions of the various body regions, such as the             
              head, the reproductive organs and the tail, will be studied.  The              
              hypothesis to be tested is that the segment-specific modulation of             
              the developmental pathway is the consequence of an intracellular               
              subdivision of an early embryonic precursor cell into sectors that             
              are differentially labeled with indicators of the future                       
              longitudinal body axis and are parcelled out in an orderly manner              
              to the daughter cells that found successive body segments.  Cells              
              in the embryo will be marked by intracellular injections and                   
              marking of the cell surface with cell lineage tracers.  Molecular              
              cell cloning technology will also be used to identify homeotic                 
              genes in the leech that may be involved in specifying neurons to               
              specific body segments.  The study of the mechanisms underlying                
              neurogenesis in this simple nervous system promise to provide                  
              insights of general relevance to the understanding of nervous                  
              system development in more complex organisms.
