Title       : Activity-Dependent Synaptic Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1994      
File        : a9121757

Award Number: 9121757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Susan F. Volman                     
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Lnenicka gregL@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              One of the major findings during the past thirty years of brain                
              research is that experience can play an important role in the                  
              development of synapses.  Dr. Lnenicka's research examines how the             
              structure and function of the synaptic connections between nerve               
              cells are influenced by experience.  Synapses between nerve cells              
              play an important role in the flow of information through the                  
              nervous system and changes in synaptic properties have been shown              
              to have a direct effect on behavior.  A key question in nervous                
              system development is how the properties of the synapses are                   
              specified.  In order to examine activity-dependent synaptic changes            
              with the precision not presently possible in the complex mammalian             
              brain, Dr. Lnenicka will study these synaptic changes in the                   
              simpler invertebrate nervous system.  Findings from his studies                
              will provide information on the basic mechanisms of experience                 
              dependent synaptic development.  The results of Dr. Lnenicka's                 
              study are likely to be important for understanding important                   
              problems in neurobiology such as the cellular basis of plasticity              
              in the nervous system.  It is also likely that results obtained                
              with this type of research can have foreseeable application in the             
              domain of public health.  For instance, recovery of function after             
              peripheral nerve injury may be improved by applying procedures                 
              derived from a better knowledge of the factors affecting synaptic              
              remodelling.***//
