Title       : Upgrade of CCD Spectroscopy for the MMTO and Steward Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1992      
File        : a9121801

Award Number: 9121801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. W. Van Citters                       
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Lesser mlesser@as.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig B. Foltz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1218      ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES & INSTRM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Several companies have produced excellent CCD detectors with low               
              noise, negligible dark current, and high charge-transfer                       
              efficiency.  These devices are nearly ideal for astronomical                   
              observations, with the exception of low overall quantum efficiency             
              (QE) and small imaging area.  At Steward Observatory a post-                   
              manufacture CCD optimizing process has been developed with which               
              commercially produced devices can be thinned for backside                      
              illumination, backside charging and antireflection coating.  This              
              procedure has now been demonstrated successfully on several devices            
              manufactured at the Loral Aeronautronics Corporation.                          
                                                                                             
              As a result of this success, we have undertaken a joint program                
              with the National Optical Astronomy Observatories (NOAO)  to                   
              custom-design two CCD detector formats for use in astronomical                 
              spectroscopy.  Eighty-eight of each of these two devices have been             
              manufactured (at NOAO's expense) with potentially 20% of                       
              astronomically useful quality.  In this proposal we seek funding               
              for the thinning, packaging, backside charging, antireflection                 
              coating, and implementation of several of these devices in the                 
              spectrographs of the two largest telescopes at the University of               
              Arizona; the Multiple Mirror Telescope (MMT) on Mt. Hopkins and the            
              2.3 m telescope on Kitt Peak.  These instruments are workhorse                 
              facility spectrographs routinely used by faculty, students, and                
              visitors, and will benefit greatly by the improved spectral                    
              coverage, higher efficiency, flatter imaging surface, and lower                
              noise of the new detectors.  The MMT spectrograph in particular                
              will for the first time have a two-dimensional detector available              
              for blue and near-UV observations.  This will open entirely new                
              classes of observations which can be efficiently made with this                
              large aperture telescope.
