Title       : International Relations Theory: A Formal Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1992  
File        : a9121959

Award Number: 9121959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74485              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Powell rpowell@violet.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Many of the most influential current approaches to international               
              relations theory appeal to analogies between the international                 
              system and oligopolistic markets.  However, the existing formal                
              economic models of oligopoly have few counterparts in international            
              relations theory.  In this research the investigator develops a                
              formal approach to international relations theory by beginning to              
              formalize this analogy.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Preliminary research by the investigator has already developed a               
              natural model of a bipolar international system; established                   
              conditions sufficient to ensure the existence of a peaceful                    
              equilibrium in which neither state attacks; shown that there is a              
              strictly Pareto dominant pair of peaceful equilibrium payoffs; and             
              characterized the unique pure-stragey, peaceful, Markov perfect                
              equilibrium that yields these payoffs.  In the model, increases in             
              the cost of fighting, a state's level of risk aversion, a state's              
              discount factor, and the advantages of striking first are shown to             
              increase the equilibrium level of armaments in the system.  More               
              generally, the model provides a framework for analyzing broader                
              issues in international relations theory including the role of                 
              anarchy and the problem of absolute and relative gains.  The                   
              current research extends this model in an effort to incorporate                
              incomplete information, link the model with existing formal work               
              on crisis bargaining, and broaden the scope of the analysis to                 
              encompass several issues in international political economy.
