Title       : Learning and Interdependent Decision Making, Modeling Farmers' Technology
               Adoption Decisions in Developing Countries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1992  
File        : a9121938

Award Number: 9121938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124368             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne C. Case   (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Besley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this research project is to develop new               
              methods for studying the adoption of technological innovations of              
              uncertain profitability.  The focus will be on situations where                
              learning about the technology, either from one's own past                      
              experience, or from the success of others, is significant.  It is              
              important since externalities between adopters imply that diffusion            
              occurs at less than the socially optimal rate.  Empirical analysis             
              of such situations also raises interesting methodological                      
              questions.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The proposed study has three parts.  First, the interdependence of             
              farmers' decisions will be given a theoretical foundation.                     
              Incorporating learning, the decision problem for each farmer is a              
              dynamic programming problem and equilibrium adoption paths are                 
              found by applying the appropriate apparatus.                                   
                                                                                             
              Second, econometric models reflecting strategic interdependence in             
              farmers' decisions must be developed.  The path of adoption of a               
              new technology reflects dynamic discrete choice optimization.  A               
              simulated methods of moments procedure will be used to estimate a              
              dynamic system with neighborhood effects.                                      
                                                                                             
              Finally, the theoretical and econometric models developed will be              
              tested using a ten year panel data set from the International Crops            
              Research Institute for the SEmi-Arid Tropics.  The study will be               
              of the adoption of higher yielding varieties cotton in the semi-               
              arid tropics of India.
