Title       : Studies of Olefin Triplets and Triplet Biradicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9121313

Award Number: 9121313
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Caldwell caldwell@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will probe both the thermodynamic and kinetic                     
              factors involved in the formation and decay of alkene triplet                  
              states and triplet biradicals. By combining conventional                       
              photochemical techniques such as product analysis and quantum                  
              yield measurements with laser flash and time resolved                          
              photoacoustic calorimetry, a complete decription of triplet                    
              state photochemical processes will emerge. By combining the                    
              experimental results with theoretical calculations, a thorough                 
              and fundamental analysis of intersystem crossing and the                       
              corresponding energy surfaces involved will be developed. An                   
              important outcome of the investigation will be a better                        
              understanding of biradicals, and new methods for their                         
              production will be suggested. The investigation will provide                   
              critical and definitive conformation of theories for                           
              intersystem crossing from triplet to ground state surfaces and                 
              the factors, such as spin-orbit coupling, which control these                  
              processes.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professsor Richard A. Caldwell at The                       
              University of Texas at Dallas. These studies will probe the                    
              basic nature of the intermediate states which occur in chemical                
              processes. By measuring the way that these intermediate species                
              absorb light and how much heat is involved in their formation                  
              and decay, it is possible to predict how other similar, and in                 
              some cases not so similar, processes will proceed. Such                        
              fundamental knowledge, which is obtained by using specially                    
              designed instruments which are able to record phenomena which                  
              occur on the order of billionths of a second, will be combined                 
              with the theoretical predictions from computer calculations to                 
              provide a complete description of the energy requirements for                  
              converting one molecule into another via the use of light                      
              energy. The information gained will be useful in a variety of                  
              applications which use light to induce rapid and efficient                     
              changes, such as those which occur during the processing of                    
              computer chips.
