Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Studies in Science, Technology and Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1992  
File        : a9121786

Award Number: 9121786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Gregory   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Brautigam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dissertation Student, Jeffrey Brautigam;  Dissertation Title:                  
              "Reading Biometrika:  An Inquiry into the Creation and Uses of                 
              Historical Identity in Science."  Under the direction of Dr.                   
              Frederick Gregory, Mr. Brautigam is studying the formation and                 
              development of the biological and statistical journal, Biometrika              
              (first published in 1901), in order to learn about the process by              
              which identities are fashioned through various literary and                    
              rhetorical strategies, for both scientific researches and their                
              subjects.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Mr. Brautigam is examining the papers, correspondence, and notes               
              of the founding editors of Biometrika, to discern the way in                   
              which an ideologically charged core identity of a "biometrician"               
              was created.  He is using the analysis of archival materials to                
              supplement and contrast an analysis of the icons, metaphors, and               
              historical narratives published in Biometrika, which attempted to              
              communicate that identity to its reader-contributors.  He is also              
              examining the notes of the founding editors which pertain                      
              specifically to articles published in the journal in order to                  
              reveal the ways in which the editorial policy of the journal                   
              created and enforced certain notions of the proper biometric                   
              "subject."  This archival analysis compliments an analysis of the              
              presentation of the "subjects" (men, women, deviants, criminals,               
              geniuses, etc.) in the journal itself.
