Title       : GABA and Dopamine Release in Coho Salmon Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1992     
File        : a9121221

Award Number: 9121221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly L. Drew ffkld@aurora.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1188      SYNAPTIC MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Drew will begin studying the basic neurochemistry of the brains            
              of teleosts.  She will be exploring the regional distribution of               
              the neurotransmitters dopamine and gammaminobutyric acid (GABA).               
              Dopamine and GABA play an important role in motivation and motor               
              function in mammals.  Release of dopamine in mammalian forebrain               
              is thought to mediate the reinforcing properties of drug abuse.                
              GABA is thought to relay and modulate dopaminergic messages.  She              
              will also be investigating what mechanisms regulate the release of             
              these chemical messengers.  Dr. Drew will be utilizing a newly                 
              developed, state of the art technique called in vivo microdialysis             
              to measure neurotransmitter release in awake freely moving teleost.            
              In vivo microdialysis has been used successfully in warm blooded               
              vertebrates to address previously unanswered questions regarding               
              neurotransmitter release.  Dr. Drew's experiments are the first to             
              employ the technique in the study of neurotransmitter release in               
              cold blooded vertebrates.  Although Dr. Drew's current research is             
              aimed primarily at establishing the feasibility of the technique,              
              it is envisioned that in the future in vivo microdialysis will be              
              used to study neurotransmitter release during migration and rapid              
              deterioration of teleosts as they journey upstream to spawn.  Such             
              studies would also contribute significantly to the understanding               
              of the role that dopamine and GABA play in the initiation and                  
              maintenance of compulsive behavior exhibited in some humans.//
