Title       : Electromagnetic Studies of the Continents (EMSOC): Trans-Hudson Orogen and
               Southeast Appalachians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1993    
File        : a9121278

Award Number: 9121278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. Chave achave@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean H. Filloux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Electrical conductivity, which depends on ionic fluids, metal             
              or carbon content and temperature, provides complementary                      
              information to properties determined from seismic or potential                 
              field data.  Our ability to image conductivity structure has                   
              recently undergone a revolution.  These projects involve high                  
              resolution magnetotelluric (MT) profiling in the Trans-Hudson                  
              Orogen (THO) and the southeast Appalachians (SEA).  The common                 
              element in the two experiments is illumination of processes in                 
              fossil zones of continental collision.  The THO experiment will                
              coincide with an 850 channel COCORP seismic reflection line across             
              the Williston Basin and will be closely coordinated with the                   
              Canadian Lithoprobe transect of the THO.  Its targets include the              
              largest known conductivity anomaly in N. America, sutures between              
              the orogen and adjacent Archean provinces and possibly anomalous               
              mantle under the orogen.  It is expected to provide a definitive               
              demonstration of the resolving power of MT data in nearly ideal                
              conditions.  The SEA experiment will take advantage of the fact                
              that the ocean edge can amplify MT response to certain structures.             
              It is expected to settle the controversy about the location of the             
              Alleghanian suture, map the sedimentary package under the thrust               
              associated with this collision event, provide important insight                
              into the preservation of retrograde metamorphic conditions in deep             
              continental crust and estimate the volatile content in (and the                
              presence of partial melt beneath) very old oceanic lithosphere.
