Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Archaeo-Environmental Investigationsin Southern New
               England
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1991   
File        : a9121245

Award Number: 9121245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10280              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucinda McWeeney  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Frank Hole, Ms Lucinda McWeeney will                
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation thesis.  She will                   
              extract cores from archaeological and geological sites to obtain               
              macroflora - small preserved plant remains, and analyze these as               
              well as materials already in hand. All sites are located in                    
              Southern New England and together span the time period from late               
              in the last glacial period, ca 14,000 years ago, to recent times.              
              On this basis, it should be possible to reconstruct vegetation                 
              response to the northward retreat of the last glaciers as well as              
              more recent climatic fluctuations.  The results of this                        
              reconstruction  will be integrated with archaeological data to                 
              examine how Native American populations at different periods of                
              time responded to, and were affected by climatic change.                       
                                                                                             
              In particular, Ms McWeeney will examine three specific issues.                 
              The first involves the earliest paleoindian hunters and gatherers              
              in North America.  What were the environmental challenges which                
              they faced and what resources were available to these first human              
              colonists in the New World?  Secondly, a major change in                       
              lifestyle took place in the late Archaic period when settlement                
              in New England shifted to riverine locations and a number of new               
              stone tool forms appeared in the archeological record.                         
              Archaeologists don't know whether these changes are due to an                  
              influx of new peoples or represent an in situ adaptation to a                  
              changing environment.  Finally, in comparison to other parts of                
              North America, maize agriculture was adopted relatively late in                
              New England and it is unclear what role climatic limitations may               
              have played in this delayed spread.  Ms McWeeney's research will               
              help to answer this question.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  While it is                   
              clear that human populations are influenced by and may actively                
              respond to environmental change, the details of this interaction               
              are not well understood.  Because of its long archaeological                   
              record and the presence, at different times, of groups with                    
              varying levels of technical expertise, New England provides an                 
              excellent context to examine this question.  Much archaeological               
              data exists but the environmental context is not well                          
              established.  Ms McWeeney's research will help to remedy this.                 
              This work will also assist in the training of a very promising                 
              young scientist.
