Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Engineering): Effects of Fuel Properties and
               Physical Factors on Engine Combustion Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1992      
File        : a9121271

Award Number: 9121271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas P. Cernansky cernansk@cbis.ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 9200      US CHINA COOP IN BASIC SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1407,
Abstract    :
              There is a general need for a better understanding of the                      
              combustion processes occurring in engine systems.  In particular,              
              the detailed physical and chemical processes important in engine               
              ignition, flame propagation, and knock need to be clarified, and               
              fuel property effects and interactions determined.  In an effort               
              to address these needs, a joint research program between Tianjin               
              University and Drexel University was initiated in March 1989                   
              under NSF sponsorship; Good progress has been made on this                     
              program and will be continued under this award.                                
                                                                                             
              The work is being carried out by separating and individually                   
              studing the two major types of processes occurring in engine                   
              systems, i.e., the chemical processes and the physical processes.              
              Drexel University is concentrating on the chemical processes,                  
              while Tianjin University is concentrating on the physical                      
              processes.  This division of labor builds upon the strengths and               
              programs at each university and effectively leverages existing                 
              resources.  The Drexel effort is focusing on low and intermediate              
              temperature oxidation of hydrocarbons using a variety of                       
              laboratory systems, including static and flow reactor systems, to              
              isolate relevant chemical processes.  The Tianjin effort is                    
              focusing on physical factors, such as surface deposits, test                   
              transfer and fluid flow effects, utilizing a variety of                        
              laboratory and engine test facilities.  Coordination of the                    
              individual research effort is leading to identification of                     
              important interactions and incorporation of critical experiments               
              for studying these interactions.  Successful completion of the                 
              research program will lead to a better understanding of the                    
              important chemistry and physics in engine combustion and                       
              autoignition processes, and consequently to improved engine                    
              performance.
