Title       : Japan Long Tern Visit: Spectrum Management Policy and DSP Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  1991   
File        : a9121590

Award Number: 9121590
Award Instr.: Contract Interagency Agreement               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23402              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Marcus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed Comm Commission
	      1919 M St NW
	      Washington, DC  205540001    /   -

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              0206000   Telecommunications                      
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1455,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a six month visit by Dr.                               
              Michael J. Marcus, Office of Plans and Policy, U.S.                            
              Federal Communications Commission to carry out a                               
              collaborative project with Professor Takeshi                                   
              Hiromatsu, Chair of the Laboratory on Correlation of                           
              Information Technology and Society at the University                           
              of Tokyo's Research Center for Advanced Science and                            
              Technology (RCAST).  The project will also involve                             
              cooperation with Professor Tadao Saito of the                                  
              University's Electrical Engineering Department at the                          
              Hongo campus and also the Ministry of Posts and                                
              Telecommunications' (MPT) Communication Research                               
              Laboratory in Koganei-shi, Tokyo.  Dr. Marcus'                                 
              research will include a study of Japanese radio                                
              spectrum management policy as it relates to technical                          
              innovation.  His joint research at MPT will include                            
              the application of digital signal processing                                   
              technology to transmitter identification.                                      
              All countries, including the U.S., are faced with the                          
              common problem of how to regulate radio technology to                          
              further public interests and control interference                              
              between radio systems users.  The Japanese have                                
              developed a unique system of governmental and                                  
              nongovernmental organizations to accomplish this task                          
              which has never been documented in detail in the                               
              English literature.  This project will document the                            
              interrelationships between these organizations and the                         
              impact that these have on technical innovation.                                
              Meetings will be held with the various individuals                             
              involved from industry, academia and government.                               
                                                                                             
              The knowledge acquired on the Japanese regulation of                           
              radio technology will facilitate U.S. consideration of                         
              whether certain aspects might be of benefit in the                             
              U.S.  Such knowledge will also be helpful to U.S.                              
              firms which are considering whether to market new                              
              technology in the Japanese market.  Additionally, it                           
              will be helpful to the U.S. Government in support of                           
              negotiations seeking equity in international trade.                            
              All of the individuals named above as collaborators                            
              are well-known and respected in their area of digital                          
              signal processing.  It is believed that collaboration                          
              between these individuals will continue well past the                          
              formal termination of this award.
