Title       : RUI: Reproductive Consequences of Maternal Stimulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1994       
File        : a9121238

Award Number: 9121238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Celia L. Moore moorec@umbsky.umb.cc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Many of the processes that shape the development of the                   
              nervous system and behavior occur during the early neonatal                    
              period.  Dr. Moore has shown that perineal stimulation provided                
              by mothers to their developing offspring during the course of a                
              specific maternal behavioral pattern, has long-term consequences               
              on their adult behavior.  She has also shown that this maternal                
              stimulation also produces changes in the central nervous system.               
              Using an exciting and highly innovative approach, Dr. Moore will               
              investigate how interactions between environmental stimulation                 
              and the hormones produced by the developing young work jointly to              
              produce the enduring changes in the both central nervous system                
              and behavior.  She will concentrate on a sexually dimorphic                    
              nucleus in the lumbar region of the spinal cord.  Using state-of-              
              the-art anatomical techniques, Dr. Moore will investigate the                  
              role that cell death plays in regulating the observed differences              
              in neuron number following variations in maternal stimulation.                 
              By systematically varying the mother-infant interactions in ways               
              similar to those experienced naturally by the offspring, the                   
              effect that early stimulation has on individual differences                    
              within males and females, and sex differences can be examined.                 
              At present, little is known about the role of sensory input in                 
              development of sexual dimorphisms.  Her systematic focus on                    
              external stimulation and normal sensory input is an excellent                  
              opportunity to weave functional, anatomical, and developmental                 
              questions togethers in a meaningful and mutually useful way.  The              
              outcome is likely to redefine our ideas about the sexual                       
              differentiation process than is now currently being accepted.
