Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Thermal Effects in Fully-Coupled Transient Models for
               Dynamics Quasi-Brittle Fracture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1992   
File        : a9121700

Award Number: 9121700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1992  
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis M. Brock   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Experiments show that quasi-brittle fracture in solids under              
              rapid (dynamic) loading is accompanied by temperature increases.               
              These increases are confined to very small regions near the crack              
              edge, yet are substantial enough to reduce the solid's resistance              
              to fracture.  The study of this phenomenon must deal with the                  
              mixed boundary/initial value problems and fracture criteria of                 
              fracture mechanics and transient thermoelastic and small-scale                 
              yielding theories that often couple otherwise hyperbolic and                   
              parabolic partial differential equations.  The research proposed               
              here will conduct just such a study by obtaining analytical                    
              solutions, asymptotic expressions and numerical results for these              
              problems.  Two important variations -- the principle of second                 
              sound, which allows thermal waves, and crystal defect                          
              (dislocation) motion near cracks -- are also considered.                       
                                                                                             
                   The results obtained will shed new light on the critical                  
              problem of rapid fracture in solids by considering the oft-                    
              neglected temperature effect.  The development of the equations                
              and numerical results necessary for this purpose will provide                  
              insights into combinations of equations that are usually examined              
              separately.  Finally, the difficulties encountered in the                      
              development process will lead to an enhanced capability to apply               
              a variety of analytical and computational solution techniques.
