Title       : Materials Research Group on Studies of Fundamental Mechanisms of Film Growth
               Using Chemical Vapor Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1996     
File        : a9121074

Award Number: 9121074
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: W. Lance Haworth                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2796000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Max G. Lagally lagally@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Kuech  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald F. Gaines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leon McCaughan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Kariotis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9251,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is to establish a new Materials Research Group at the               
              University of Wisconsin at Madison.  The topic of the research of              
              this group is studies the fundamental mechanisms in growth and the             
              resulting microstructure of thin films of semiconducting materials             
              using chemical vapor deposition.  The emphases of the research                 
              include: understanding of the interaction of the gas phase with the            
              growing thin film through studies of the precursor gases and the               
              gas phase chemistry, quantitative microscopic characterization of              
              the kinetic and thermodynamic mechanisms involved in growth, ex-               
              situ characterization of the structural, optical, and electronic               
              nature of the resulting films, theoretical analysis and                        
              computational modeling of the gas phase chemistry and film                     
              structure, feedback from characterization and theory to growth                 
              chemistry, design of novel processing and materials on the basis of            
              new understanding of the growth process.  The group is developing              
              a chemical vapor deposition system capable of growing electronic               
              device-quality films, that also allows in-situ monitoring of the               
              growth process.  The initial materials being studied are silicon               
              and silicon-germanium systems/multilayers.  The later stages of the            
              research involves studies of group III nitrides, which are wide                
              band-gap semiconductors that show great promise for application in             
              integrated electronic, optical, and optoelectronic devices.                    
              Characterization techniques being used include: photoreflectance,              
              photoluminescence, reflection difference spectroscopy, mass                    
              spectroscopy, reflection high energy electron diffraction, scanning            
              tunnelling microscopy, and low energy electron diffraction.                    
              Theoretical techniques include Monte Carlo simulations, rate                   
              equation calculations, and statistical mechanical methods.  The                
              strengths of the group are the balance of the complementary                    
              expertise of the investigators and the facilities available for                
              this research.  This research would not be possible without the                
              collaboration of the investigators working in an interactive and               
              integrated mode.
