Title       : Paleoanthropological Exploration of the Otavi Mountain Land,Namibia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9121666

Award Number: 9121666
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99468              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn C. Conroy conroyg@thalamus.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this proposal is to continue                          
              paleontological exploration of cave deposits in the Otavi Mountains            
              of northern Namibia.  During the past year Conroy and colleagues               
              discovered in this area the first Miocene hominoid known from                  
              southern Africa.  The fossil has been named Otavipithecus and it               
              exhibits a number of features which differentiate it from other                
              middle Miocene hominoids from Eurasia and other areas of Africa.               
              Dating by association places Otavipithecus between 12 and 14 MYA.              
              A number of other deposits have been identified in the Otavi region            
              which require systematic exploration.  The discovery of three                  
              separate fossil faunas at the Otavi site of Berg Aukas (both                   
              Miocene and Plio-Pleistocene) will allow the investigators to track            
              faunal and, by inference, paleoecological changes through rime in              
              this part of Africa.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The discovery of Otavipithecus significantly extends the range of              
              hominoids in this time period.  As a result hypotheses which view              
              East Africa and/or Eurasia as the foci for hominoid evolution may              
              need to be re-evaluated.  Indications are that Miocene Namibia was             
              relatively humid in contrast to the semi-arid conditions of                    
              Oligocene and modern Namibia.  The Otavi deposits have great                   
              potential for providing information on vertebrate evolution and                
              paleoclimate and ecological change in Southern Africa over a span              
              of 16 million years.
