Title       : Developing a Model of Expertise in Complex Domains: The Case of Chess
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9121027

Award Number: 9121027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173608             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert A. Simon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will use chess as a model system to develop and test              
              a theory of human perception and memory, with particular                       
              attention to the memory abilities of experts and the way in which              
              these abilities are acquired.  The study of expert memory is of                
              great importance for the improvement of teaching methods in the                
              schools and of training and decision-making techniques in the                  
              professions and the trades.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The theory will be built on the foundation of EPAM, a computer                 
              simulation of perceptual and memory processes that has, for                    
              thirty years, had remarkable success in modeling human behavior                
              in a wide range of standard tasks, including expert memory,                    
              paired-associate and serial-anticipation learning, letter and                  
              word recognition, and concept attainment.  EPAM and its                        
              extensions have explained many salient phenomena in these realms,              
              including the serial position curve, the conditions for one-                   
              trial and incremental learning, effects of familiarity and                     
              similarity of stimuli on learning rates, expert memory for                     
              positions in chess and other games, effects of word context on                 
              speed of letter recognition, and others.                                       
                                                                                             
              This project will develop EPAM further to handle a variety of                  
              important new phenomena that have been discovered in recent years              
              and that are not modeled accurately by the present version of                  
              EPAM.  In particular, it has been found that memorization by                   
              experts is too rapid to be wholly explained by the short-term                  
              memory and chunking mechanisms in the present EPAM.  On the basis              
              of this experimental evidence and additional evidence that the                 
              project will gather, a new component of EPAM will be designed to               
              account for these phenomena.  The new EPAM will be capable of                  
              gradually acquiring in long-term memory a "template," specific to              
              each domain of expertise, that provides a framework for rapid                  
              storage of large numbers of new observations.  In the case of                  
              chess, the template will incorporate the basic structural                      
              features of the chess board and processes for storing rapidly in               
              it information about new chess positions.  While the particular                
              templates will use chess materials, the mechanisms for building                
              and using them will be entirely general and hence designed to                  
              account for the characteristics of expert memory in any domain.                
                                                                                             
              The main effort of the project will be devoted to building this                
              extended model of perception and memory and testing it                         
              experimentally.  Tracking of subjects' eye movements will play an              
              important part in the experimental strategy.  In order to make                 
              the model wholly accessible to other cognitive scientists,  the                
              system (currently written in an obsolete language) will be                     
              reprogrammed in LISP, a programming language used widely in                    
              cognitive science, so that copies of EPAM can be provided to                   
              other investigators who are studying perception and memory.
