Title       : Studies in Intermediation and Financial Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1992      
File        : a9121807

Award Number: 9121807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126465             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Franklin Allen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project has two parts.  The first part is concerned with                  
              developing models for analyzing competition among financial                    
              intermediaries.  The role of competition in the banking industry               
              is of particular interest.  In contrast to most other countries,               
              the US has a long tradition of encouraging competition among a                 
              large number of banks.  Banks have many special features which mean            
              that standard economic analyses of competition cannot be directly              
              applied.  These special features include their role as information             
              gathering and processing institutions and the fact that there are              
              significant switching costs for customers.  Models which take                  
              account of these features and allow their effect on competition to             
              be analyzed will be developed.  Four areas that the project will               
              focus on are (i) competition and the costs of bank failure; (ii)               
              branch networks and competition; (iii) price-setting competition;              
              (iv) competition and risk-taking behavior by banks.                            
                                                                                             
              The second part of the project is concerned with the issue of stock            
              price manipulation and market microstructure.  In recent years,                
              there has been a large literature on how stock exchange specialists            
              set prices when there is a group of investors that know more about             
              the stock than the specialist.  This literature has assumed that               
              there is a group of liquidity traders who are forced to buy or sell            
              their stock.  It is plausible that some traders have cash needs and            
              are forced to sell.  However, buyers will typically be able to                 
              choose the best time to trade.  This asymmetry between liquidity               
              buyers and sellers means purchases are more likely to be by an                 
              informed buyer than sales so the price movement resulting from a               
              purchase is larger.  As a result, profitable manipulation by                   
              uninformed investors may occur.  Standard models will be used to               
              consider the possibilities for manipulation, whether these                     
              activities should be regulated and if so how.
