Title       : Ylide-Fluoroolefin Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1994    
File        : a9121222

Award Number: 9121222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Burton donald-burton@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9156,9187,9223,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Previous work on this project has demonstrated the                             
              self-oligomerization of trifluoromethylcopper to form                          
              CF3(CF2)nCu(n=1 to 16).  The use of ?CF3Cu! as a ?CF2! transfer                
              agent with other perfluorinated organometallic reagents is                     
              planned, and the generality and mechanism of the ?CF2!                         
              insertion process will be investigated.  Alternative sources of                
              ?CF2! will be studied for use with less reactive organometallic                
              compounds.  A broad study of alpha-halogen effects in                          
              alpha-halo and alpha, alpha-dihaloperfluoro organometallic                     
              reagents and of the scope of cumulene formation will be done.                  
              Complementary to this approach is the synthesis and chemistry                  
              of perfluoro diene-ynes.  As an adjunct of the organometallic                  
              and phosphorus chemistry, a long range study will be made of                   
              the preparation of perfluoro-polyenes and the study of unique                  
              chemistry of these relatively unknown systems.  The development                
              of cis- and trans-difluoroethylene synthons will be part of the                
              synthetic methodology for F-polyenes. These will be utilized as                
              new synthons for the stereospecific preparation of                             
              perfluorobutadiene derivatives.  In the area of ylide                          
              chemistry, a practical approach to functionalized fluoroolefin                 
              derivatives via an intramolecular Wadsworth-Emmons reaction                    
              using ylide/acylation methodology developed earlier will be                    
              undertaken.  Related work with alkylated fluorinated ylides is                 
              planned as a new and practical route to alpha-fluoromethylene                  
              ylides.  Finally, the study of new single electron transfer                    
              (SET) reactions will provide new or improved routes to                         
              fluoromethylene and difluoromethyl functionalized derivatives                  
              of biological interest.                                                        
                                                                                             
              With this award, the Organic Synthesis Program will support the                
              research of Dr. Donald J. Burton at the University of Iowa.                    
              The studies will continue the development of new synthetic                     
              methodology for the introduction of fluorine into organic                      
              molecules and the development of the ofttimes unique chemistry                 
              that results.  This may lead to new kinds of chemicals and                     
              materials that should benefit research in biochemistry and                     
              medicine, as well as in the chemical industry.
