Title       : Modulation of Two Transient Potassium Currents in Mouse Hippocampal Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9121751

Award Number: 9121751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Barish mbarish@coh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beckman Res Inst Cty Hope
	      1500 E. Duarte Road
	      Duarte, CA  910103000    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The individuality of neurons is determined by the particular                   
              complement of functional ion channels present in the neuronal                  
              membrane.  Different neurons express varying numbers of channels               
              selective for sodium, calcium, potassium and chloride ions, and as             
              a consequence have specific patterns of responses to incoming                  
              excitatory and inhibitory stimuli.  In order to understand how the             
              individuality of neurons is established, a class of potassium                  
              currents whose activity influences both the waveform of single                 
              action potentials and the pattern of repetitive action potentials              
              will be studied.  Experiments will be performed on cultured                    
              embryonic mouse hippocampal neurons, a standard preparation for                
              study of early neural development.  It has been previously observed            
              that the expression in neurons of two variant forms of transient               
              potassium currents, termed A-current and D-current, is dependent on            
              contact with non-neuronal glial cells.  Since A- and D-currents are            
              involved in neuronal electrogenesis, these observations raise the              
              possibility that glial cells modulate neuronal activity by                     
              influencing channel expression.  To understand how this process                
              might occur, the precise molecular relationship between A- and                 
              D-current channels should be clarified.  In the present experiments            
              differences in gating and permeation behavior at the single channel            
              level will be examined.  Future experiments will focus on issues of            
              gene expression and post-translational modification that may                   
              establish the differences between the ion channels underlying A-               
              and D-currents.
