Title       : Synthesis and Structural Characterization of Novel Main Group Compounds with
               Multiple Bonding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1993  
File        : a9121065

Award Number: 9121065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip P. Power pppower@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program supports continued investigation on novel main group                   
              compounds by Dr. Philip P. Power of the Chemistry Department at                
              the University of California at Davis.  The primary focus of                   
              the work will be synthesis and characterization of monomeric                   
              and polymeric species containing multiple bonds between main                   
              group III and V elements.  In some cases both elements will be                 
              heavier members of the series, e.g., In-P.  In other cases,                    
              only one member will be a later element, e.g., B-Sb or B-Bi.                   
              Particular attention will be paid to the synthesis of ring                     
              species, in which delocalized bonding might occur.  In                         
              addition, preparation of other compounds containing main group                 
              elements from groups III through VI which are multiply bonded                  
              will be attempted.  For example, species containing Al=C and                   
              Ga=C will be prepared.  Compounds will be characterized by                     
              X-ray structures and NMR spectrometry.                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              New compounds containing members of the boron family and the                   
              nitrogen family will be prepared.  These compounds are unusual                 
              because they contain multiple bonds between elements of these                  
              families.  The strength of the second bond will be determined                  
              and compared to theoretical predictions.  Bonds between these                  
              elements do not usually occur in discrete molecules, but are                   
              common in materials used as semiconductors or ceramics.  This                  
              research provides an opportunity to learn more about the nature                
              of such bonding and thus may help guide design of electronic or                
              structural materials with specific properties.
