Title       : Metabolic and Endocrine Control of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1996     
File        : a9121056

Award Number: 9121056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355265             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill E. Schneider js0v@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Our abilities to see, hear, smell and touch are all mediated              
              by sensory systems in which the stimuli and the receptors are                  
              well understood.  For example, vision results from light entering              
              the eye and impinging on receptors located in the retina.  While               
              it is known that environmental events, such as changes in                      
              temperature and food availability, have major effects upon the                 
              behavior of mammals, little is known about the stimuli and                     
              receptors that mediate these influences on the brain.  Dr.                     
              Schneider will investigate this important problem.  She has found              
              that reproductive, maternal, and temperature regulatory behaviors              
              are controlled by the availability of metabolic energy, or the                 
              chemical fuels that derive from sugars and fats.  This supply of               
              metabolic fuels is influenced by diet, body fat stores, and the                
              energy required to keep warm, find food and carry out other                    
              processes necessary for life.  Dr. Schneider will now identify                 
              the nature and location of sensory detectors of metabolic energy               
              availability.  She will infuse drugs that inhibit specific                     
              metabolic pathways to examine effects on neuroendocrine systems                
              controlling each of the three specific regulatory behaviors                    
              mentioned above.  Her results will provide a broad and integrated              
              view of the relation between metabolic, neural and hormonal                    
              signals generated by changes in energy supply and demand.                      
              Moreover, these results will have important clinical relevance                 
              since they should shed light on phenomena such as infertility in               
              women who limit their energy intake.  Infertility is common in                 
              professional athletes, ballet dancers and women with eating                    
              disorders such as anorexia nervous.  It also occurs in normal                  
              women who diet and/or participate in recreational sports.  Dr.                 
              Schneider's work will help elucidate how these changes in fuel                 
              availability influence the nervous system to regulate behavioral               
              and physiological responses.
