Title       : High Resolution Molecular Beam Spectroscopy and Model Potential Energy Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1993  
File        : a9121534

Award Number: 9121534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Muenter muenter@chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the                       
              Chemistry Division, Professor John Muenter of the University of                
              Rochester will study weakly bound van der Waals complexes using                
              a number of spectroscopic methods with the intent of exploring                 
              intermolecular potential energies.  Included in the experiments                
              are molecular beam electric resonance studies of hyperfine and                 
              tunneling splittings, infrared laser studies of new acetylene                  
              systems with extension to ethylene, and pulsed laser studies to                
              extend the determination of high resolution parameters to                      
              excited electronic states of monomeric species.  There is a                    
              theoretical component which aims to extend and test Muenter's                  
              simple model for intermolecular potentials by adding                           
              polarizability terms.                                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              The forces between individual molecules affect every aspect of                 
              chemistry, from gas phase kinetics to in vivo biochemistry.  In                
              recent years, high resolution molecular beam spectroscopy has                  
              studied intermolecular interactions by observing the structure                 
              and properties of weakly bound cluster molecules.  These                       
              species, made up of two or more stable molecules held together                 
              by weak bonds, contain considerable information about the                      
              forces and energies which govern the motions within the                        
              complexes.  This program combines a theoretical model for                      
              describing these forces and energies with an experimental                      
              program which aims at gathering data to validate and refine                    
              this model.
