Title       : Behavior Systems and Learning: Modules, Modes, and Temporal Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1993       
File        : a9121647

Award Number: 9121647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99415              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Timberlake Timberla@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research stems from an ecological approach to the study of                
              basic learning mechanisms, an approach based on the assumption                 
              that learning evolved and can be profitably studied within a                   
              functioning system of behavior.  Specifically, the present                     
              experiments are designed to reveal the nature and number of the                
              mechanisms involved in spatial learning.  Do spatial learning and              
              search vary with the type of cue used and the effects of reward?               
              To what extent are there differences between the sensory-motor                 
              mechanisms controlling efficient search when rewards are used                  
              versus no rewards or different types of reward?  The answers will              
              determine the importance of considering the specific system                    
              context in analyzing spatial learning.                                         
                                                                                             
              The more general importance of this work involves establishing                 
              examples of the extent to which learning can be profitably                     
              studied within functioning systems of behavior (such as foraging               
              for food, or seeking safety) rather than based only on very                    
              general mechanisms.  If systems of behavior are important, it                  
              suggests that learning can be more effectively produced and                    
              controlled by understanding the function it serves rather than                 
              exhaustively analyzing the circumstances that produce it.  In                  
              humans, the general importance of learning in determining                      
              behavior is large and unquestioned.  What has not been so                      
              specifically dealt with is the extent to which learning follows                
              somewhat different rules and determinants related to specific                  
              functions.  Even in humans, learning about spatial locations and               
              learning appropriate social behaviors may depend on different                  
              stimuli, motivational states, and mechanisms.  The optimum                     
              conditions for promoting one sort of learning may well be                      
              different from the conditions promoting the other.
