Title       : Sustainability as a Norm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1995       
File        : a9121770

Award Number: 9121770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124423             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul B. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry T. Cralle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Bruce Dickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will critically analyze how the concept of                        
              sustainability functions as a norm in three settings:  within                  
              disciplines, as a social goal, and in setting agricultural and                 
              development policy.  The project is a multidisciplinary effort                 
              involving a philosopher, a soil scientist, and an anthropologist.              
              The disciplinary orientations of agronomy and archeology will                  
              provide contrasting scientific approaches to the study of                      
              sustainability.  Examining how these two disciplines compare and               
              contrast in their approaches to the concept of sustainability                  
              will provide a basis for understanding how sustainability                      
              functions as a norm in disciplinary contexts.  The principal                   
              investigator will review events of the past decade to examine how              
              sustainability has emerged as a political norm nationally and                  
              internationally.  The three collaborators will work together to                
              develop a strategy for integrating and constructing an approach                
              to sustainability that takes cognizance of both scientific and                 
              political norms, and which uses ethical goals as a way of                      
              bridging disciplinary divisions that emerge with respect to                    
              sustainability.  They will compare alternative interpretations of              
              sustainability as a norm for research policy decision making, and              
              analyze how these norms are influenced by disciplinary                         
              interpretations and what social goals the research policy norms                
              are likely to achieve.  Project results will be disseminated                   
              through books, articles, and presentations at professional                     
              associations and relevant meetings.
