Title       : Measurement of Solar Plasma Electric Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9121303

Award Number: 9121303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41426              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter V. Foukal pfoukal@world.std.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cambridge Res & Instrumen
	      21 Erie Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021394260    617/491-2627

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal is to observe solar electric fields.  Solar plasma               
              electric fields have received relatively little attention                      
              considering the central importance of such fields in energy                    
              release, and in plasma and energetic particle acceleration in the              
              solar atmosphere.  This proposal is to carry out ground-based                  
              measurements of such fields to validate the promising                          
              "electrograph" technique of electric field remote sensing.  This               
              is based on measurement of the transverse Stark effect in solar                
              hydrogen lines.  The PI plans to upgrade the SPO instrument to                 
              increase its sensitivity to 1 volt cm1, and test this sensitivity              
              by observing the motional electric field (due to random cross-B                
              particle motions in any magnetized plasma) which should become                 
              detectable in the sunspot chromosphere at this sensitivity level.              
              More broadly, they plan to operate the electrograph on a daily                 
              basis to study the intensity, geometry, and spatial and time                   
              behavior of electric fields associated with flares, eruptive                   
              filaments, sunspots and faculae.  They also plan to extend the                 
              electrograph technique farther into the infrared, to include                   
              promising hydrogen lines out to beyond 10 .  This IR work will be              
              carried out with the FTS and with the main McMath spectrograph at              
              Kitt Peak.  The results of thes investigations will be compared                
              to the discharge and reconnection models of flares, to models of               
              post-flare loops, filament eruptions, and also to recent ideas on              
              solar abundance variations.  They experience in these ground-                  
              based observations will be also used to determine the optimum                  
              wavelengths of electrograph operation in the infrared, and to                  
              investigate whether important advantages in electric field                     
              measurements on the disc and at the limb might be achieved with                
              an electrograph flown on a balloon, on the Shuttle or on a                     
              satellite.
