Title       : Applying Program Visualization Techniques to Aid Parallel and Distributed
               Program Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1994       
File        : a9121607

Award Number: 9121607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208885             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Appelbe   (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Stasko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GTRI
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30332    /   -

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2880,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Parallel and distributed programming is intrinsically more difficult           
              then sequential programming, yet few effective tools or methodologies          
              have been developed to help programmers understand the behavior of             
              their parallel programs.  Browsing source code and tracing program             
              output are tedious and ineffective approaches for parallel program             
              understanding.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Program visualization, which relates a program's behavior to the               
              programmer's model of the system's components and interactions, has            
              been shown to be a novel and highly effective approach to program and          
              algorithm comprehension.  Extending and adapting program visualization         
              to parallel programming can aid comprehension of the complex                   
              concurrent events and transitions that occur in parallel programs.             
                                                                                             
              This project will define a model for the capture and display of                
              parallel program events and transitions, based upon the path-                  
              transition paradigm for animation, and partial ordering of events.             
              The model will be used to develop a prototype for visualizing parallel         
              programs.  The model and its prototype will be tested upon a suite of          
              scientific parallel programs.
