Title       : Public Evaluations of Legal Disputes: A Study of Causes andConsequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1992     
File        : a9121940

Award Number: 9121940
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 1,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Terance D. Miethe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Legal institutions are used increasingly in modern society to                  
              mediate disputes and resolve conflicts.  Previous research and                 
              portrayals in popular culture, however, suggest that lawyers in the            
              U.S. have a serious "image" problem and that clients are generally             
              dissatisfied with the quality of their legal services.                         
              Dissatisfaction with lawyers and legal services can be                         
              disfunctional for society because it hampers the resolution of                 
              particular cases and may discourage the the use of law to resolve              
              future conflict.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This grant will provide a comprehensive examination of public                  
              opinion about legal remedies to disputes, and assess the extent,               
              causes and consequences of client dissatisfaction with their legal             
              services in disputes related to divorce, torts, and criminal                   
              complaints.  While focus groups and personal interviews will be                
              used in the early stages of the research, the primary data will be             
              derived from telephone surveys of a national probability sample of             
              1000 citizens.  The survey gives particular attention to clients'              
              perceptions of the style of lawyering and social power strategies              
              used by their attorneys and how these factors influence ratings of             
              procedural justice, satisfaction with legal services, and future               
              intentions of using legal methods of dispute settlement. The                   
              results of this study will fill an important empirical gap in our              
              understanding of public perceptions of lawyers and the use of legal            
              remedies to redress disputes.  Also, the results will contribute               
              to theoretical discussions about the future utility of traditional             
              legal solutions to interpersonal disputes in modern society.
