Title       : Evaluating Algorithms for Conservative Generation Garbage Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1992     
File        : a9121269

Award Number: 9121269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin G. Zorn zorn@cs.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2876,
Abstract    :
                   This project has three important goals:  to propose and                   
              investigate new effective algorithms for conservative generation of            
              garbage collection in C and C++ (using true generation techniques), to         
              use a new simulation-based evaluation technique that is largely                
              language and system independent, and to prototype the most attractive          
              algorithms and measure them directly.                                          
                   In recent years, conservative collection algorithms have been             
              used in C and C++.  This project focuses on developing, evaluating and         
              implementing the most efficient generation techniques available in the         
              context of conservative collection.  All existing conservative                 
              algorithms for C and C++ require that every living object in the heap          
              is scanned during each garbage collection-eliminating two essential            
              advantages of generation collection (locality and efficiency).  The            
              new algorithms investigated will only require that a small subset of           
              the heap is scanned during each collection.  By investigating the use          
              of garbage collection in such widely-used languages as C and C++, and          
              by providing a thorough comparative evaluation of these techniques,            
              this research may lead to widely-used versions of efficient garbage            
              collection implementations.                                                    
                   In the past, evaluation of garbage collection algorithms has been         
              limited by the high cost of implementing the algorithms.  As a result,         
              substantially different algorithms have rarely been compared in a              
              systematic way.  Recently, however, Zorn showed that trace-driven              
              simulation using object-level traces can be successfully used to               
              evaluate and compare different garbage collection algorithms.  This            
              project extends previous work by combining object-level tracing with           
              abstract execution, thus allowing evaluation of garbage collection             
              algorithms in a mostly language-independent manner.
