Title       : Phase-Separating Polymer Blend Films Containing Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0234903

Award Number: 0234903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Composto composto@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will focus on the dynamics of polymer blend films and
              polymer blend films containing nanoparticles.  Control of film properties, such
              as hardness and permeability, are greatly complicated by the simultaneous
              occurrence of phase separation and wetting.  Using lateral and depth profiling
              techniques, the phase evolution and wetting behavior of blends with a critical
              composition will be investigated for films as thin as 10 nm, ca. radius of
              gyration.  By controlling domain size and spacing, membranes with monodisperse,
              submicron pores will be prepared.  The phase and wetting dynamics of
              off-critical blends will be studied to gain control over film stability,
              interfacial area between phases, and wetting structure.  New evolutionary
              pathways are anticipated yielding better insight into phase separation, wetting
              and capillary fluctuations in confined spaces.  The second project will
              investigate how inert fillers, in particular mobile nanoparticles, modify the
              rate and morphology of phase separation in polymer blend films.  After
              evaluating silica nanoparticle diffusion and wetting, the effect of particle
              size, concentration and wettability on domain evolution and morphology will be
              evaluated using the experimental techniques developed for the previous study as
              well as new techniques for depth and lateral profiling of the nanoparticles
              within the film.
The proposed research is important because thin polymer films
              containing multiple components are critical to many technologies including
              photolithography, adhesives, and displays.  In particular, experimental studies
              of polymer blends containing filler greatly lag both theory and commercial
              applications.  Fundamental studies will be complimented by studies of
              commercial filler-polymer films of interest to the automotive coatings
              industry.  Outreach programs including a second cable TV show on polymers,
              demonstrations at public and private elementary schools as well as high school
              teacher training will continue as will training of undergraduate students.

