Title       : Collaborative Research: Response of Tropical Stream Ecosystem Structure and
               Function to Amphibian Extinctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0234386

Award Number: 0234386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matt R. Whiles mwhiles@zoology.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen R. Lips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract.  Amphibians represent an important energetic link between aquatic and
              terrestrial habitats, particularly in the tropics where diversity and abundance
              are very high.  Tadpoles feed on algae and organic materials and transfer
              energy and nutrients from aquatic to terrestrial habitats when they emerge as
              frogs, and frogs transfer energy and materials back when they return to water
              to breed.  However, amphibian populations have declined dramatically around the
              world, including massive losses in 13 Latin American countries in the last 20
              years.  Most declines involve disappearances of over 75% of amphibians at a
              given site.  This research will examine the consequences of amphibian declines
              on tropical streams by investigating how losses alter stream biodiversity,
              energy flow in streams, in-stream and streamside food webs, and energy exchange
              between streams and terrestrial habitats.  This will be accomplished through
              intensive comparisons of stream communities, food webs, and energy flow
              patterns in Panamanian highland streams with natural amphibian populations and
              nearby streams where amphibians have recently disappeared.  Preliminary studies
              suggest that amphibian declines will have large-scale effects on streams,
              including changes in community structure, shifts to increased importance of
              algal energy sources, reduced downstream transport of organic materials, and
              reduced energy transfer from streams to terrestrial habitats. 
Broader
              impacts.  The broader implications of this research are that findings will be
              relevant to an urgent problem (i.e. amphibian declines) influencing many
              regions. The proposed research will also provide opportunities for students
              from Latin America and the U.S. to work on an important, large-scale
              environmental issue and will further collaboration between the 3 institutions
              involved and other scientists researching related issues in the tropics.

