Title       : Chemical Pathways Leading to Organic Aerosol Formation from the Atmospheric
               Oxidation of Alkanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0234586

Award Number: 0234586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Atkinson ratkins@mail.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Arey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Ziemann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of this experimental program is to elucidate the detailed
              chemical mechanisms leading to the formation of secondary organic aerosol (SOA)
              from atmospheric photooxidation of alkanes. Alkanes comprise the largest class
              of volatile organic compound (VOC) emissions from anthropogenic sources, and
              appear to be a significant contributor to urban SOA. Alkane-derived compounds
              present an ideal system for exploring the basic gas-phase chemical reaction
              mechanisms involved in the formation of low-volatility, condensable compounds.
              

The general approach for this project will be to investigate the gas- and
              particle-phase products of the hydroxyl (OH) radical-initiated reactions of
              selected alkanes and of their first- and potentially second- (and later)
              generation products in large-volume environmental chambers. A combination of
              demonstrated, state-of-the-art techniques, including thermal desorption
              particle beam mass spectrometry (TDPBMS), atmospheric pressure ionization mass
              spectrometry, and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry with derivatization,
              will be used to analyze gas-phase and particle-phase products in real-time as
              well as off-line, in order to identify and quantify successive generations of
              products and follow the chemical evolution of SOA formation and growth. The
              alkanes to be investigated include n-decane and a number of its isomers.
              Studies of SOA formation in the presence of seed particles of different
              compositions will investigate the potential role of particle-phase
              polymerization reactions.

This research will help to determine the
              importance of alkane photooxidation in atmospheric SOA formation and the
              chemical mechanisms by which this occurs. The results will improve current
              understanding of the fate of alkanes, which are a major component of the
              atmosphere, and aid in the development of more sophisticated atmospheric models
              of SOA formation and behavior. These types of models are widely used to
              evaluate the potential effects of aerosols on global climate change, air
              pollution and visibility, and human health, which are all important problems
              confronting society. This project will also make it possible to educate a
              number of graduate and undergraduate students, who in turn will have the
              opportunity to educate others, in the area of atmospheric chemistry as well as
              on more general environmental issues. 

