Title       : Microbial Diversity of Yellowstone Hydrocarbon Seeps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0234921

Award Number: 0234921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory M. Colores colores@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9136,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary
The goal of this Minority Research Planning Grant is to use
              non-cultivation based methods to
characterize the microbial populations
              associated with natural hydrocarbon seeps in Yellowstone
National Park. In
              addition to its well-known hot springs, Yellowstone has a few documented
areas
              that contain hydrocarbon seeps. These seeps are typically associated with
              thermal vents and
the best characterized ones occur in terrestrial areas. The
              proposed research will focus on soil
samples to be taken from the Calcite
              Springs area, where several hydrocarbon seeps exist. The
specific objectives
              of this planning grant are:
1. Evaluate soil microbial diversity in Calcite
              Springs soil containing naturally occurring
hydrocarbons.
2. Examine
              functional gene diversity and evolutionary relatedness to characterized
              genes
encoding hydrocarbon-degrading enzymes (PAH dioxygenases).
3.
              Characterize the abundance and types of hydrocarbons present in Calcite Springs
              soil
adjacent to hydrocarbon seeps.
Clone libraries of 16S rRNA genes and PAH
              dioxygenase gene fragments will be constructed
and sequenced to identify
              microorganisms and catabolic pathways present in hydrocarbon-
impacted soil. A
              thorough chemical analysis of soil samples (GC-MS) will also be performed
              to
identify and quantify the major hydrocarbons present. This study will
              provide the first
investigation into the phylogenetic diversity of soil
              microbial populations associated with
terrestrial hydrocarbon seeps in
              Yellowstone National Park. This information is of interest
primarily due the
              extended exposure to hydrocarbons that these microbial populations
              have
received. As such, novel microorganisms and/or metabolic pathways may
              have evolved in this
setting. As a planning grant targeting underrepresented
              minorities in science, this award will help
to increase the participation of a
              minority scientist in NSF-funded research. Furthermore, this
planning grant
              will be used to generate sufficient preliminary data for an NSF CAREER
              proposal
to combine research and teaching efforts focused on the microbial
              ecology of hydrocarbon seeps
in Yellowstone National Park.
