Title       : SOFTWARE: Automatic Resource Selection in Dynamic Networked Computation
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0234328

Award Number: 0234328
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaspal Subhlok jaspal@cs.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will perform fundamental research in middleware for resource
              selection
in dynamically shared network environments such as computation
              grids.
The distinguishing feature of our approach is that it matches the
              application resource
requirements to the resources available on a network
              rather than selecting the "best"
nodes based on a fixed criterion. 
The key
              challenge is to estimate how a given application will perform on a given set of
              nodes under given network conditions. The project will investigate two
              different approaches to address this challenge. The first one is based on a
              "heterogeneous performance model", which is a model to predict application
              execution time under different resource availability scenarios, such
              as
different speed processing nodes and network links and different competing
              loads and
traffic. The second is based on the concept of a "performance
              skeleton program",
which is a synthetically generated short running program
              that has the same fundamental execution characteristics as a given application.
              Under the same network conditions, the execution time of a performance skeleton
              program is expected to be a fixed small fraction of the expected execution time
              of the application it represents. The implementation of both these approaches
              is based on experimental measurement of the resources that an application uses
              during execution. The procedure is based on monitoring the processor, network
              and memory activity generated by an application during execution on a
              controlled testbed. 
The project aims to develop a complete resource selection
              framework for grid computing environments based on matching these application
              information models to the network status information obtained from publicly
              available network measurement and prediction tools like the Network Weather
              Service.

