Title       : Conference: Symposium for Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
               Meeting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0234142

Award Number: 0234142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4875               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Copeland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga. Southern Univ. R&S Fdn
	      4 College Plaza
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will result in the in the organization and presentation of a
              symposium called "Flash  Communication: Fireflies at Fifty", an overdue
              recognition to the more than fifty years that have  passed since the modern era
              of the study of flash communication began with the initial  publications of Dr.
              John B. Buck on flash communication and synchronous flashing. This  symposium
              will be presented at the January 4-8, 2003 Toronto meeting of the Society for 
              Integrative and Comparative Biology. The symposium is sponsored by the SICB
              Division of  Neurobiology and co-presented by the Society's Division of Animal
              Behavior.  

Objectives. The objectives of the symposium will be 1) to
              present new knowledge in flash  communication arrived at through diverse
              approaches (cellular, neuroethological, behavioral  ecological); 2) to
              integrate this new knowledge and to facilitate the emergence of new research 
              directions in flash communication; and 3) to publish the observations and
              conclusions of the  symposium in a journal like American Zoologist.  Methods.
              To facilitate discussion at the meeting, a list-server/chat room will be
              established using the  Georgia Southern WebCT. Participants can "chat" prior to
              the symposium and after the  symposium. 

 Impacts. The primary impact of
              this project lies in the fact that there has never been a flash  communication
              symposium presented on the national level in American science. It is important 
              to have the symposium now. Many of the older generation of firefly workers have
              retired or  died. This symposium will bring together remaining senior
              scientists as well as mid-career  scientists and beginning scientists for a
              mutual sharing of old and new ideas. The symposium  has the potential for
              setting the directions of firefly flash communication for the next ten years. 
              A  symposium report will be published in American Zoologist, the journal of the
              Society for  Integrative and Comparative Biology, or in a university press like
              Johns Hopkins University  Press, where animal subject specific symposia have
              been published. This will help to advance  knowledge as well. Additionally,
              fireflies are insects that the general public considers "good".  Thus, the
              results of the symposium, when described by the popular press, may be very
              accessible  to the general public. Fireflies have been used in the past to
              teach the general public about  entomology, hypothesis testing, and the process
              of discovery in science.  An additional impact of the symposium lies in the
              fact that 31% of the participants are  women and 27% are at the very beginning
              of their scientific career. Thus, the demographic  structure of the symposium
              will play a role in increasing the participation of traditionally 
              underrepresented groups in the sciences.  

