Title       : NIH-NSF BBSI: The Penn State Summer Institute (PSSI) for Biomaterials and
               Bio-nanotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0234026

Award Number: 0234026
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $718878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheng Dong cxd23@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1758      Bioengineering & Bioinformatic
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1758,1990,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.:  0234026
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Cheng Dong
INSTITUTION NAME: 
              Pennsylvania State University University Park
TITLE:  The Penn State Summer
              Institute (PSSI) for Biomaterials and Bio-nanotechnology

ABSTRACT

Penn
              State proposes to develop a Summer Institute (PSSI) for research and education
              for upper-level undergraduate and first-year graduate students to stimulate
              interest in bioengineering and bioinformatics in general and to draw on the
              strengths of current research at Penn State in biomaterials and
              bio-nanotechnology in particular. At Penn State, biomaterials and
              bio-nanotechnology programs emphasize the development of novel materials and
              their biocompatibility along with nano-scale manipulations and investigations,
              all with an eye toward clinical applications. The PSSI will be unique in
              incorporating laboratories that emphasize the physical sciences (Department of
              Chemistry), applied sciences (Department of Bioengineering), and life and
              clinical sciences (Hershey Medical Center).

The students will attend an
              8-week course entitled "Biomaterials and Bio-nanotechnology in the Health
              Sciences". This course will be augmented by a seminar series to include
              industry and academic leaders in biomaterials and bio-nanotechnology (4 outside
              speakers, 4 Penn State Speakers). Following completion of the program, student
              career and academic progress will be tracked for data on impact assessment to
              be used for PSSI enhancements and career counseling.

An important goal of
              the PSSI is to draw talented students and faculty from the physical, life and
              clinical sciences into bioengineering. This will be addressed by recruiting
              students from related fields, such as physics, chemistry, mathematics,
              biophysics, biology, physiology, orthopedics and surgery. Through the students,
              they also intend to attract talented faculty working in other areas to apply
              their skills to biological and medical problems.

They aim to: (i) increase
              the pool of domestic students considering graduate education in bioengineering,
              (ii) provide educational experience to undergraduates and first-year graduate
              students to prepare them for careers in these cutting edge fields, (iii)
              provide faculty with students and supply monies so students can carry out
              innovative research in faculty labs, and (iv) increase the impact of the Penn
              State biomaterials and bio-nanotechnology programs.



 



