Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Postcranial Proportional Variation in
               Australopithecus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0234193

Award Number: 0234193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol V. Ward wardcv@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The specific objective of the proposed research is to evaluate species
              boundaries in the hominid genus Australopithecus using a novel method.  This
              will be achieved by evaluating variation in postcranial skeletal proportions of
              unassociated individuals from the fossil assemblages recovered at Hadar,
              Sterkfontein, and Makapansgat, and comparing it to that seen in all extant
              large hominoid taxa.  Because the species is the most fundamental unit in
              biological and phylogenetic studies, determining species boundaries in the
              early hominid fossil record is imperative to all other analyses involving
              hominid biology, evolution, and behavior.  Recent discoveries and analyses have
              increased the perceived amount of variation in hominids, some of which has been
              interpreted as indicating divergent locomotor behaviors among species. 
              Accurate assessment of species boundaries is more important than ever in order
              to critically evaluate these claims, to trace the trajectory of morphological
              and behavioral change among early hominids, and to accurately estimate the
              variability upon which selection acted to produce our genus, Homo.  
Previous
              attempts to determine species boundaries have relied primarily on the
              assessment of craniodental remains and have often produced conflicting results.
               Recently, however, it has been demonstrated that postcranial data validly
              reflect the molecular phylogeny of extant primates.  Unfortunately, the early
              hominid fossil record is composed primarily of isolated skeletal elements from
              numerous individuals.  By combining pairs of these elements from presumably
              different individuals, variation in body proportions can be assessed using
              nonparametric density estimation.  This method is well established in other
              fields, but has never been applied to paleoanthropological problems.  It will
              allow the thorough exploitation of the postcranial fossil assemblages and will
              shed significant light on questions of taxonomy and phylogeny in
              Australopithecus.  Additionally, not only is this research expected to help
              clarify species boundaries in these early hominids, it will also significantly
              contribute to the understanding of both human and ape postcranial proportional
              skeletal variation.
This research will have several broad impacts.  First, it
              will advance the graduate training of the student.  It will also develop a
              novel approach to studying variability. Third, it will establish a method that
              holds great promise for other areas of anthropology in which the recognition of
              individual skeletons from commingled skeletal assemblages is desired, such as
              in forensics and bioarchaeology.

