Title       : Software Instability Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0234603

Award Number: 0234603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmet James Whitehead ejw@cse.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 7214      HIGHLY DEPENDABLE COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-0234603
Whitehead, Emmet James
Univ. of Calif. - Santa Cruz

Software
              today is tightly woven into the daily fabric of business, government, and
              homes. This software is maintained for many years to accommodate changing
              operational environments and to add new capabilities. An increasing body of
              evidence shows that the structure of software decays over time, leading to a
              cluster of related problems:  changes take longer to implement since they touch
              more files, modular boundaries soften, and large recent changes are a good
              predictor of software faults.

This project aims to improve the effectiveness
              of perfective software maintenance techniques by developing a novel tool called
              IVA (Instability Visualization and Analysis) that allows the rapid
              identification and ranking of unstable code regions, so they can be redesigned
              first. The concept of an instability region is introduced as a set of dependent
              software fragments that have been frequently modified together, and the project
              uses analysis and visualization techniques to show the locations and relative
              severity of these instabilities utilizing Instability Identification, Analysis,
              and Visualization.  It is expected that this approach will dramatically reduce
              the time required to identify and prioritize instability regions. The project
              takes full advantage of the NASA testbed to perform activities related to
              validating the correctness, usability, scalability, and performance of the IVA
              system. Furthermore, the project will validate that IVA would have provided
              much earlier identification of code regions that were ultimately refactored. In
              addition, IVA will be incorporated in undergraduate and graduate teaching and
              research.

