Title       : Living Free Radical Polymerization in Continuous Miniemulsion Reactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a0234658

Award Number: 0234658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Joseph Schork joseph.schork@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher W. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Research:

A large percentage of polymers (plastics and synthetic rubbers)
              are made via free radical polymerization. Unfortunately, this technology does
              not allow for accurate control of the molecular structure of the polymer
              produced. Living free radial polymerization (LRP) is a recent technology that
              allows for substantially more control over molecular structure, i.e., it allows
              for the preparation of well-defined vinylic polymers with unique architectures.
               Most research in LRP to date has involved batch reactors in which all
              ingredients are added to the reactor at the beginning of the reaction. In
              addition, most LRP studies to date have involved processes that use organic
              solvents.  These solvents are expensive, and can pose environmental and health
              threats.  The advent of living radical polymerization (LRP) processes over the
              last few years 

More stringent environmental and health concerns are driving
              the polymer industry to benign processing. For free radical polymers this
              includes systems in which water is substituted for an organic solvent.
              Miniemulsion polymerizations in particular have garnered increasing attention
              due the absence of organic solvent, their robust nature and lack of interphase
              mass transfer. Recent studies combining miniemulsion techniques with LRP have
              demonstrated added benefits such as increased rate of polymerization.
              

Continuous reactors are associated with high volume, low operating and
              labor costs, and most importantly, may be able to provide control of molecular
              structure, which can be difficult in a batch or semibatch reactor. With this in
              mind, this proposal will carry out a comprehensive study of LRP using the RAFT
              technique in continuous miniemulsion reactors. In particular, the ability of
              trains of CSTR's with inter-reactor monomer feed to create unique, new block
              copolymers will be evaluated. Specific objectives include evaluating: effect of
              reactor type, effect of control agent type, polymer composition control, and
              reactor-polymer property relationships.


Impact:

If the results are
              successful, the technology could be the basis for a low-cost, environmentally
              clean, commercially viable manufacturing method for paints and coatings. 
              Development of this new methodology could also be a great boon for the polymer
              industry in general.

