Title       : CAREER: Coalition Formation Among Self-Interested Computationally Limited Agents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0234693

Award Number: 0234693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177502             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tuomas Sandholm sandholm@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9179,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The  award  supports research into the development  of  efficient  automated 
              coalition  formation  methods  that  are  targeted  to  operate  in  inherently
              distributed situations with combinatorial  characteristics---e.g. task and
              resource  allocation  and  multi-  agent   planning  and  scheduling.   Of 
              specific  interest   are  situations in which agents have different goals and
              each agent is  trying  to  maximize its own good without concern for the 
              global  good.   The  first  part of the research extends  prior  work  on 
              coalition  formation under bounded rationality to new  models  of  computation
              and communication limitations.  More general settings  will also be studied in
              which a coalition's value is affected  by  nonmembers  actions.  For this,
              powerful new  strategic  solution  concepts will be used. A paradox of bounded
              rationality in multi-  agent  systems  also  will be further studied  and 
              resolved.   A  second  part of the work will explore coalition formation, 
              using  protocols  that  incorporate  constructive  multi-agent   search, 
              iterative   refinement  via   renegotiation,   backtracking   via 
              decommitting,  and  avoiding  local  optima  via  specific   more  powerful 
              agreement  types. A broad  set  of  protocols  will  be  explored. Collusion
              will also be analyzed among agents that  have  probabilistic, conditional
              performance profiles for  their  local  deliberation  algorithms, as well as 
              agents  that  can  gain  by  explicitly   coordinating   their   computations  
              with   others.  Algorithms will be designed and tested, and applied to two 
              real-  world problems:  distributed vehicle routing and multi-enterprise 
              manufacturing.
