Title       : Functional Analysis of Ammonia Transporters during Development of Dictyostelium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0234254

Award Number: 0234254
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles K. Singleton charles.k.singleton@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0234254
Singleton

Dictyostelium discoideum is one of the simplest studied
              eukaryotes that possesses true multicellularity. Depletion of its natural food
              source results in a cessation of both growth and cell division of the
              unicellular amoebae, initiating a developmental program that leads to the
              coalescence of the amoebae into a multicellular entity.  The goal of the
              program is to produce and disperse spores in order that some cells survive the
              temporary unfavorable environment.  A number of cell differentiation events and
              morphological changes must occur to ensure the attainment of this goal. 
              Efficient cell-to-cell and environment-to-cell communication and signaling are
              necessary for the successful implementation of the developmental program.
              Endogenously produced ammonia is used by developing Dictyostelium cells as a
              self-generated signal for monitoring not only their environment, but also the
              morphological changes and the differentiation events they are undergoing, and
              thus their progression through the developmental program.  . 

This project
              will explore a novel approach to understanding ammonia signaling and will
              generate new tools that will allow a more focused study of the functions of
              ammonia and the molecular mechanisms used to carry out those functions.  There
              are three known ammonia transporters (AMTs) in Dictyostelium.  Two hypotheses
              will be addressed: 1) much of the differences in ammonia levels within various
              cell types and within the microenvironments of the developing structures is due
              to the function of ammonium transporters; and 2) the AMTs play a direct role in
              ammonia signaling by serving as ammonia sensors that link ammonia to signal
              transduction pathways.  The spatial expression of the amt genes and the
              distribution of the encoded AMT proteins within the developing cells and
              structures will be determined.  Strains will be generated in which the amt
              genes are disrupted, either singly or in various combinations, so that the
              specific role of each AMT can be discerned.  Based on the results of the
              distribution studies and the resulting phenotypes of the mutant strains,
              testable models of how ammonia signaling is mediated by each AMT will be
              formulated.  Genetic, molecular genetic, and biochemical characterizations will
              be carried out to test the predictions of the models and to determine the
              molecular mechanisms that mediate the function of the AMTs.  

Because of the
              pervasive use of ammonia throughout development of this organism, the work
              should lead to a significant, new understanding of the control and regulation
              of the multicellular developmental program of Dictyostelium.  Although studying
              ammonia transport in other systems is an active area of research, the focus is
              mostly on uptake of ammonia from the environment to supply the cell's nitrogen
              needs.  A broader role for ammonia as a signaling molecule used during
              development has received little attention.  In this regard, Dictyostelium
              provides a good system for exploring the ways endogenously produced ammonia can
              serve as a means of communication during development.  The findings from the
              proposed experiments may impact thinking on the role ammonia plays in other
              organisms and may lead to new models of, and implications for, the use of
              ammonia in signaling, particularly during plant and mammalian development. 

