Title       : Workshop: Microbial Observatories/Life in Extreme Environments Principal
               Investigator Workshop; September 22-24, 2002, Arlington, Virginia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2002    
File        : a0234272

Award Number: 0234272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56386              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Ann Moran   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sherry L. Cady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The National Science Foundation (NSF) Microbial Observatory (MO) and Life in
              Extreme Environments (LExEn) programs have provided critical opportunities for
              research into the diversity and activity of microorganisms.  Together, these
              programs sponsor diverse research efforts on microbial communities from a wide
              variety of natural environments, ranging from the extreme and/or unusual (e.g.,
              hydrothermal vents and hypersaline lakes) to the typical and/or ubiquitous
              (e.g., ocean waters and agricultural soils).  The investigators funded through
              the MO and LExEn programs have pushed the frontier of microbial diversity and
              microbial biogeochemistry research, discovering novel microbial lineages,
              describing the complexity of natural microbial communities, and linking
              microbial taxa to critical ecosystem functions.    
	
A workshop, including
              principal investigators of MO and LExEn projects, other outstanding scientists
              in the field, and Postdoctoral students is proposed as a mechanism to enhance
              future research in environmental biology and microbial life.  The purpose of
              the workshop is two-fold: 1) to provide a platform for principal investigators,
              post-doctoral associates, and graduate students to share ideas and techniques
              among projects, facilitating communication of technical advancements and
              fostering collaborative/interdisciplinary activities; and 2) to discuss the
              future of microbial life research programs sponsored by the National Science
              Foundation, including identification of funding gaps and analysis of new
              research frontiers. 
 
The workshop will provide an important opportunity for
              student and postdoctoral training.  At least 22 postdoctoral associates and
              graduate students will take part in the meeting as representatives of MO or
              LExEn projects.  An additional 24 postdoctoral associates currently funded
              through the NSF Microbial Biology postdoctoral program, including
              underrepresented minorities in science, have been invited to attend.
