Title       : Clause Types: Form and Force in Grammatical Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0234278

Award Number: 0234278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Portner portnerp@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raffaella Zanuttini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Paul Portner and Raffaella
              Zanuttini will conduct two years of research on clause types in human language.
              This research seeks to understand what gives a sentence a particular function,
              for example that of asking a question, making a statement, or giving an order.
              In particular, the project aims to answer two questions: (1) To what extent can
              a sentence's function be read off of its grammatical form? (2) What range of
              functions are mapped to particular grammatical forms in the languages of the
              world? The study will focus on two languages, Korean and Badiotto (a Romance
              variety spoken in northern Italy). The data for this project will come from
              several sources: fieldwork, questionnaires, elicited production data, and
              grammaticality judgments.

This project has significance for several
              scientific fields that pertain to language (e.g. computational linguistics,
              psycholinguistics, and language acquisition). The results of this research will
              fill a major gap in our understanding of language, both in terms of the
              grammars of particular languages and of language universals. Additionally,
              there are benefits to documenting and studying Badiotto and Korean: Badiotto is
              an endangered language variety. Korean is one of the world's major languages,
              and yet its particles and clause types are not well studied. Finally, this
              project will train young scholars in the analysis and description of
              lesser-known languages, a skill of importance in educational institutions,
              government agencies concerned with intelligence and defense, and the
              computational linguistics industry.

