Title       : SGER: Monetary Credibility in a Transforming Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0234664

Award Number: 0234664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neven Valev nvalev@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5958,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to contribute to knowledge on the process of
              financial stabilization in transition economies. This Small Grant for
              Exploratory Research (SGER) generates data from national surveys conducted in
              Bulgaria, a transition country in South East Europe, which implemented a
              currency board in1997 to combat years of high inflation. The surveys are large
              in scope and include questions on expected devaluation, expected inflation,
              attitudes toward the monetary regime, beliefs about the operation of the
              currency board, and preferences over alternative monetary regimes. Combined
              with a rich set of demographic characteristics, the data are used to study the
              evolution of credibility over time, the various influences on agents' beliefs
              and expectations, the process of learning about the regime, and the political
              outcomes of stabilization for the population at large and for different social
              groups defined on the basis of age, political affiliation, gender, income,
              education, and employment status. 

Four surveys have already been completed
              in the first four years of the currency board. This SGER would make it possible
              to build on that work by conducting one more survey and by continuing the
              analysis of the economic effects of credibility. With an application for
              additional financing at that point, the final objective is to generate a data
              series that span the lifetime of the currency board from its inception to
              Bulgaria's entry into the European Monetary Union. Survey data are needed
              because transition economies do not have financial markets, which are developed
              enough to provide a menu of interest rate and other financial data required for
              such research. In addition, the surveys make it possible to examine not only
              macro level but also deeper disaggregated social dynamics and effects, which
              are difficult to observe otherwise. Financial stabilization is studied in a
              broad political economy and institution-building framework, which is
              appropriate in the context of a nation in transition. So far, the surveys have
              revealed a number of unique insights. 
The analysis informs three important
              policy issues. First, the project helps understand the process of monetary
              institution building in transition economies. Second, it informs the choice of
              monetary regimes in countries, which are in membership negotiations with the
              European Union. Third, it generates predictions important for countries, which
              consider implementing a currency board. 

In addition to its research and
              policy relevance, the project also contributes to education and training
              through the activities of the Principal Investigator (PI) and the Andrew Young
              School of Policy Studies (AYSPS) at Georgia State University. The AYSPS
              conducts training programs for government officials and collaborates on
              curriculum development with university faculty from several developing
              countries. The project generates useful knowledge for these activities. The PI
              advises several graduate students who work on development issues similar to
              those studied in the project. Finally, the project enhances knowledge about
              Bulgaria, a country that has not received much research attention despite its
              interesting transition dynamics its important geographic position on the
              Balkans. 

