Title       : Collaborative Research: Reproductive Behavior and Pathogen Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0234945

Award Number: 0234945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177348             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marlene Zuk marlene.zuk@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1148,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lay summary

This project will examine the evolution of resistance to
              pathogens in the context of sexual selection and reproductive behavior.  Using
              crickets as model organisms, the research has two components.  First, the
              effect on immunity of a unique component of courtship, tibial spur feeding,
              will be examined in the ground cricket Allonemobius socius.  The female feeds
              from a wound she makes on a spur on the male's tibia during mating, allowing
              her access to the male's circulatory system and potentially compromising his
              immune response.  How has sexual selection via this nuptial gift influenced
              male and female ability to resist disease?  A series of experiments on virgin
              and mated males and females will examine the effect of tibial feeding on
              encapsulation ability and resistance to pathogens.  Second, a comparative study
              will investigate sex differences in immune response across several ground
              cricket species that differ in life history.  Do seasonal species, in which
              females must sequester resources for reproduction over a restricted period,
              show a different pattern of sex bias in immunity than species in which
              investment is spread out over a longer period?  Although male vertebrates have
              generally weaker immune responses than females, such a difference has rarely
              been explored in invertebrates, despite the advantages of performing
              experimental and field manipulations in these animals.  Furthermore, little
              research has examined the relationship between reproductive behavior and
              disease resistance. 


