Title       : SOFTWARE:"Cluster-based Runtime Support for Data-Intensive Online Applications"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0234346

Award Number: 0234346
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332827             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tao Yang tyang@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kai Shen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Data-intensive applications such as data mining demand significant compute and
              I/O resources.  With the ubiquity of World Wide Web and the advances in
              clustering technologies, it becomes a reachable goal to bring these
              data-intensive applications to a large number of users in real-time.  Online
              applications such as Internet services differ from their offline counterpart in
              the performance sensitivity to highly concurrent workload and the availability
              requirement.  It is challenging to achieve high performance, reliability, and
              efficient resource management for these applications under highly concurrent
              workload.

This project addresses the system and programming-level issues in
              building
high performance and reliable runtime support for highly
              concurrent
network services and online applications.  There are three main
              research
thrusts in  this project. First, cluster-based system architectures
              are studied with a  focus on overall system scalability/availability as well as
              load balancing and data replication support.  Secondly, this project
              investigates programming and runtime support to simplify the development and
              deployment of online applications that involve concurrent and parallel data
              manipulation on clusters.  Thirdly, a cluster-based resource management
              framework will be developed with the combined goal of quality-of-service and
              overall resource
utilization efficiency.  Throughout this project, efforts
              will be made to
examine data-intensive applications and validate the
              effectiveness of the
proposed work.  Additional issues will be investigated as
              more experience
are gained through system development and application
              evaluation.
The developed software will be released in public for potential
              use of other
applications.

Since more and more data-intensive services are
              being made
available through intranets and the Internet, it is expected that
              the
developed results will have broad impacts.  Research described in this
              proposal will directly benefit instruction improvement for undergraduate and
              graduate education at PIs' institutions and enhance students' experience in
              cluster-based
computing.


