Title       : RCN: Molecular and Organismic Research in Plant History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0234008

Award Number: 0234008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498128             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Friedman ned@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1664,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Plants are responsible for over two-thirds of human caloric intake worldwide,
              and for the production of most of the oxygen that we consume with every breath.
              Yet despite the centrality of plants to human life and most ecosystems on
              Earth, their evolutionary history (from single-celled ancestors some 475
              million years ago) has largely been overlooked in the increasingly dynamic
              field of developmental biology. Today, a century after Charles Darwin described
              aspects of the evolutionary history of plants as an "abominable mystery," much
              still remains unknown about how everything from leaves to roots to flowers
              evolved (the first plants lacked these structures). In light of the ongoing
              revolution in molecular biology, botanists now have the opportunity to decipher
              the developmental and evolutionary history of plants in ways that, even twenty
              years ago, could never have been imagined. 

The goal of the MORPH (Molecular
              and Organismic Research in Plant History) Research Coordination Network will be
              to foster cross-disciplinary interactions between organismic, paleontological
              and molecular biologists, all intent on solving Darwin's "abominable mystery"
              (and other long-standing questions about the evolution of plants). Major
              planned networking activities include 1) annual meetings/workshops, 2) support
              for cross-disciplinary training opportunities of students, postdoctorals, and
              early career faculty between organismic and molecular labs, 3) outreach
              activities to underrepresented groups in the sciences (through mini-symposia to
              be held at institutions with substantial minority student populations), and 4)
              development of a website for the MORPH RCN. The cross-disciplinary interactions
              of this RCN will provide a unique opportunity for students, postdoctorals and
              faculty to combine historically diverse fields and in turn develop research
              programs at the interface of evolutionary and developmental plant biology. The
              anticipated impact of the proposed network is nothing less than the
              invigoration of the discipline of plant evolutionary developmental biology and
              a nationally coordinated effort to elucidate the underlying developmental
              principles that have governed the diversification of plants over the last 500
              million years. 


