Title       : CAREER: Untangling the Energetics and Dynamics of Atom-Radical and
               Radical-Radical Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0234461

Award Number: 0234461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralf I. Kaiser kaiser@gold.chem.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1962,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, funded within the NSF-wide CAREER program by the Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Kaiser will investigate
              the collision-energy dependent reaction dynamics of bimolecular atom-radical
              reactions of ground state atomic carbon and silicon with propargyl and allyl
              radicals, and the radical-radical reactions propargyl-propargyl,
              propargyl-allyl, and allyl-allyl.  The principal objective of this research is
              to unravel the reaction mechanisms that underlie these processes.  The
              experiments will be performed using crossed supersonic beam technology.  Both
              reactant beams will be prepared in well-defined quantum states before they
              cross with a specific collision energy under single collision conditions.  The
              research will be conducted with a number of international collaborators
              spanning a variety of expertise.  

The PI will actively participate in the
              development of a cross-disciplinary curriculum in reaction dynamics, linking
              his Department of Chemistry with the Department of Physics and Astronomy, the
              university's Institute for Astronomy and the Hawai'ian Institute of Geophysics
              and Planetology.  Through these interactions the PI will relate chemical
              dynamics to astrochemistry, planetary sciences, laboratory astrophysics,
              astrobiology, and combustion chemistry.  The PI's research project will involve
              the training of undergraduate and graduate students, as well as the further
              scientific development of postdoctoral researchers.  Undergraduate students
              involved in research, training and mentoring and will primarily be drawn from
              the underrepresented minority students at the University of Hawai'i.  The PI
              will further engage in an outreach program to science teachers and students at
              local schools involving visits, presentation of popular scientific lectures,
              and visits by high school students and teachers to the research laboratories.

