Title       : Photobiology of Vision and Photosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0234938

Award Number: 0234938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus J. Schulten kschulte@ks.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Emad Tajkhorshid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1144,1164,1248,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to combine classical and quantum mechanical
              modeling to investigate the spectral characteristics of human visual pigments
              and light harvesting complexes in purple bacteria, cyanobacteria, green algae,
              and higher plants, as well as study processes in these systems subsequent to
              light absorption. For this purpose, the newly available atomic structures of
              some of these protein-pigment complexes will be used to construct physical
              models, which will then be studied through molecular dynamics and quantum
              chemistry, employing concepts of condensed matter and statistical
              physics.

Many organisms have evolved a visual and photosynthetic apparatus
              to efficiently detect and harvest light. Interaction of light with matter, in
              particular living matter, is governed by fundamental physics, especially
              quantum theory. As such, vision and photosynthesis both pose conceptual
              challenges to biologists and physicists alike. This provides genuine
              opportunities for interdisciplinary activities between physics, chemistry, and
              biology, making also use of the computational resources at the NSF centers.
              Accordingly, there exist exceptional research training opportunities for
              participating graduate and undergraduate students as well as postdoctoral
              associates arriving from any of these diverse backgrounds. These activities
              will extend strong outreach activities that already exist in our group. 
              Quantum chemistry visualization tools will be added to the freely available
              leading molecular graphics software VMD distributed by our group to over 20,000
              users and experiments related to the theme "Physics in People, Physics in
              Plants" will be developed in collaboration with the UIUC Physics Department's
              traveling science show for children, the Physics Van.
This project is
              supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
              Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
              Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.

