Title       : NIH-NSF BBSI: BioMEMS Summer Bioengineering Institute at New Jersey Institute of
               Technology (NJIT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0234132

Award Number: 0234132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $720800             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Hunter cardiovascular@comcast.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dentcho V. Ivanov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Foulds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1758      Bioengineering & Bioinformatic
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1758,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.:  0234132
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  William Hunter
INSTITUTION
              NAME:  NJIT
TITLE:  NIH-NSF BBSI BioMEMS Summer Bioengineering
              Institute


ABSTRACT 

The Department of Biomedical Engineering at the New
              Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) proposes to develop a four year BioMEMS
              Summer Bioengineering Institute in response to the call for
              bioengineering/bioinformatics summer institutes by NSF/NIH (NSF-02-019). The
              first Institute would be held over 10 weeks in the summer of 2003. 

The
              focus on BioMEMS will be supported by both didactic and research experiences
              planned for the students. The capstone research experience will be fabricating
              a BioMEMS device in the Class-10 Cleanroom of the Microelectronics Facility at
              the New Jersey Institute of Technology. The students will also test the
              biological/medical application of their device in a host biomedical research
              lab either in the University Heights academic community, the metropolitan New
              York community (an easy commute) or at their home university. Prior to testing
              their device, students will also have worked extensively during the summer with
              their host biomedical research lab, so that they have a thorough understanding
              of the biomedical problem for which their device is intended. The students'
              more general understanding of the sort of biomedical research questions that
              are currently being addressed using BioMEMS will be broadened by weekly
              state-of-the-art research seminars given by experts in the field.

The
              students' research experience will be complemented by four formal courses that
              they will complete. One course will survey the field of BioMEMS. The others
              will be the three courses that form the core curriculum in biomedical
              engineering at NJIT. Two of these provide a general introduction to the field
              of biomedical engineering: BME 301 focuses on bioelectrical signals,
              physiologic modeling, and imaging; BME 302 focuses on biomechanics, tissue
              engineering, and biomaterials. The third core course, BME 303, focuses on the
              essentials of biochemistry and cell biology from an engineering point of view.
              Instead of being drab lectures, all of these courses use the studio style of
              presentation that encourages active student involvement in the learning
              process

