Title       : US-Egypt Workshop: Genetic Engineering and Genomics, Alexandria, Egypt, February
               2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0234175

Award Number: 0234175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. Semancik   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed F. Hadidi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : W223      STATE-REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5944,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0234175 
Semancik

Description:  This project supports a US-Egypt Workshop on
              Research in Genomics and Genetic Engineering to be held in Alexandria, Egypt,
              in February 2003.  The U.S. organizers are Dr. Joseph Semancik, Department of
              Plant Pathology, the University of California at Riverside and Dr. Ahmed
              Hadidi, Lead Molecular Virologist and Research Plant Pathologist Emeritus,
              United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service.  The
              Egyptian organizers are Dr. Sirag Lashin, Director, Mubarak City for Scientific
              Research and Technology Applications, Alexandria, Egypt and Dr. Hasan Moawad,
              National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt.  The proposed workshop will bring
              together US and Egyptian scientists to discuss current progress in genetic
              engineering and genomics.  Three days of the workshop will be dedicated to
              talks on current research in genetic engineering and genomics of plants, humans
              and microbes.  The fourth day will be reserved for planning potential
              collaborations between U.S. and Egyptian scientists. Published documents will
              include a book of abstracts and also workshop proceedings. The long-term goal
              of the workshop is to establish permanent collaborative arrangements between
              Egyptian and US scientists. 

Scope:  Genomics and genetic engineering are
              both rapidly advancing areas of research.  The workshop would contribute to
              maintaining international research communication.  This project enables US and
              Egyptian scientists to participate in a workshop to discuss an area scientific
              importance to scientists and officials in both countries and to identify
              potential collaborative research where the two sides can complement each
              other's capabilities. This project is being partially supported under the
              US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
              in both countries to carry out these joint scientific activities.  Additional
              funding is provided by the Plant Genomics Research Program, Directorate of
              Biological Sciences.

