Title       : Distribution And Ecology Of Ammonia Oxidizing Bacteria In The Palmer LTER Study
               Area
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0234249

Award Number: 0234249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $627912             (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Hollibaugh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the distribution, phylogenetic affinities and
              ecological aspects of ammonium-oxidizing bacteria in the Palmer Long-Term
              Ecological Research study area. Ammonia oxidation is the first step in the
              conversion of regenerated nitrogen to dinitrogen gas via denitrification, a
              3-step pathway mediated by three distinct guilds of bacteria. As such, ammonia
              oxidation is important to the global nitrogen cycle. Ammonia oxidation and the
              overall process of nitrification-denitrification have received little attention
              in polar oceans where it is significant and where the effects of climate change
              on biogeochemical rates are likely to be pronounced. The goals of the studies
              proposed here are A) to obtain more conclusive information concerning
              composition of Antarctic ammonia oxidizers; B) to begin characterizing their
              ecophysiology and ecology; and C) to obtain cultures of the organism for more
              detailed studies. Water column and sea ice AOB assemblages will be
              characterized phylogenetically and the different kinds of AOB in various
              samples will be quantified. Nitrification rates will be measured across the
              LTER study area in water column, sea ice and sediment samples. Grazing rates on
              AOB will be determined and their sensitivity to UV light evaluated. In
              addition, the significance of urea nitrogen as a source of reduced nitrogen to
              AOB will be assessed and the temperature response of nitrification over
              temperature ranges appropriate to polar regions will be evaluated. This work
              will provide insights into the ecology of AOB and the knowledge needed to model
              how water column nitrification will respond to changes in the polar ecosystems
              accompanying global climate change. 
