Title       : Geo-Engineering and Rock Mechanics Research at the Proposed U.S. National
               Underground Science Laboratory; September 19-21, 2002; Washington, DC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  2002   
File        : a0234136

Award Number: 0234136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30643              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Smeallie smeallie@armarocks.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Rock Mec Assoc Fdtn
	      600 Woodland Terrace
	      Alexandria, VA  22302    425/883-0777

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0234136
PI:		Peter Smeallie
Institution:	American Rock Mechanics
              Association Foundation
Title:	"Geo-Engineering and Rock Mechanics Research at
              the Proposed U.S. National Underground Science Laboratory"

 
The
              establishment of a National Underground Science Laboratory (NUSL) is currently
              under 
consideration.  A workshop will be conducted by the University of
              Maryland on September
19-21, 2002, to identify research areas of value to the
              nation that could be conducted at the NUSL.  The American Rock Mechanics
              Association Foundation (ARMA/F) proposes to develop
for presentation a
              research agenda for geo-engineering and rock mechanics for consideration at the
              NUSL workshop and eventually to be undertaken at the proposed NUSL facility
              itself. ARMA/F will identify topics and will select up to four broad areas for
              preparation of white papers.  Captains will be identified for each area and
              four to five team members.  The captain will lead the team in writing a white
              paper (10-15 pages) on the subject that will detail the nature of the research,
              how such work could take advantage of the underground laboratory, and what the
              benefits of the results would be.  The four papers will be submitted to ARMA/F
              by August 15th and examined by a  team assembled by ARMA/F to include experts
              from the various fields called out in the papers.  One day prior to the NUSL
              workshop, ARMA/F will host a day-long pre-workshop meeting, inviting the
              captains and the teams to view all the presentations, and make improvements and
              modifications to the presentations consistent with the allotted time and
              speakers for the subject at the NUSL workshop.  The final result will be
              presented at the main workshop.

This project will advance the field of
              geo-engineering and rock mechanics by identifying
for consideration needed
              research to be undertaken at the NUSL. This work will give 
unprecedented
              opportunities for educators, students, and researchers to obtain field 
              experiences and to carry out complex projects under field conditions. Results
              of research carried out at the NUSL could potentially have direct impacts on
              national security through a better understanding of how rock behaves and civil
              infrastructure systems through advances in tunneling and excavation
              technologies.

