Title       : SOFTWARE: Resource Virtualization for Cluster-Based Network Storage Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0234281

Award Number: 0234281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tzi-Cker Chiueh chiueh@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A growing concern among corporate information technology (IT) managers is the
              elevating gap between the increasing system maintenance and administration cost
              of the IT infrastructure and the decreasing hardware/software acquisition cost.
              
This gap is escalating because system administration and management
is still
              relatively labor-intensive and thus non-scalable, despite extensive
              research/commercial efforts to automate the process. In view of this
              trend,commercial enterprises resort to IT out-sourcing in order to share
              expensive and precious system management expertise. Despite its compelling cost
              saving advantage, IT out-sourcing so far has not been the mainstream, chiefly
              because the lack of technology to enforce and certify the so-called Service
              Level Agreement (SLA) between the out-sourcing and out-sourced parties.
              

This proposal will develop a multi-dimensional storage virtualization
              system called Stonehenge, which is able to guarantee a wide variety of
              storage-related Quality of Service (QoS) metrics and thus provides the enabling
              technology toenforce SLAs associated with storage service in particular and
              Internet services in general. The set of techniques developed in the Stonehenge
              system will carry the storage virtualization field one large step further
              because they allow virtualization of storage resource almost in all possible
              performance attributes that can be associated with physical disks. 
As a
              result, Stonehenge allows creation of virtual disks that are as tangible as
              physical disks, and yet much more flexible and easier to manage and maintain.
              As an integral component of this project, we will also develop a unified and
              reusable implementation framework that could quickly convert, with zero or
              minor modification, a given cluster-based Internet service into QoS-aware, such
              that they are capable of supporting contractual SLAs that are described in
              terms of service-specific performance metrics.

Besides its intellectual
              contributions, this project will make a major impact on the undergraduate and
              graduate education of the CS department at Stony Brook by introducing a series
              of system management courses, which will use the Stonehenge prototype as a case
              study on the functionality and implementation details of production-grade
              enterprise storage management systems.


