Title       : Systematics of Maxillariinae(ORCHIDACEAE): Generic Delimitation, Pollinator
               Rewards, and Pollination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0234064

Award Number: 0234064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norris H. Williams orchid@flmnh.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Whitten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0234064
Williams and Whitten
	The purpose of this project is to collect,
              study, and classify the species
of Maxillaria, one of the largest and most
              poorly known orchid genera.  New
species of Maxillaria are discovered
              frequently in the tropics, and the total number of currently described species
              exceeds 650.  Orchids are one of the showiest and most species-rich families of
              plants, yet are very poorly studied.  As tropical forests are destroyed at an
              increasing rate, the most basic questions we need to answer are 1) How many
              species exist?  2)  Where do they grow?  3)  How are they related to each other
              and to other plants?  Maxillaria species are often large, conspicuous, and
              numerically important components of the epiphytic vegetation in the Neotropics,
              but species are difficult to identify.  The classification of Maxillaria and
              its relatives has been chaotic for more than a century, and current taxonomic
              treatments offer little hope of stability unless the revisions are based on
              modern DNA- and morphology-based phylogenies (hypotheses of evolution).  In
              this project, researchers at the University of Florida will coordinate studies
              of Maxillaria with collaborators in Mexico and Central and South America.  DNA
              sequencing of nuclear and plastid genes will be used to acquire new data in
              order to classify and to estimate phylogenetic relationships within this large
              genus.  Specimen images, identification keys, publications, and on-line
              databases will be produced to help botanists and the public identify these
              orchids.  
The pollinators of Maxillaria flowers and the type and composition
              of
the floral rewards (nectar, oil, resin, etc.) will also be studied.  By
              plotting these pollination data onto evolutionary "trees", one can gain insight
              into how pollinators have influenced speciation and diversity within this genus
              and in other plants. This project will provide basic information on the
              biodiversity of a major group of tropical plants.  This information is
              fundamental to broader
biodiversity studies such as regional inventories
              (floras), choosing areas of high diversity for conservation priorities, and
              documenting rates of species extinction.  Specimens, photographs, and DNA
              samples will be archived and will serve as a record of orchid species that may
              become extinct within the near future.  This grant will train PhD level
              students in modern plant systematics.  Because orchids are beautiful and
              charismatic "poster child" plants,  information on their diversity and biology
              can be used to raise public awareness and support for conserving tropical
              ecosystems.  Women graduate students from Brazil and Ecuador and male students
              from Mexico and Costa Rica will broaden the representation of scientists from
              Central and South America and bring gender, ethnic and geographical diversity
              to this collaborative project.  Collaboration with Mexican, Ecuadorian, and
              Brazilian scientists will enhance the network of
partnerships which have been
              developed with other groups. 


