Title       : Conference: Advanced Bioethics Institute, Lisbon, Portugal 2003 and 2004,
               England 2005
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0234227

Award Number: 0234227
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111583             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Comstock   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Bioethics Institute is a faculty development workshop designed to assist
              
participants in learning theoretical and applied ethics and effective
              classroom strategies for discussing them.  It has educated over 500 life
              science faculty during the last decade.  In 2000, with funding from the
              European Union and FLAD (a private Portuguese foundation) as well as NSF, the
              Bioethics Institute became a trans-Atlantic project as three joint US/EU
              workshops were held in Lisbon (summers of 2000, '01, and '02).  The project is
              now responding to Europe's request for assistance in reaching science students
              in languages other than English and on line for students unable to access
              Europe's university campuses.  This advanced institute will 1) Provide
              
participants with education in moral philosophy; 2) Enrich participants'
              classrooms and research, including US participants' classrooms and research,
              with diverse international perspectives; 3) Assist participants in translating
              the Institute's text, "Life Science Ethics," and  4) Prepare participants to
              teach the Institute's on-line course, "Life Science Ethics." 

To attain
              these goals, twenty-one participants will gather annually at FLAD (the
              Foundation for Luso-American Development) in Lisbon, Portugal for three years. 
              There they will discuss ethical theory; review the latest developments in
              ethics pedagogy; review drafts of translations of the Institute's text they
              have produced; and prepare on-line courses. The "translations" of the
              Institute's text, "Life Science Ethics," need not be straightforward
              translations, and may be modifications of the English text to suit students'
              particular interests and needs.

Three European languages will be selected,
              and working groups will be formed 
by invitation.  Each group will consist of
              seven people.  For example, if Portuguese is one of the languages, that team
              might consist of two life scientists from Portugal 
and one from the US, one
              ethicist from Portugal and one from the US, a faculty 
member whose specialty
              is English/Portuguese translation (either from the US 
or Portugal), and one
              of the translator's graduate students.  The team will be 
responsible for the
              Portuguese translation of "Life Science Ethics" and for 
offering at least one
              section of an online course based on the text.


