Title       : Scalable Formal Methods for Multidimensional Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0234524

Award Number: 0234524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grigore Rosu grosu@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose G. Meseguer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7214      HIGHLY DEPENDABLE COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates scalable formal methods and their combinations as a
              way to reduce the gap between formal methods and software practice.  These
              methods include domain-specific certification and runtime verification and
              monitoring.  Important subthemes are: exploitation of domain-specific knowledge
              to derive efficient and scalable algorithms and decision procedures; strength
              through the combined use of several "lightweight" formal methods;
              multidimensional components to represent not only code, but also
different
              views of the system from different perspectives; dependability metrics based on
              the notion of multidimensional component, so that increases in dependability
              along each dimension are aggregated into measurable overall dependability
              increases.  Various prototypes are developed: safety policy certifier for units
              of measurement; coordinate frame safety certifier; optimality state estimation
              certifier; runtime verification and monitoring prototypes.  These are
              experimentally evaluated using the NASA-HDCP testbed.

This research is
              expected to lead to advances in software technology and to benefit advanced
              education.  Novel combinations of software synthesis, certification and
              monitoring lead to new, powerful
dependable software development methodologies
              ensuring safe execution with little or no overhead.  Two graduate courses are
              planned.  Supported graduate students are given a solid scientific
              foundation
and acquire invaluable experience by working closely with NASA
              scientists.


