Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Association and Alignment of French Rises
               and their Role in Discourse Segmentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0234667

Award Number: 0234667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6490               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Beckman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Mary E. Beckman, Ms. Pauline Welby will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation on intonational rises in French as cues to
              identifying where one word ends and another begins. Such cues are necessary
              since speech lacks the spaces between words that writing often has. In English,
              stress is a good cue to segmentation since content words (nouns, adjectives,
              etc.) typically begin with stressed syllables. French lacks such stress cues,
              but the timing of intonational rises there has been hypothesized to fill a
              similar role. Previous research has shown that French intonation is
              characterized by an obligatory rise at the end of a phrase and an optional
              early rise near the beginning. Two production experiments will examine
              influences on the early rise (e.g., speaking rate) and the timing of both
              rises. Three perception experiments will examine the role of the early rise in
              speech segmentation. Items will be read by a native speaker and recorded; the
              timing of the rises will then be varied using computer resynthesis.
              Participants will listen to stimuli and make various types of responses. For
              example, one experiment will use invented non-words, whose segmentation
              reflects that of unknown but real words. For example, the same sequence of
              syllables could be interpreted as the nonsense word "melamondine" or as the
              phrase "mes lamondines" ('my' plus the nonsense word "lamondine"). According to
              one hypothesis, an early rise beginning at the first syllable will bias the
              listener to the one-word interpretation ("melamondine"), while an early rise
              beginning at the second syllable will bias the listener to the two-word
              interpretation ("mes lamondines"). 

This research is significant both for
              theoretical linguistics and for the development of speech technologies. It will
              increase our understanding of French intonation and of speech segmentation.  In
              addition, a better understanding of segmentation strategies can improve
              automatic speech recognition systems, which lag far behind humans in
              segmentation accuracy. A more refined account of the timing facts might also
              improve speech synthesis systems, since poor intonation makes synthesized
              speech difficult to understand. In turn, improvements in speech technology
              provide scientists with better tools for future speech research. 

