Title       : Morphogenetic Role of Serotonin in Very Early Embryogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0234388

Award Number: 0234388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359941             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Levin mlevin@forsyth.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Forsyth
	      140 The Fenway
	      Boston, MA  021150000    617/262-5200

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0234388
Levin

Understanding developmental pattern formation is fundamental
              to cell and evolutionary biology; it will be a vital part of biomedicine
              addressing birth defects, cancer, & organ/tissue regeneration by achieving
              fine-scale control over the structure/function of living tissues. Research in
              the post-genomic age requires a synthesis of genetics and molecular biology
              with functional physiology in vivo. Through interdisciplinary molecular and
              computer modeling techniques, the Levin lab seeks a detailed understanding of
              cellular signals that control large-scale pattern formation by modulation of
              gene activity and the biophysics of membrane flux. The vertebrate body-plan
              possesses bilateral symmetry; however, embryos also exhibit a striking
              left-right asymmetry (LRA) of the viscera and brain which is highly conserved
              across species. Why does asymmetry exist at all? What are the implications of
              asymmetry for the normal physiology of the heart, gut, and brain? Why are all
              normal individuals not only asymmetric, but asymmetric to the same direction?
              When, in evolution, did handed asymmetry appear? Is it connected to chirality
              in plants and mollusc shells? At what developmental stages is asymmetry
              initiated in vertebrate embryos? What are the implications of brain asymmetry
              for human cognition? And, how can the left-right axis be consistently oriented
              with respect to the other two axes in the absence of any macroscopic feature of
              the world which distinguishes left from right? Are quantum parity violations
              relevant to mesoscopic biological shape? These issues await a detailed
              understanding, at the molecular, genetic, and biochemical levels, of biased
              asymmetry in embryos since early LR steps are poorly understood.
	
In
              pursuing the mechanisms of LRA, the involvement of a novel and important aspect
              was discovered: serotonin (5HT). 5HT is a key neurotransmitter in the central
              nervous system that regulates psychodynamic function and is directly implicated
              in both normal cognition and syndromes such as memory impairment, sleep
              disorders, schizophrenia, dementia, aggression, depression, etc. Thus serotonin
              is, potentially, a biochemical correlate of conscious states which can be used
              to probe the physical basis of cognition. Preliminary studies in our lab
              utilized the frog embryo (Xenopus) to show that (1) some members of the 5HT
              pathway are present in the cleavage-stage embryo (i.e., long prior to the
              formation of neurons) in dynamic patterns some of which display a consistent
              LRA, 2) 5HT signaling is functionally implicated in early steps of LRA by
              pharmacological experiments, and 3) the L and R sides of the embryo show
              differential responses to intracellular serotonin. Thus, the 5HT pathway is a
              promising and completely novel entrypoint into early steps of LR patterning.
              The proposed research will seek to understand extremely basic properties of
              serotonergic signaling in early embryos by capitalizing on the many advantages
              of Xenopus embryos over rodent and human systems for these studies, and
              collaborations in the neurobiology community. The aims are: (1) characterize at
              the embryonic and subcellular level, the localization of all LR-relevant 5HT
              pathway members at each stage of early development, (2) determine precisely
              which embryonic stages in LR patterning utilize 5HT signaling, (3) characterize
              a novel cytoplasmic site of functional 5HT receptors, and (4) test two specific
              molecular models of the role of 5HT signaling with known early steps in LR
              patterning. 

Intellectual merit and broader impacts: A direct benefit will
              be the characterization of a novel mechanism in embryonic left-right asymmetry,
              in the context of known steps in LR patterning. Importantly, since this work
              identifies a marker of LR asymmetry within 2 hours of fertilization, it shows
              that embryos know left from right far earlier than heretofore suspected in the
              field, as well as providing reagents which set up a direct attack on the
              elusive "step 1". Perhaps the most interesting are the numerous long-term,
              wider impacts of this interdisciplinary work. Techniques will be developed and
              introduced for functional developmental studies of small molecule flux in vivo.
              These novel embryological techniques and approaches will be taught directly to
              graduate students and post-docs in our lab, as well as be published and
              presented at scientific meetings to help disseminate valuable ideas to the
              scientific community which can form the basis of new future work in many labs.
              Particularly exciting is the fact that an early role for this neurotransmitter
              may suggest that serotonergic synapses are an evolutionary co-opting of far
              more primitive cell:cell signaling events, which will have interesting
              implications for evolutionary developmental biology as well as neurobiology.
              This provides a ready context within which to train future scientists in
              interdisciplinary approaches to biological problems. These studies will thus
              initiate an understanding of a new role for a signaling molecule well-known for
              its physiological relevance in adult tissue. This information will benefit
              society by shedding light on very basic problems of neuroscience, embryology,
              evolution, and the safety of pharmaceutically popular 5HT- modulating drugs
              during pregnancy. 

