Title       : HIGH RISK RESEARCH: Paleoanthropological Survey and Exploration of North and
               Central Afar Rift, Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0234320

Award Number: 0234320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16946              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yohannes Haile-Selassie yhailese@cmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland Mus of Nat Hist
	      
	      Cleveland, OH  44101    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Afar region of Ethiopia is widely known for the information it has yielded
              that bears on the early history of humans.  Many of the fossil remains of our
              earliest relatives, some dating back dating back to six million years ago, were
              found in the region.  While a number of areas of the Afar Rift have been
              investigated for evidence of our evolutionary past, uncovering further sites is
              an exciting proposition. 

The Ethiopian government's Authority for Research
              and Conservation of Cultural Heritage has provided Yohannes Haile-Selassie and
              colleagues with a one year survey and exploration permit to locate new
              paleoanthropological sites with high potential for further research in the
              future.   Under this permit the researchers will be able to explore previously
              unsurveyed regions in order to locate new Plio-Pleistocene and late Miocene
              sites in the North and Central Afar Rift.  While this time period is the chief
              interest of the investigators, more recent sites that are discovered will be
              made available to the broader scientific community.  Satellite imagery and
              aerial reconnaissance using remote sensing will be employed, as well as foot
              and vehicle surveys, to assist in locating promising sites.  

In addition to
              the intellectual excitement and public appeal of uncovering our species'
              ancestry, this High Risk Research in Anthropology award will enable a truly
              international collaboration with Ethiopian scientists based in both the United
              States and Ethiopia. 

