Title       : The Role of KANADI in Promoting Abaxial Cell Fates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0234347

Award Number: 0234347
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Bowman jlbowman@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0234347
Bowman

Leaves of seed plants are formed from the flanks of apical
              meristems. Therefore, an inherent positional relationship exists between them:
              organ primordia have an adaxial side adjacent to the meristem, and an abaxial
              one away from the meristem. Surgical and genetic studies suggest that a
              morphogenetic gradient, whose source is the meristem, converts the inherent
              polarity into a functional one. Once an adaxial-abaxial axis of polarity is
              established within organ primordia, it provides cues for proper lamina growth
              and asymmetric development. Several key players involved in this process were
              identified recently, and analyses of these genes support and refine our views
              of axis formation in plants. Members of two gene families, the KANADIs and
              YABBYs, promote abaxial fates, and their expression is confined top the abaxial
              domains of developing lateral organs.  When adaxial factors are active
              abaxially, the expression of the abaxial factors is eliminated, and vice versa.
               Thus, the adaxial and abaxial factors are expressed in mutually exclusive
              domains.  The aim of this proposal is the characterization of the KANADIs,
              focusing on the role of the KANADIs in repressing adaxial factors, and the role
              of the KANADIs in promoting lamina expansion through the activity of the
              YABBYs.  Experiments are proposed to address whether the interaction between
              the KANADIs and the adaxial factors and the YABBYs is direct or indirect and
              whether KANADI dependent lamina expansion is mediated via YABBY activity. 
              Finally, experiments to integrate hypotheses based on classical meristem
              dissection experiments with genes identified via genetics are proposed.  The
              basic research proposed should provide a foundation of knowledge to facilitate
              the modification of plant architecture.  Since leaves provide the source of the
              majority of photosynthate, modification of their structure to maximize this
              process has the potential to increase agricultural productivity in many crop
              species.

