Title       : Mechanistic Studies Employing In Situ Infrared Spectroscopy of Reactions
               Pertinent to Metal-Catalyzed Carbon Dioxide/Epoxide Coupling Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0234860

Award Number: 0234860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Darensbourg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research by Prof. Donald J. Darensbourg of Texas A&M University to
              address the utilization of carbon dioxide in the development of improved
              synthetic routes for the production of polycarbonates.  The current industrial
              production of these materials is both hazardous and expensive and involves the
              interfacial polycondensation of phosgene and diols.  This research will examine
              in detail the mechanistic aspects of metal catalyzed carbon dioxide/epoxide
              coupling reactions employing in situ spectroscopy methods utilizing
              Fourier-transform infrared attenuated total reflectance (FTIR/ATR)
              spectroscopy.  Selected processes will be investigated both in carbon dioxide
              swollen organic solvents and in the absence of added solvents where phase
              behavior is of importance.   Experiments are designed to understand the various
              factors controlling carbon dioxide /epoxide coupling processes involving
              alicyclic vs aliphatic epoxides with particular emphasis on copolymer vs cyclic
              carbonate formation.   Selected catalyst systems to be examined include those
              with adjacent nucleophile/epoxide binding sites and those with trans related
              binding sites (e.g., (salen)Cr(III)Cl).  Other studies will explore the
              development of structural and reactivity models for the industrially prevalent
              double metal cyanide catalysts (DMC) used in polyether and polycarbonate
              synthesis. 

The very important fields of organometallic chemistry, catalyst
              design, polymer catalysis and characterization provide valuable training for
              graduate and undergraduate students entering either the academic or industrial
              work force.  Furthermore, these studies heighten students' sensitivities to the
              roles chemists play in issues of environmental concern.  Outreach programs
              involve high school students in research projects.

This research seeks to
              find new, more environmentally benign ways of producing polycarbonate plastics
              utilizing carbon dioxide as a synthetic component.  

