Title       : RUI: Acid and Base Stress in Escherichia Coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0234732

Award Number: 0234732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan L. Slonczewski slonczewski@kenyon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      22 Ransom Hall
	      Gambier, OH  43022    740/427-5114

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Joan Slonczewski of Kenyon College to study acid
              and base stress in the bacterium, Escherichia coli, and to train undergraduate
              students in microbiological research.  Bacteria make different proteins to help
              them survive extreme changes in pH, both in natural environments and within the
              human body.  For this project (a continuation of MCB-9982437), a model of
              pH-regulated proteins has been developed.  This model predicts that growth in
              acid leads E. coli to convert its food into alkaline fermentation products, and
              vice-versa. This model will be tested using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis
              to observe induction of metabolic enzymes that lead to different end products,
              which will, in turn, be identified by using high-performance liquid
              chromatography.  In addition, the effects of various acidic and alkaline end
              products on bacterial metabolism will be studied.
	
Acid and base regulation
              are important for bacteria to survive in soil and aquatic environments, as well
              as in the human intestine.  E. coli is particularly interesting as a model
              organism whose genome has been sequenced, and as a "neutralophile," a species
              that can grow in either acid or base.  Many mechanisms of food preservation,
              such as the use of weak acids benzoate and sorbate, depend on pH; yet
              increasingly food-borne pathogens are acid resistant.  Revealing the mechanisms
              of response to pH change will help us to better understand its environmental
              effects, as well as the role of pH in food quality and preservation. 
              Furthermore, understanding of pH and metabolism in bacterial cultures will
              contribute to biotechnology by helping improve growth conditions for bacterial
              production.  Kenyon College emphasizes undergraduate education, and students
              will be involved in every aspect of this project as they are trained to perform
              research experiments in microbiology.  Several undergraduates have already been
              attracted to work on the project, and they are encouraged to pursue careers in
              science.

