Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Craniofacial Asymmetry, Morphological
               Integration, and Developmental Instability in the Human Skull
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2002   
File        : a0234565

Award Number: 0234565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9141               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan T. Richtsmeier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project uses craniofacial asymmetry to identify developmentally integrated
              characters in the human skull.  Understanding the normal range of craniofacial
              variation, as well as limitations on the range of variation, is a necessary
              foundation for research involving the human skull.  Developmental integration
              of character traits constrains variability, because these traits grow, adapt,
              and evolve together as a single unit.  This project will identify characters
              that are integrated through direct developmental interactions (developmental
              "modules") and test whether they remain integrated under conditions of stress. 
              Distinguishing patterns of integration that remain consistent under stress is
              critical for studies of adaptation, evolutionary change and
              speciation.

Recent advances in the study of fluctuating asymmetry offer an
              innovative new method for identifying developmentally integrated characters. 
              Fluctuating asymmetry has been defined as a random pattern of between-sides
              variation in a sample of individuals.  Because of the random nature of
              morphological fluctuating asymmetry, significant covariation in the fluctuating
              asymmetry of two characters indicates that the characters are developmentally
              integrated.  

This project consists of three separate but related studies. 
              First, the methodology will be applied to analysis of normal adult skulls to
              test predictions from substantial existing literature on integration in the
              skull.  Second, the maintenance of integration under the stress of
              biomechanical constraint will be tested using data from children with
              prematurely fused cranial sutures and a normal control group.  Finally, the
              maintenance of integration under systemic stress is tested using data from two
              archaeological samples of humans that lived under conditions differing in
              adversity.  For each analysis, the Co-PI will collect three-dimensional
              coordinates from biologically relevant landmarks on each skull.  Fluctuating
              asymmetry will be quantified using these coordinate data and established
              morphometric methods.  Patterns of covariation will be tested to identify
              developmentally integrated characters.  

Project funding permits the Co-PI
              to visit various museums housing skeletal collections.  In addition, adequate
              materials will be obtained to support this project and further related
              research, advancing the scientific career of this female Co-PI.  Results of
              this project will include unique information about development of the human
              skull and constraints on adaptive responses to stress.  

