Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Cloud-Particle Growth Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2002  
File        : a0234211

Award Number: 0234211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $605434             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Lamb lno@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry Harrington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As a cloud droplet or ice crystal grows by condensation, water molecules flow
              from the vapor surrounding the particle to its surface and the heat released by
              condensation flows away from the particle.  Classical theory treats the
              environment of the particle as a continuum, so that the heat and mass transfer
              are described by the diffusion equation.  This is a valid approximation for
              drops that are much larger than the molecular mean free path, which is about
              0.06 microns for normal sea level conditions.  However, newly formed droplets
              have sizes typically between 0.1 and 1 microns.  For these, the classical,
              continuum theory must be modified to include gas kinetic effects.  The
              modification introduces two new parameters that characterize the transfer of
              heat and mass, called the condensation coefficient and the accommodation
              coefficient.  The condensation coefficient may be described as the fraction of
              the molecules hitting the surface of the particle that stick to it.  The
              accommodation coefficient may be thought of as the fraction of the molecules
              bouncing off the surface of a particle that have acquired the temperature of
              the particle.  In general, these so-called kinetic coefficients must be
              determined experimentally, because there is no known way to derive their values
              theoretically.  Previous attempts to evaluate them have given widely variable
              results.  This project approaches the problem a new way, by suspending the
              particles by electrodynamic levitation under controlled conditions of
              temperature, pressure, and humidity, heating them with pulses of laser energy,
              and deducing the accommodation and condensation coefficients from the
              temperature change and the loss of mass by evaporation.  Recent attention has
              focused on the possible influence of trace amounts of volatile solutes on cloud
              droplet growth and evaporation.  Experiments using droplets doped with these
              materials will determine their effect on the kinetic coefficients.  Sensitivity
              tests using a numerical cloud model will be carried out to evaluate the
              significance of the kinetic coefficients and their variability.  This work is
              fundamental for understanding the formation, development, and dissipation of
              clouds in the atmosphere.  Furthermore, an accurate accounting of the effects
              of clouds on solar radiation may require knowledge of the kinetic coefficients.
