Title       : Collaborative Research: Workforce Diversity, Coworker Trust, Skin Shade, and
               Competitiveness: Wage Determination of Black Americans Reconsidered
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0234025

Award Number: 0234025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131218             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Darity darity@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project extends the knowledge of economists regarding black-white wage
              differentials by examining two hypotheses for why the racial wage gap might be
              larger for some groups of black workers.  First, we postulate that as an
              economically subaltern group acquires more competitive labor market attributes
              they will face a greater intensity of labor market discrimination so as to
              maintain the social hierarchy in favor of the dominant group.  We refer to this
              hypothesis as the Functionality of Discrimination.  We will perform a variety
              of tests in which we compare levels of unexplained wage differences, a standard
              measure of discrimination, across black workers that have alternative amounts
              of desirable labor market attributes.  Second, we propose that blacks with
              lighter skin shade benefit more from coworker cooperation than darker skinned
              blacks who are otherwise comparable, which will lead to a smaller racial wage
              gap for lighter skinned blacks.  We advance the notion that there is a link
              between skin shade and productivity since the work setting is a social
              environment where personal interaction influences job performance.  In our
              view, coworkers have skills they may share with one another that enhance
              personal productivity and wages.  However, cooperation between coworkers
              (including the sharing of skills) is likely to depend on commonalities and we
              envision phenotype similarity as a commonality that workers may form coalitions
              around.  Thus, we expect white workers, who generally are in better jobs than
              black workers, to be more cooperative with lighter skinned blacks.  If this is
              the case then lighter skinned blacks will be more productive than otherwise
              comparable darker skinned blacks from working with white coworkers, which will
              translate into greater wages for lighter skinned blacks.   

Data from the
              National Survey of Black Americans (NSBA) collected in 1979 and data from the
              National Survey of American Life (NSAL), which resembles the National Survey of
              Black Americans but were collected in 2001, are used in this study to estimate
              wage equations.  The estimated equations will reveal the contribution of skin
              shade to wages and the estimates will reveal if unexplained wage differences
              between blacks and whites are greater for those blacks considered highly
              competitive in the work place.  Since the surveys are two decades apart how the
              relationship between skin shade and wages has changed over time can be
              explored.  The data sets used in the study are unique in that they provide data
              on a person's skin shade and information on whether an individual works in a
              group.  For work team members there is information on the size and on the
              racial composition of their workgroup.  These data sets also provide
              information on an individual's cognitive ability and accumulated skills, which
              can be used to gauge their competitiveness in the work place.  The findings
              generated by these studies will shed light on whether the extent of racial wage
              discrimination varies with workplace context and with phenotypical attributes. 
              Thus, new insights will be gained on the appropriate form of policies to
              redress wage discrimination and on the likely feasibility of implementing such
              policy initiatives. Undergraduate students at Washington and Lee University,
              who are members of a minority group and who plan to attend graduate school in
              the social sciences or humanities, will be part of the research team conducting
              these studies.  These students will participate in the Minority Undergraduate
              Research Assistant Program at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
              during the summer. 

