Title       : Plasma Irregularity Sources Associated with Charged Dust in the Polar Summer
               Mesosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0234062

Award Number: 0234062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269413             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne A. Scales wscales@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The explanation of Polar Mesospheric Summer Echoes (PMSEs) has become one of the
              central challenges in near earth space science. These radar echoes are often
              observed in conjunction with high altitude noctilucent clouds (NLCs), which
              consist of charged dust particles. Since NLCs may provide evidence of global
              climate change on earth and are an indicator of the evolution and dynamics of
              the near earth space environment, a quantitative understanding of the
              relationship between PMSEs and NLCs has also become a forefront issue. PMSEs
              are believed to be produced by small-scale electron density irregularities in
              the NLC source layer. Recent simultaneous sounding rocket and radar
              measurements have produced the most complete picture to date of the plasma
              configuration inside NLCs and the relationship to PMSEs. These measurements
              provide strong evidence that PMSEs are enhanced in the boundary layer between
              the charged dust cloud and the background mesospheric plasma where plasma
              irregularities are also observed to be enhanced. Funding is requested to make
              an important and substantial advance in the quantitative understanding of the
              source of electron density irregularities believed to produce PMSEs. Consistent
              with the recent experimental evidence, a new model will be developed to
              consider the NLC boundary layer as a primary source region for PMSE generation.
              This investigation will provide a new methodology and approach to gaining
              fundamental insight into the importance of NLC boundary layers in producing
              PMSEs.

The proposed activity will have broad impact by establishing
              infrastructure and collaboration between academic departments at the principal
              investigator's home institution. The activity will also sustain long term
              collaboration between the principal investigator and government research
              laboratories. The activity will allow collaborations to be furthered between
              the atmospheric science and international plasma communities. Finally, a
              minority PI and graduate student education will be supported by this work.
