Title       : RUI: Gene-Specific Importin Alpha Functions in Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0234751

Award Number: 0234751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130293             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Fleming robert.fleming@trincoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity College
	      300 Summit Street
	      Hartford, CT  061063100    860/297-2000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0234751
Fleming

In eukaryotic cells, cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments
              are separated by the nuclear envelope.  This double membrane structure contains
              numerous nuclear pores that regulate the flow of molecular information into and
              out of the nucleus.  Proper functioning of this transport process is essential
              for normal cellular metabolic regulation as well as the transmission of
              developmental signals from the extracellular and cytoplasmic compartments to
              the nucleus so that gene transcription can be regulated and modified during
              cellular differentiation processes.
Many specific transporter molecules have
              been identified in this process. In particular, Dr. Fleming will focus on the
              importin a (imp a) genes act as adapter proteins for cargo molecules containing
              classical nuclear localization signals. The imp a gene family contains three
              distinct members (clades): imp a1, a2 and a3. Metazoan animals generally have
              representatives of each of the three clades. The evolutionary conservation of
              all three clades from Drosophila through human suggests that each clade is
              constrained in its ability to diverge from or converge on the others,
              suggesting that each clade has evolved specialized functions.  He has chosen to
              examine the imp a gene family in Drosophila since there are only single genes
              representing each of the clades, thus allowing us to assess any specific
              functions of individual clade members.
The merit of these studies resides in
              the definitive demonstration of unique roles for specific imp a genes in
              nuclear transport and perhaps roles for these genes in other cellular
              processes. The elucidation of these functions is critical for the understanding
              of cellular signaling and homeostasis.  It is expected that these roles will be
              conserved in other metazoan animals having representative members of the
              different imp a clades. His studies will reveal evolutionary conservation of
              specific functions by comparisons with other species. 
Additionally, the
              experimentation within this proposal will provide undergraduate students with
              direct exposure to current biological methodologies while demonstrating the
              extent to which conclusions can be drawn from available data.  This exposure
              will allow students to design additional experiments based on their findings
              and explore the true nature of scientific thought and experimentation.  It is
              further anticipated that students will experience the opportunity to present
              their findings at local and national meetings and also in publications to
              experience the totality of the scientific community and the interactions
              fostered by it. 

