Title       : Formal Checklists for Remote Agent Dependability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0234462

Award Number: 0234462
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390015             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn Talcott clt@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grit Denker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 7214      HIGHLY DEPENDABLE COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Talcott
CCR-0234462
"FORMAL CHECKLISTS FOR REMOTE AGENT DEPENDABILITY"

Deep
              Space Missions involve a tight integration of physical and software systems
              that must function autonomously over a prolonged time. These autonomous agents
              need to be robust and able to react in real time to state changes without aid
              of earth control.  The Mission Data System (MDS) framework, consisting of an
              architecture, tools, and libraries of reusable components, has been developed
              by NASA to address this problem. This project builds on two key ideas of the
              MDS approach: a state-based approach to system design and a goal-oriented
              approach to operation. It develops a formal framework with methods and
              supporting tools for increasing the dependability of goal based operation of
              space systems. In particular, a formal approach to the analysis of goal net
              specifications is being developed that enables assertions to be made about
              their dependability level. A set of formal checklists (formal analysis suites)
              will be produced along with supporting tools that can be used to achieve more
              predictable dependability of goal nets and goal-based operation.  The
              checklists will provide a qualitative means of measuring dependability of goal
              achievers. A spectrum of analysis techniques of different strengths will be
              developed to allow for achieving different levels of dependability.
To
              experimentally validate the ideas, the framework will be applied to goal
              achievers for a representative set of domains in the context of the MDS test
              bed.  The experimental work will guide the development of formal checklists.
              The resulting case studies will also serve as templates for further application
              of the formal framework.  Certified packages of goals, goal nets and
              corresponding software modules developed for one mission can be re-used in
              future missions.  The formal technology developed in this project will be
              applicable to a wide range of domains and physical situations.

