Title       : Evolution of Novel Ontogenies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0234576

Award Number: 0234576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolf A. Raff rraff@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0234576
Raff

The goal of this project is to understand the mechanisms by
              which development evolves, and how developmental processes influence or
              constrain the direction of evolution.  Two related species of sea urchins with
              highly different modes of early development are being used in this study.
              Heliocidaris tuberculata develops in the ancestral indirect mode via a feeding
              larva, whereas H. erythrogramma develops directly from embryo to juvenile
              adult.  Eggs of H. erythrogramma fertilized by H. tuberculata sperm develop via
              a novel pathway in which a number of the primitive pluteus features are
              restored by the action of dominant factors derived from the paternal genome. 
              Dr. Raff has exploited the restoration of pluteus-like gene expression in a
              restored pluteus tissue, oral ectoderm, to identify candidate regulatory genes
              involved in evolution of developmental mode.  A hypothesis for evolutionary
              change in larval form of H. erythrogramma will be tested, and genes underlying
              evolution of both larval and maternal features will be studied through
              functional assays.  The specific aims are (1) Determine the functional roles of
              regulatory genes in indirect, direct, and hybrid embryos.  Gain of function
              studies will be done with presumptive dominant regulatory genes selected for
              known roles in organization of indirect-developers.  These will be expressed
              in
H. erythrogramma embryos as injected mRNAs to determine which larval
              features are restored by transcription factor mRNAs.  (2) Determine the
              functional roles of genes affecting primary larval axes and their evolution. 
              Functions of candidate genes will be studied by misexpression of mRNAs that
              include those encoding signal system components, transcription factors, and
              knockout/knockdown constructs for these components.  (3) Use cross-species
              hybrids to investigate cell lineage transformations and novel gene expression
              patterns.  He will use cell lineage tracing in hybrids to define which
              blastomeres shift fate to become oral ectoderm, as well as other cell lineage
              changes.  

Meeting NSF Review Criteria: (1) Intellectual merit of the
              proposed activity: The project will advance knowledge by determining how the
              function of developmental regulatory genes influences the evolution
              of
development.  The project will contribute to a new discipline in biology. 
              The project makes use of unique organisms and resources in Australia, and
              includes long-term collaborations with Australian scientists. (2) Broader
              impacts of the proposed activity:  The main societal impact is to help create a
              more integrated view of biological evolution.  This is important in teaching
              evolution in a realistic way in biology classes at secondary and college
              levels.  In addition, the work itself has been cited in college text books,
              (Freeman and Herron, Evolutionary Analysis, Prentice Hall, 2001; Wilt and Hake,
              Principles of Developmental Biology, Norton, 2001, and Gilbert, Developmental
              Biology, Sinauer, 2000), and the popular press (Washington Post, October, 2000,
              and National Geographic, May 2000), which helps create a greater public
              understanding of research in biology.





