Title       : Vertical and Horizontal Integration of Manufacturing Courses in Engineering
               Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0234478

Award Number: 0234478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395506             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy S. King lking@kettering.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tony Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gwan-Ywan Lai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline A. El-Sayed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kettering University
	      1700 West Third Avenue
	      Flint, MI  485044832    313/762-9790

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Vertical and Horizontal Integration of Manufacturing Courses in Engineering
              Curicula

The goal is to define a unique, novel model with strategies,
              processes and teaching tools and materials, to vertically integrate
              manufacturing courses and horizontally integrate mechanical engineering and
              industrial engineering courses, and to extend this model to other universities
              nationally. 

Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity
The proposed
              project will develop a streamlining process where students move fluidly from
              one course to another with continuity, are able to carry with them the
              knowledge and skills from upstream courses and visualize what is expected in
              the downstream classes. Students are able to interact with each other within
              manufacturing degree and with mechanical engineering and industrial engineering
              degrees. This holistic learning forms the foundation of a solid
              multi-disciplinary education. This project will form a strategy for
              inter-departmental collaboration, define a process for integration, and develop
              teaching tools, hands-on and web-based, for streamlining course progression and
              consolidating lecture and laboratory material for beta testing and later,
              dissemination.

Broader Impacts Resulting from the Proposed Activity
The
              project will identify and establish collaboration between manufacturing,
              industrial engineering and mechanical engineering disciplines and between
              Kettering University and other beta-site universities as well as industry
              partners. The integration concept, new equipment and laboratory experiments,
              and product realization projects will be used in Kettering summer workshops for
              pre-college women (21st Century Women) and minority (Academically Inclined
              Minorities Program) to encourage and mentor underrepresented groups to study
              engineering. The outcomes of the project will directly impact Kettering's
              students and faculty, female and minority programs, beta-site universities and
              industry partners through developed laboratory projects, workshops and
              seminars, and will be published in diverse media such as Internet websites,
              CD-ROMs, conferences presentations, papers, laboratory manuals, and books for
              dissemination to broader audiences.



