Title       : SOFTWARE: Autonomous Scheduling on Large Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0234233

Award Number: 0234233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne Ferrante jferrante@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henri Casanova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Advances in network and middleware technologies have brought computing with many
              widely-distributed and heterogeneous resources to the forefront, both in the
              context of Grid Computing and of Internet Computing.  These large distributed
              platforms allow scientists to solve problems at an unprecedented scale and/or
              at greatly reduced cost.  The high level goal of this work is to further the
              development of software methodologies and algorithms to enable
              scientists,
engineers and others to use large heterogeneous distributed
              systems.

Application domains that can readily benefit from such platforms
              are many; they include computational neuroscience, factoring large numbers,
              genomics, volume rendering, protein docking, or even searching for
              extra-terrestrial life.  Indeed, those applications are characterized by large
              numbers of independent tasks, which makes it possible to deploy them on
              distributed platforms with high network latencies.  More specifically, in this
              work we assume that all application data initially resides in a single
              repository, and that the time required to transfer that data is a significant
              factor. Efficiently managing the resulting computation is a difficult and
              challenging problem, given the heterogeneous and typically dynamic attributes
              of the underlying components.  Such an approach allows for adaptivity and
              scalability, since decisions and changes can be made locally.  
This approach
              is particularly effective for scheduling in environments that are heterogenous,
              dynamic, and unstructured, such as global and peer-to-peer computing platforms
              consisting mostly of home PC's.

This research develops a simple yet general
              computation and communication model for Grid and Internet platforms, and
              autonomous and decentralized scheduling techniques based on this model.  It
              analyzes the optimality of these techniques in terms of steady-state and
              overall application performance. Further, it encorporates adaptability and
              fault-tolerance, and evaluates the resulting techniques by both simulating and
              running real applications on actual testbeds.  Its overall impact to the
              scientific community is to enable scientists to solve important classes of
              problems faster and in a more cost-effective fashion.


