Title       : How Embryos Assess Danger: The Role of Vibrational Cues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a0234439

Award Number: 0234439
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen M. Warkentin kwarken@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James G. McDaniel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              How Embryos Assess Danger: The Role of Vibrational Cues
Karen M. Warkentin (PI)
              and J. Gregory McDaniel (co-PI)
Eggs often suffer high levels of predation,
              but were thought to be incapable of defending themselves. The recent discovery
              of amphibian embryos that hatch early to escape predators changed this view,
              and evidence for similar responses in fishes and spiders suggests that many
              embryos may respond adaptively to changing risks. 
In any life stage,
              appropriate responses to threat depend on the acquisition and processing of
              information. This study investigates the sensory world and behavioral decisions
              of embryos, using the best-studied case of embryonic anti-predator responses.
              The arboreal embryos of red-eyed treefrogs use vibrations in the egg mass to
              detect predatory snakes and wasps, and distinguish them from benign
              disturbances such as wind and rain. Many other animals, from insects to
              mammals, use vibrations in communication and/or predator-prey interactions, but
              research has been limited by technical difficulties in reproducing these
              vibrations. This interdisciplinary research will develop new methods for the
              analysis and reproduction of biologically relevant vibrations, and then apply
              them to ask how red-eyed treefrog embryos use vibrations to decide when to
              hatch. 
To characterize the sensory environment of embryos, vibrations caused
              by important dangerous and benign natural disturbances, and standardized
              artificial disturbances, will be recorded. These recordings will be analyzed to
              determine which characteristics of the vibrations carry information that
              embryos could use to assess risk, and to inform the design of experimental
              stimuli. To determine which characteristics of vibrations embryos actually use
              to assess danger, a mechanical shaker will be used to expose embryos to
              standardized sets of vibrational stimuli. 
This study will elucidate the rich
              sensory world and information processing abilities of embryos, and improve our
              knowledge of how animals use vibrational information. It will facilitate the
              flow of information between behavioral biology and mechanical engineering, thus
              advancing bio-vibrations research, and provide students with a unique
              opportunity to participate in this cross-disciplinary endeavor. 

