Title       : Upgrade of a 300 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Teaching and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0234811

Award Number: 0234811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Elsenbaumer elsenbaumer@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl J. Lovely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dmitry M. Rudkevich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Pomerantz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick M. MacDonnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
              (CRIF) Program, the Department of Chemistry at the University of Texas in
              Arlington will acquire a 300 MHz NMR Spectrometer. This equipment will enable
              researchers to carry out research on synthetic organic, inorganic, physical
              organic and polymer chemistry.  These include the study of a) novel
              enantiomerically pure metal-organic dendrimers; b) metal complexes of new
              fluorinated poly(pyrazolyl)borate ligands; c) polymeric materials with enhanced
              electrical conductivity, superconductivity or electro- and photoluminescent
              properties; d) the study of ISAMs with nonlinear optical properties; e) the
              total synthesis of bioactive alkaloids and synthetic methods development; and
              f) molecular recognition of gases.  

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
              spectroscopy is the most powerful tool available to chemists for the
              elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
              substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules,
              and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access
              to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying
              out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have a
              particular impact in materials science and the development of new polymers.
              


