Title       : Pol III-Related Mechanism of Transcription Through Chromatin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0234493

Award Number: 0234493
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422314             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vasily M. Studitsky vstudit@med.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The genome of higher organisms is organized in DNA-protein complexes called
              chromatin. Chromatin is designed to allow tight DNA packaging and proper
              functioning of DNA, as well as regulation of enzymes such as nuclear DNA and
              RNA polymerases. RNA polymerases transcribe chromatin (make RNA copies of one
              DNA strand). Transcribed genes are organized in chromatin raising the question
              of how RNA polymerases deal with chromatin. The primary features of this
              process have been recapitulated in vitro. In particular, the mechanism used by
              eukaryotic RNA polymerase III (pol III) is accompanied by transient chromatin
              remodeling at the sites of transcription followed by recovery of chromatin
              structure. This project focuses on further mechanistic analysis of this
              mechanism and its regulation using defined chromatin templates. The mechanism
              of transcription through chromatin by pol III will be analyzed using
              biochemical approaches, electron cryo-microscopy and fluorescence resonance
              energy transfer (FRET). Completion of this project will result in development
              of novel defined chromatin templates and new techniques useful for analysis of
              various DNA-protein interactions in chromatin, including interaction of
              specific regulatory factors and enzymes of DNA metabolism (such as enzymes
              involved in DNA replication and repair) with chromatin. The data obtained will
              lead to better understanding of the mechanism of chromatin transcription in
              terms of the structures of the DNA-protein complexes formed during this
              process. Since the mechanisms of DNA replication, ATP-dependent chromatin
              remodeling and the mechanism of transcription through chromatin by pol III have
              many common features, the results obtained during this research will help to
              understand all these processes. 

