Title       : Visualization in Science and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0234844

Award Number: 0234844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Jane Shultz Mary.Shultz@Tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Conference on Visualization in Science and Education brings together
              practitioners from four sectors:  scientists, cognitive psychologists,
              educators, and evaluators to examine the teaching of science and the science of
              teaching. All four sectors are needed to ensure that the next generation of
              visualization tools are accurate (the scientists' role), convey the intended
              message (the cognitive psychologists' role) and minimize barriers to learning
              (the educators' role).  Evaluators, the fourth sector, form the essential base
              for the other three groups by determining that the student has assimilated the
              intended message and evaluating whether the visualization facilitated the
              process. The primary purpose of the conference is to lay the foundation for
              images that are ever more effective at conveying the intended meaning.  To
              bring participants up-to-speed on the latest hardware and software
              developments, the project contains a pre-conference Workshop. Workshop
              participants will be provided with hands-on experience with cutting-edge
              hardware and software.  Finally, to ensure a lasting change from the newly
              formed collaborations, conference participants will be invited to apply for
              Mini-Grants.  Mini-Grants consist of modest funds that are intended to assist
              with development of larger scope proposals to either create new technology or
              improve existing tools for visualization to deliver on the promise of
              reconceptualizing instructional delivery.  In addition, a session is planned
              that specifically addresses alternate learning styles, a subject that is
              expected to appeal to a broad audience. As part of the Gordon Research
              Conference Organization, the conference is well advertised, recruiting
              participants from all members of the science research and education enterprise.
