Title       : Symposium: "Selection and Evolution of Organismal Performance in Nature", to be
               held January 2003 in Toronto, Canada.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0234558

Award Number: 0234558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9716               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel G. Kingsolver jgking@bio.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
How the ability of organisms to perform key tasks-to run, fly, forage,
              acquire and process nutrients, regulate water and ions-evolves in response to
              selection in natural environments is a central issue for understanding
              adaptation and organismal diversity.  During the past two decades researchers
              have developed a theoretical and methodological framework for addressing this
              issue, and have applied this framework to a diverse set of natural systems.  We
              have organized a society-wide symposium, entitled Selection and evolution of
              organismal performance in nature, for the January 2003 Annual Meeting of the
              Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology, in Toronto, Ontario.  The
              symposium brings together leading junior and senior researchers whose studies
              integrate analyses of organismal performance, phenotypic selection, and
              microevolution in nature.  Collectively, these studies consider a diversity of
              taxa, habitats, components of performance, and empirical and theoretical
              approaches that address the question:  What are the mechanisms and patterns of
              selection and microevolution of organismal performance in natural populations? 
              The symposium will identify commonalities and differences in patterns of
              selection and evolution among different systems and performance traits; provide
              a forum for discussing methodological and conceptual challenges of studying
              performance in nature; and suggest new directions for the field.  The
              proceedings of the symposium will be published in Integrative and Comparative
              Biology, the leading journal in the field of Integrative Biology.     


