Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Spin Fluid Flow Dynamics in Polarized Superfluid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0234032

Award Number: 0234032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Haruo Kojima kojima@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0234032
Kojima

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Haruo Kojima at Rutgers University in New Brunswick
              and Professor Hidehiko Ishimoto at the Institute of Solid State Physics (ISSP)
              of the University of Tokyo in Japan.  They will be undertaking research on spin
              fluid flow dynamics in polarized superfluid.  A novel mechanical spin density
              detector technique has been developed for probing the nature of spin transport
              and relaxation effects.  The technique will be applied to study the unusual
              spin transport and diffusion across two material states with different magnetic
              properties of their model system.  Earlier experiments and analysis indicated
              that the presence of "interface" between the magnetic superfluid and either
              another superfluid or normal fluid exhibits very different mechanisms of spin
              relaxation.  It is proposed to provide a direct test on the importance of the
              interface by measuring the spin relaxation in an arrangement which eliminates
              the interface altogether.  The new spin filter experiment will increase spin
              polarization to much greater degree than possible in the past.  A fluid state
              with large non-equilibrium polarization will be created and its dynamics will
              be studied.  
 
The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories
              that have complementary expertise and research capabilities.  The U.S.
              researchers provide expertise in the spin fluid flow dynamics experiments and
              the Japanese researchers provide expertise in ultra low temperature with a high
              magnetic field.  Studies on spin dependent transport are important in advancing
              towards spintronics devices.  The studies also have advantages in simpler
              structures because of the ease of changing material conditions and longer time
              scale involved.  This would also contribute towards a better understanding of
              spintronics.  The project advances international human resources through the
              participation of a number of graduate students who will gain experience in the
              state of art technology in ultra low temperature physics and materials physics.
                 Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  Results of the research will be disseminated at scientific
              meetings and in scientific journals.  


