Title       : The Involvement of Steroidal Androgens in Sex Differentiation of Prosobranch
               Neogastropods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0234676

Award Number: 0234676
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388056             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald A. LeBlanc ga_leblanc@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study will examine the basic endocrine control of sexual differentiation in
              a snail species (mud snail: Ilyanassa obsoleta) and also determine the
              mechanism by which the biocide tributyltin causes sexual ambiguity in marine
              snails.  Tributyltin is an antifoulant used in marine paints.  The material is
              ubiquitous in the marine environment and has been causally associated with the
              global occurrence of reproductive system abnormalities in marine snails. 
              Studies will be performed to identify the hormones that are responsible for the
              development of the snail reproductive system.  Initially, field surveys will be
              performed to establish relationships between hormone or hormone receptor levels
              and development of the snail reproductive system over the seasonal reproductive
              cycle.  These investigations will be followed by laboratory experiments where
              levels of tentatively important hormones will be manipulated and consequences
              to reproductive system development will be established. Once the relevant
              hormones have been conclusively identified, the effect of tributyltin on those
              hormone levels and activity will be established. Results from this study will
              significantly advance our understanding of basic molluscan endocrinology. Many
              Asian and South American countries are developing snail culture as a
              sustainable food source for local consumption as well as export.  Understanding
              the regulation of the reproductive cycle of snails would greatly enhance the
              economic feasibility of such operations.  In addition, the International
              Maritime Organization has implemented a phase-out of tributyltin in marine
              paints owing to its adverse effects on marine ecosystems. The economic
              incentive to minimize drag on ocean-going vessels through the use of
              antifoulants will necessitate the development and use of tributyltin
              alternatives.  Elucidation of the mechanism by which tributyltin interferes
              with sexual development of snails will help ensure that alternative
              antifoulants do not share this insidious property.
