Title       : Multi-Community Polity Formation in the Lake Titicaca Basin, Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0234011

Award Number: 0234011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286346             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine A. Hastorf hastorf@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Christine Hastorf and her
              colleagues will conduct three field seasons of archaeological research on the
              Taraco Peninsula along the southwestern shore of Lake Titicaca in modern day
              Bolivia, studying the Taraco Peninsula Polity. The international team brings
              together specialists in archaeology, geoarchaeology, botanicarchaeology, and
              zooarchaeology to conduct a coordinated investigation into the origins and
              development of the early and longest lived Andean state, the urban city
              Tiwanaku. This large city held dominion over the southcentral Andean region for
              over 600 years, consolidating around ACE 500. To investigate the foundations of
              this state and their developments the researhers will test three models.  One
              model proposes that this development was funded by large scale intensive raised
              field agricultural systems controlled by an elite class.  This strategy would
              have gathered in a sizable surplus of staple products, used to underwrite
              monumental construction and public ceremonialism.  The second model posits that
              Tiwanaku's power was built upon control of long distance trade in wealth and
              staple goods across the greater southern Andean region, which financed the
              centralization of power over labor that built the ceremonial center. The third
              model privileges local social experimentation and strategies by which people
              were enticed into joining larger communities.  This will be studied by pursuing
              evidence for the development of nested supra-communities through local rituals
              and lineage development.  The Taraco Peninsula Polity was one of the first
              generation of multi-community groups to arise in the Titicaca Basin, emerging
              fully by 250 BCE.  The beginning of this sequence seems to be at 1000 BCE.
              Building on their previous work at a site on the Peninsula, this field project
              will concentrate excavation at three additional sites.  These sites span the
              time phases of this political development, beginning with the earliest
              settlements on up to when the nearby Tiwanaku drew the populace into its urban
              sprawl.  From the excavations, the team will complete a series of analyses
              using macro, micro, and chemical analyses to provide concrete data that
              addresses these three models.   These analyses include: 1) identification of
              crops and associated wild plant taxa to record the agricultural land use
              changes, 2) charting camelid pack animal use and evidence for the extent of
              long distance caravans, 3) sourcing and identifying highland stone, Amazonian
              wood, drug and medicinal plants to track the exchange patterns, and 4)
              uncovering and mapping ceremonial architecture and associated ritual artifacts
              to describe the elaboration of communal rituals.  

The team consists of US,
              Canadian and Bolivian students and archaeologists, providing an important
              source for professional training in Bolivia while promoting international
              collaboration.  They also work closely with indigenous communities in building
              and maintaining small regional museums about their past.  There has been a
              recent surge of archaeological and ethnographic work in the Basin which will
              place the results within a larger cultural trajectory and clarify the rise and
              fall of large political entities in the high Andes, perhaps explaining more
              about long-term sustainability in such environments.  

