Title       : Social Inequities at the U.S.-Mexico Border: Pollution, Poverty, and Health
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0234153

Award Number: 0234153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11020              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert V. Kemper rkemper@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The U.S.-Mexico border provides a living laboratory in which to study the
              potentially detrimental effects of industrial pollution. This dissertation
              research in cultural anthropology will study the landscape of El Paso, Texas,
              as an arena in which the human and economic costs of increased ambient
              pollution and the unequal burdens of environmental risk can be evaluated. The
              project investigates the conditions under which the Hispanic-majority
              population in this expanding urban region along the U.S.-Mexico border
              perceives and responds to ambient pollution and the resultant respiratory
              disease in the context of their marginalized economic status. A comparative
              study between two ethnically and economically similar communities (but which
              experience different levels of environmental exposure) may reveal a difference
              in the incidence of respiratory disease as well as clarify some of the
              treatment seeking behaviors demonstrated under specific urban, industrial, and
              economic conditions. This research also explores the cultural significance of
              the relationship between the environment and health morbidity in children
              living in communities within, and more distant from, a contaminated
              atmosphere.
This ethnographic research will contribute at several levels to
              the understanding of the relationships between pollution, poverty, and health.
              The empirical results from this two-community case study will be valuable to
              environmental scientists, health-care planners, and policy makers concerned
              with similar settings throughout the United States. This project also will
              provide important data for local-level governmental officials in the El Paso
              region and the broader border region by informing them of potential
              environmental risk situations. Finally, the research will offer culturally
              appropriate information that might help at-risk families in the communities to
              reduce their environmental risks and their rates of respiratory diseases

