Title       : Theory of Metal-Insulator Transitions in Strongly Correlated Electronic Systems
               with Disorder
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0234215

Award Number: 0234215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daryl W. Hess                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Dobrosavljevic vlad@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0234215
Dobrosavljevic
This award supports theoretical and computational
              research and education on the metal-insulator transition. Several different,
              but equally important, physical process all play a role; these include the
              physics of Anderson localization, the effects of strong correlations, and
              processes associated with glassy freezing of electrons. Energy scales
              associated with each of these processes are all comparable, so a successful
              theory must include them all on the same footing. All three basic physical
              processes associated with the metal-insulator transition can be consistently
              incorporated within extended dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) approaches.
              They are all treated on the same, non-perturbative level allowing a realistic
              description of many materials. The PI aims to apply extended DMFT methods to
              several specific systems in an effort to explain phenomena that were beyond the
              reach of theoretical approaches in the past. Specific topics to be addressed
              include: (1) Disorder, magnetic field, and doping dependence of the critical
              behavior in doped semiconductors; (2) Localization effects on magnetic ordering
              in diluted magnetic semiconductors; (3) The two-dimensional metal-insulator
              transition viewed as a transition to a Mott-Anderson glass; (4) Non-equilibrium
              glassy dynamics of electron transport close to metal-insulator transitions; (5)
              Low temperature spin-glass behavior in electronic Griffiths phases of
              disordered heavy fermion compounds. In each of these projects, DMFT methods
              used will be technically tractable and will address the main physical
              questions. This award supports the integration of research at the forefront of
              condensed matter science and education at all academic levels: K-12,
              undergraduate, and graduate. This will be accomplished through participation in
              various activities, including: Outreach programs - The PI will contribute to
              enhancing scientific and technological understanding by communicating the
              importance of his research to the general public through various outreach
              activities, including lecturing at elementary schools, judging at annual
              regional Science Fairs, and participating in the FSU Physics Department Open
              House (PDOP) and the NHMFL Annual Open House activities. Research Experiences
              for Undergraduates (REU) program - The PI will participate in the REU Site at
              the NHMFL and plans to provide an opportunity for at least one intern every
              year to spend two summer months working on one of his research projects. FSU
              graduate students will be trained - The PI will supervise the research of
              several physics graduate students in physics. 
%%%
This award supports
              theoretical and computational research and education on the transition between
              metallic and insulating states observed in two-dimensional systems, dilute
              magnetic semiconductors, and some heavy fermion materials. This problem is
              theoretically challenging in part because it involves different and possibly
              competing physical processes.  The PI will apply and advance a promising avenue
              of inquiry based on the dynamical mean field theory and its extensions.  This
              award also supports the PI's involvement in a range of education related
              activities including outreach, undergraduate involvement in the PI's research,
              and the training of the next generation of condensed matter theorists.
***


