Title       : RUI: Gonadotropin-Induced Gene Transcription Associated with Ovulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0234358

Award Number: 0234358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence L. Espey lespey@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78212    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This study will examine ovarian genes that are regulated by hormones from the
              pituitary gland, and the mechanisms of this regulation.  The project focuses on
              hormone action that controls the rupture of ovarian follicles-a process called
              ovulation.  The project is based on state-of-the-art procedures in molecular
              biology and recombinant DNA technologies such as "microarray" and "differential
              display."  In addition, the project will utilize standard methods of Northern
              blotting and in situ hybridization to determine the temporal and spatial
              patterns of expression of each gene in the ovarian tissues.  As a more
              comprehensive picture of ovulation-related genes is achieved, the ultimate goal
              of this project is to integrate information about the protein products of these
              genes into meaningful metabolic pathways that explain how a follicle ruptures. 
              In broader terms, the scientific potential of the project is significant in
              several other respects.  First, this ovulation process will serve as a clear
              cut experimental model to study the basic mechanisms by which glycoprotein
              hormones such as luteinizing hormone (or, its homologue, human chorionic
              gonadotropin) brings about its biologically programmed 'target tissue'
              response-in this case the rupture of healthy tissue at the surface of the
              ovary.  Second, the project can provide basic knowledge about mammalian
              reproduction with potential value for increasing the productivity of livestock
              and for regulating human fertility.  Lastly, in view of the similarities that
              exist between ovulatory and inflammatory processes, this project also has the
              potential for providing useful genetic information about metabolic changes that
              occur during inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis.
