Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dental Analysis of Classic Period Population
               Variability in the Maya Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0234006

Award Number: 0234006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1920               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori E. Wright   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This research will examine biological variability among the Classic period
              Maya using dental metric and nonmetric data from ancient human skeletal
              remains.  Analyses of biological distance and variability within physical
              anthropology can be classified as model-free and model-bound.  In model-free
              approaches, low levels of biological variability are treated as evidence for
              high levels of related ancestry and gene flow.  In contrast, model-bound
              approaches take into account the affects of genetic drift and thus provide a
              more satisfying model of ancient population dynamics.  In this study, both
              model-free and model-bound approaches will be utilized.  One of the major
              benefits of applying model-bound analyses to the study of the Classic Maya is
              the availability of large skeletal samples sizes from archaeological sites with
              well-known population estimates and well-controlled chronologies; factors that
              have been difficult to control in previous model-bound analyses.  This study
              will address problems both specific to Maya archaeology and will produce a
              large data set on Pre-Columbian Central American dental morphology, furthering
              our understanding of ancient biological variation in the Americas.
 In this
              study of ancient Maya biological variation, Scherer will test the hypothesis
              that biological distance between Classic period Maya site populations is
              correlated with geographic distances between sites.   This hypothesis rests on
              the assumptions that migration between Maya urban centers was relatively minor
              and that increases in population size were largely due to natural population
              growth.  Current archaeological evidence, however, suggests that these
              assumptions are not correct.  Recent studies of Maya demography have
              demonstrated that numerous sites exhibit fluctuations in population size during
              the Classic period.  Migration, including movement across major archaeological
              regions, may be one explanation for these episodes of growth and decline. 
              Further, the Maya historical record describes numerous migration events during
              the Classic period, including inter-site marriages, the placement of foreign
              lords at subjugated sites, and the founding of new sites by splintering
              dynastic lineages.  What is lacking, however, is an understanding of ancient
              Maya population history from a biological perspective.  This research will fill
              that void by providing the first comprehensive study of biological variation in
              the Maya lowlands.
If this research determines that populations were not
              stable, as posited in the first hypothesis, it will be necessary to evaluate
              what segments of ancient Maya society were mobile.  Thus, Scherer will test a
              second hypothesis that when gene flow occurred during the Classic period, it
              was primarily at the elite level of society.  The data for each site will be
              partitioned into elite and non-elite segments based on burial context and
              mortuary variability.  If elite migration was more substantial than non-elite
              migration, we should expect greater biological differentiation between sites
              for commoners than for the elite.  As an additional way to examine population
              stability during the Classic period, the samples will be divided by time period
              to examine the relative degree of genetic continuity through time for each
              site.  
In order to test these hypotheses, Scherer will collect dental metric
              and nonmetric data from 15 sites representing seven of the archaeological zones
              in the Maya region.  Statistical analyses will employ both model-free and
              model-bound approaches.  Model-free statistics will include Mahalanobis D2
              (metrics) and the mean measure of divergence (nonmetrics).  Model-bound
              analyses will follow recent statistical modifications of the R matrix model of
              migration for metric and nonmetric data. 

This award will have the broader
              impact of contributing to the professional development of the student and
              providing him with an international experience. 

