Title       : Development of a Process Control Breadboard System to Attract and Retain
               Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0234671

Award Number: 0234671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292369             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Mountain mountain@mail.eng.uttyl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Tyler
	      3900 University Boulevard
	      Tyler, TX  757990001    214/566-1471

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project will provide undergraduate engineering students the opportunity to
              design build and test small-scale control systems that represent processes
              encountered in engineering practice.  The proposed instructional system follows
              the model of electrical or mechanical breadboard systems, and integrates the
              two in novel ways.  The approach will be integrated into every level of the
              curriculum using hands-on, team based design activities; enhancing the design
              education experience for freshmen, and will continue through to the senior
              capstone experience.  The students will work on real world problems with
              industrial mentors. This system is also expected to significantly enhance the
              ability of upper level students to design, build and test fully functional
              process control systems by reducing the time and effort required for system
              assembly. 
Following initial system development and testing, weeklong summer
              camps for 
Eight and ninth grade students will be conducted. Undergraduate
              student mentors, under faculty supervision, will assist attendees in hands-on
              design of process control systems. Women and historically underrepresented
              minority students will be strongly encouraged to attend the camps.  All
              attendees will be encouraged to pursue engineering careers. A resource guide,
              including vendor lists, sample design activities and a lessons learned summary
              will be provided on the WEB. In addition, as the project reaches completion,
              the guide will be widely distributed to approximately 150, small, to medium
              sized, agricultural, chemical, and mechanical engineering programs on
              CD-ROM.




