Title       : Dissertation Research: A Reconsideration of Child Labor in the Contexts of
               Household Economics and Community Norms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0234019

Award Number: 0234019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Nichter mnichter@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0234019
Nichter / Wind
The international effort to end child labor has
              sometimes been framed as being an ideological battle between Euro-American
              universalistic conceptions of child development and human rights on the one
              hand and the culturally specific beliefs and practices of developing countries
              on the other. Both agencies of the United Nations and child welfare NGOs have
              emphasized the negative impact of child labor on the physical, mental, and
              moral health of children. This dissertation research by a cultural
              anthropologist will examine the health of child workers in Mysore, India within
              the context of household livelihood strategies. The student will study a select
              group of households for one year to determine whether children's contributions
              to household income differentially affect their access to health-related
              resources and to identify and compare how a range of work-related variables are
              perceived as impacting children's health.  Interviews with other community
              members and the staff of local child welfare NGOs will serve to situate the
              views and practices of individual households within a broader framework of
              community norms regarding childhood as a life phase, the human rights of
              children, and the age and gender- appropriateness of different types of work.
              
The broader impacts of this research include advancing our understanding of
              how communities evaluate the risks associated with child labor, an
              understanding crucial to the internationally recognized short-term goal of
              quickly removing children from the most hazardous forms of work. It will also
              offer important insights into household health and economic logic useful to
              those designing child survival and poverty alleviation programs. In addition to
              such practical applications, the research will add to recent social science
              efforts to discover ways in which universalistic concepts of human rights may
              find culturally acceptable interpretations in diverse settings. The project
              also contributes to the education of a young social scientist. 

