Title       : SGER GeneBeans: A Modular System That Makes Genomic-Scale Analysis Accessible to
               Biologists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0234250

Award Number: 0234250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91882              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann E. Stapleton stapletona@uncwil.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey L. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Hudson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Biologists now have access to vast amounts of DNA sequence and annotation data,
              but do not yet have tool sets that make it easy for a novice to ask biological
              questions about these large sequence data sets. An environment with a visual
              user interface for constructing series of queries and analyses without the need
              for the user to see the underlying computer code will be created. The system
              will use Enterprise JavaBeans (EJBs) to import sequence data from a variety of
              sources and store it in a relational database. Other EJBs will handle workflow,
              query the database, and analyze results. The EJB modules will be designed to
              make their results available to other modules. The system will be extensible in
              that it will be easy to add new modules that employ the appropriate interfaces.
              This system will allow users to ask questions about frequency, correlation, and
              significance, queries typical of data mining methods, without writing new
              programs. The prototype of our system will be tested both for undergraduate
              classroom use at a historically black university, NCA&T, and for research on
              genome structure in plant DNA sequences. New kinds of search algorithms and
              statistical analyses, which will be easily integrated into our modular system,
              will be designed involving the interdisciplinary training of a biology graduate
              student. 
