Title       : Upgrade of a Scanning Probe Microscopy Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0234726

Award Number: 0234726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146271             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph G. Yount yount@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,9184,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
              Program, the Department of Chemistry at Washington State University will
              upgrade a scanning probe microscope (SPM). This equipment will enhance research
              in a number of areas including a) studies on the kinetics of growth of
              Langmuir-Blodgett films; b) evaluation of forces at protein surfaces; c)
              investigations on the enhanced deposition or dissolution of materials
              controlled on the nanoscale by precisely applied stress; and d) measurements of
              scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and STM based orbital mediated spectroscopy
              (STM-OMTS) in the solution and electrochemical environment.  Molecular
              electronic materials such as porphyrins, phthalocyanines and Langmuir-Blodgett
              films will be studied with solution phase STM. 
The scanning probe microscope
              (SPM) enables researchers to image atoms directly. The technique uses the
              piezoelectric effect which involves bringing an extremely sharp metal needle
              within a few angstroms of the sample surface. The distance is small enough for
              electrons to leak or tunnel across the gap and generate a minute current. As
              the gap between the tip and the sample increases, the current decreases. As the
              probe crosses the sample, moving back and forth across its surface, it traces
              out a contour map of the sample's surface atoms. The interdisciplinary studies
              that will be carried out using this instrument will have an impact in materials
              physicsand chemistry and in biophysical chemistry.  The graduate and
              undergraduate students who will use the equipment for their research projects
              will be directly introduced to nanotechnology.  

