Title       : SGER: Ecophysiological Consequences of Infrequent Massive Flowering of
               Monocarpic Bamboo Grasses (Chusquea spp.) in Temperate and Tropical South
               America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0234174

Award Number: 0234174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo H. Goldstein goldstein@bio.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,1228,9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Bamboo grasses are an important component of understory vegetation in
              subtropical and temperate forests in both Asia and the Americas and in many
              cases they completely dominate the lower layers of the forest. These bamboo
              grasses have important economic and conservation value since they play a key
              role in the functioning of the entire forest ecosystem and provide food and
              shelter to numerous native populations. Most species flower only once in their
              life cycle, which can last up to 120 years, and then die. When bamboo grasses
              flower, the flowering is highly synchronous, such that there are massive
              'waves' of flowering and immediate death of the grasses, affecting large
              patches of forest vegetation simultaneously. These infrequent and ephemeral
              events have consequences in many ways for both plants and animals in the
              affected forests, but because these events are so rare, little is known of the
              consequences on forest regeneration and maintenance of native biodiversity. In
              late 2001, forests in southern South America started to experience massive
              flowering of the bamboo grasses occurring over a vast area ranging in latitude
              from 25 to 45 degrees S, in both subtropical forests and temperate forests.
              This is an opportunity to explore the importance of this large-scale and
              infrequent phenomenon on the maintenance of native biodiversity and forest
              regeneration, as well as effects on carbon and nitrogen stocks in these
              forests. Observations are planned in several areas along a latitudinal gradient
              in South America where massive flowering is occurring, with the aim of
              identifying how resource availability of water, light and nutrients change as a
              result of this phenomenon and how these changes influence the regeneration,
              flowering, and physiology of native species. The simultaneous change of
              different variables with potentially contrasting effects make it difficult to
              fully understand the consequences of bamboo flowering. A field experiment,
              where we will manipulate light and nutrient availability, will allow us to
              disentangle the different mechanisms resulting from this major and infrequent
              event. A greater understanding of the mechanisms and consequences of this
              infrequent flowering in bamboo and its effect on native plant processes can
              contribute to our ability to make informed decisions for the maintenance of
              native plants and animal life in native ecosystems around the world.
