Title       : U.S.- Japan Joint Seminar: "Hybrid" Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0234287

Award Number: 0234287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Wynne kjwynne@vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krzysztof Matyjaszewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0234287
Wynne

This award supports the participation of American scientists
              in a U.S.-Japan joint seminar on hybrid materials to be held in Mishima, Japan
              from May 11-14, 2003.  The co-organizers are Professor Kenneth Wynne at
              Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond and Professor Norio Tsubokawa at
              Niigata University in Japan.  The meeting will bring together research
              scientists and engineers from the U.S. and Japan, two countries where important
              and exciting progress in hybrid materials has been made in the last decade. 
              The main objective of the seminar is to address current critical issues and
              future opportunities for hybrid materials, focusing on the unique synergism
              that results from combinations of organic and inorganic phases.  Presentations
              will focus on how to design such nanostructures in a controlled manner and to
              organize the nonoparticles on larger length scales.  A further objective of the
              proposed seminar is to bring together researchers in the areas of polymer
              synthesis, polymer physics, instrumental methods of polymer characterization,
              solid-state polymer properties, and various polymer applications, who have
              common and complimentary interests.  The goal is to identify common research
              priorities and to explore areas of joint research cooperation.

The
              co-organizers have complementary scientific expertise in the field.  This
              enables them to evaluate and attract the best organic and inorganic chemists,
              materials scientists and engineers to participate.  The seminar organizers have
              made a special effort to involve minorities, postdocs and graduate students as
              both participants and observers.  The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese
              experts in the field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work,
              and will set the stage for future collaborative projects.  Following the
              seminar the organizers plan to establish a workshop web page.  Conference
              proceedings will be published on this web site.  The proceedings will include
              the program schedule and abstracts of talks including key references to the
              literature.       



