Title       : SGER: Effects of Avalanches on Local Carbon Budgets and Regional Forest Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0234018

Award Number: 0234018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29512              (Estimated)
Investigator: George P. Malanson george-malanson@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel B. Fagre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Avalanche paths are ubiquitous features in many parts of the western cordillera
              of North America and many other high mountain ranges.  Evidence has mounted
              recently that avalanches may play more significant roles in the functioning of
              mountain ecosystems that previously had been anticipated.  Because massive
              amounts of vegetation may be carried from higher slopes to valleys, avalanches
              can have profound impacts on changing patterns of net primary productivity in
              different locales, and they can dramatically alter carbon and nitrogen budgets
              within alpine settings.  This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will support
              preliminary work during the summer and early fall of 2002 to examine the role
              that snow avalanches play in the functioning of mountain ecosystems.  The
              investigators will assess the contribution of avalanches and avalanche paths to
              mountain functions in terms of their impacts on the distribution and movements
              of carbon, nitrogen, sediments, and woody debris.  Working in the southern part
              of Glacier National Park in Montana, the investigators will conduct preliminary
              field work to estimate the amounts of carbon and woody debris moved by snow
              avalanches.  These data and data collected from IKONIS satellite imagery at
              1-meter and 4-meter scales will be used to develop and test landscape-scale
              flux models for carbon and woody debris.  The results of this project are
              expected to include the first systematic assessment of the general scale and
              magnitude of material flux in areas affected by avalanches.

The data and
              insights produced by this project should form a baseline that these and other
              investigators can use to broader the general scope of inquiry to include other
              materials and other locations.  Major outcomes of the project expected to
              result from this project are a quantification of the potential significance of
              avalanche paths to the movement and storage of carbon and wood and a test of
              the potential to combine field-based and remotely sensed data to extend
              quantitative analyses to landscape or regional scales.  The project should help
              develop techniques to characterize landscape structure, function, and change
              within a scale-dependent context that offers insights into biogeographic,
              geomorphic, and hydrologic studies of alpine dynamics.  The project also will
              provide opportunities for expanded graduate student education and training.

