Title       : NIH-NSF BBSI: Virginia Commonwealth University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0234101

Award Number: 0234101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $660602             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Buck buck@hsc.vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald E. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1758      Bioengineering & Bioinformatic
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1758,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.:  0234101
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Gregory Buck
INSTITUTION NAME:
               Virginia Commonwealth University
TITLE:  NIH-NSF BBSI at Virginia
              Commonwealth University


Abstract

This proposal is recommended for
              funding.  The proposal was rated as Highly Recommended (FUND) by the panel and
              the program director agrees with the panel's judgment.

Specific comments
              about the proposal in relation to the review criteria are outlined
              below.


Intellectual Merit

The fields of bioengineering and
              bioinformatics are being redefined through technological advances, but it is
              clear that the most critical work will take place at the interface between
              classical disciplines. It is therefore essential to attract new people to the
              field who work well in the gray areas and who can learn to adapt easily to the
              different languages of molecular biology, computational and mathematical
              sciences, and engineering.

The VCU team has developed an integrated
              curriculum to provide exposure and experiences in both fields of bioinformatics
              and bioengineering. This Institute fits into the overall goals of VCU. They
              have developed a new five year Master's in bioinformatics, with three tracks:
              computational and engineering, genomics and biology, and quantitative and
              statistical. Newly created School of Engineering has a strong focus in
              Bioengineering with connection to MCV Hospitals of VCU Health Systems. VCU Life
              Sciences creates an umbrella over these entities to enhance the integration of
              the two fields. 


Broader Impact

In order to take rising juniors with no
              necessary laboratory experience and evoke within them the sense that they are
              active and valuable members of a scientific project, the Institute will lead
              them through a series of highly integrated intensive research simulations,
              inspired by actual problems from each of their host laboratories. Core skill
              bases such as computational and mathematical methods will serve to integrate,
              across disciplines and research areas, the analytical and methodological skills
              of the Institute participants. While the first summer will provide students
              with a view of bioengineering and bioinformatics that is focused on the
              problems addressed by the laboratories of the institute, the second summer will
              offer a broader look at the fields.


I recommend funding of the proposal
              for a total of $660,602 for four years.                                  
              



