Title       : SGER: Food Web Structure Across a Large-scale Ocean Productivity Gradient: Top
               Predator Assemblages in the Southern Indian Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0234570

Award Number: 0234570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30017              (Estimated)
Investigator: George L. Hunt glhunt@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A pervasive goal of biological oceanography has been to understand the processes
              that structure pelagic communities. Past research suggests that oceanic species
              distributions are influence by physical and biological variability at a variety
              of spatial-temporal scales. The objective of this research is to test the
              hypothesis that the dispersion and community of top predators vary in
              concordance with large-scale variability in physical structure and ocean
              productivity in pelagic ecosystems. To test this hypothesis, an
              inter-disciplinary survey of marine bird and mammal use of distinct
              oceanographic domains in the Southern Indian Ocean will be conducted. This
              Small Grant for Exploratory Research will provide the opportunity to place two
              U.S. scientists on board a French research vessel near Reunion Island. The
              French scientists will sample the physical environment and estimate oceanic
              productivity while the U.S. scientists will survey top predator distributions
              across a 35 degree latitudinal gradient in physical and biological properties
              from subtropical to sub Antarctic waters.  The primary hypothesis to be
              addressed is that top predator assemblages are structured by spatial gradients
              in hydrographic properties and ocean productivity patterns known to influence
              the distribution and patchiness of their zooplankton, fish and squid prey. It
              is hypothesized that the overall abundance of marine top predators within a
              specific oceanic domain is largely determined by ocean productivity. Also, it
              is hypothesized that the energetic costs of foraging determine which types of
              marine top predators inhabit specific oceanic domains. Species with high
              foraging costs are constrained to exploit dense prey aggregations within highly
              productive areas. Conversely, taxa with low foraging costs are able to inhabit
              low productivity areas, where they exploit more dispersed prey resources.
To
              test these hypotheses, we will quantify the spatial association of top
              predator
assemblages with specific water masses and the aggregative response
              of top predators at
hydrographic and bathymetric domains. Because top
              predators respond to oceanographic
variability at multiple scales of time and
              space, we will assess their responses to
habitat variability at two specific
              spatial scales. A variety analytical methods will be used, including
              compositional analysis of coarse-scale habitat preferences, generalized
              additive models, recurrent group analysis, ordination of hydrographic data and
              top predator assemblages  and the measurement of top predator aggregation. The
              research will address spatial variability in pelagic food webs within the
              context of large (1000s km) and coarse (10s km) scale hydrographic and ocean
              productivity patterns in the subtropical and sub Antarctic Indian Ocean. This
              inter-disciplinary perspective will enhance our understanding of the way
              physical and biological processes structure pelagic communities in the southern
              Indian Ocean and will provide a model that has broader implications for the
              oceans as a whole.


