Title       : Competition and the Origins of Diversity: An Empirical Test of the Ecological
               Speciation Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0234714

Award Number: 0234714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Pfennig dpfennig@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ecological mechanisms that lead to speciation (the evolutionary splitting of one
              species into multiple new species) are central to general theory synthesizing
              ecology and macroevolution.  Although competition for resources has long been
              viewed as the major mechanism by which natural selection would lead to
              divergence of organism traits, there are few conclusive examples of competition
              promoting speciation.  The proposed research will provide a rare and strong
              test of the ecological speciation hypothesis in a system of co-occurring
              spadefoot toad species.
Specifically, it will test whether competition among
              larvae of the spadefoot toads, Spea bombifrons and S. multiplicata, is leading
              to ecological speciation.  This research will evaluate the general hypothesis
              that populations of S. multiplicata that do and do not occur with S. bombifrons
              are becoming reproductively isolated from one another because of contrasting
              competitive pressures faced by their larvae. The goals will be to test the
              following three predictions: (1) hybrids from crosses between populations
              should be less fit than offspring from matings within populations because of
              selection against hybrids; (2) traits under divergent selection between
              environments should influence mate choice and thereby form the basis of
              reproductive isolation; and (3) divergence in these traits should evolve in
              parallel in different populations that experience similar selective pressures. 
              This project will form a decisive test of ecological speciation and will
              enhance our understanding of how competition promotes adaptive radiation.  This
              study will, therefore, help explain the origins of diversity, which is one of
              the most challenging issues confronting biologists.

