Title       : SYMPOSIUM: Second International Symposium for Computational Cell Biology to be
               held on March 23-25, 2003, in Lenox, MA.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0234192

Award Number: 0234192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann E. Cowan acowan@nso2.uchc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie M. Loew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. H. Carson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1132,1165,1271,1994,9183,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports student participation in the "Second International Symposium
              on Computational Cell Biology" to be held March 23-25, 2003 at the Cranwell
              Resort and Golf Club in Lenox, MA. Computational Cell Biology is an emerging
              interdisciplinary field that responds to the need for computational methods to
              analyze and organize complex experimental data on the structure and function of
              the cell. Whereas other meetings in computational biology focus on
              bioinformatics and structural biology, this is the only meeting geared
              specifically to the use of computational modeling applications in cell biology
              and that is primarily targeted to cell biologists. The symposium is being
              organized by The National Resource for Cell Analysis and Modeling (NRCAM),
              located in the Center for Biomedical Imaging Technology (CBIT) at the
              University of Connecticut Health Center. The organizing committee consists of
              Drs. Leslie M. Loew, Director of NRCAM and CBIT, John Carson, co-Director of
              NRCAM,  and Ann Cowan, Deputy Director of CBIT and head of dissemination and
              training for NRCAM, who chairs the committee. The first such symposium, held in
              March 2001, provided a venue for cell biologists to interact with theoreticians
              and computer scientists, and was highly successful both in its scientific
              content and in its goal of initiating a new level of communication among
              different groups of scientists. A major goal of this second meeting is to
              solidify the community of scientists in this young and expanding field. The
              scientific focus of the meeting is on areas of cell biology for which modeling
              approaches are currently being developed, or that are ripe for computational
              modeling approaches. Specific topics at the meetings will include a range of
              cellular mechanisms such as regulation of the cytoskeleton and molecular
              motors, membrane and protein trafficking, regulation of calcium dynamics,
              signal transduction pathways, and cell cycle control. In each of these areas,
              researcher using highly quantitative experimental approaches and/or applying
              mathematical modeling approaches will be invited to speak. The meeting format
              includes platform sessions, poster sessions and small workshops and tutorials.
              The venue for the meeting is a small resort in the Berkshire Mountains that is
              limited to a maximum of 125 on-site participants. This setting and meeting size
              is ideal for encouraging individual interactions, and also encourages active
              participation by graduate and postdoctoral students.
