Title       : Obtaining Highly Dependable Communication Protocols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0234600

Award Number: 0234600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandeep K. Gupta sandeep@poisson.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed Helmy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 7214      HIGHLY DEPENDABLE COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Communication protocols form an integral part of many complex 
software
              systems. In many such systems, protocols' impact on
system dependability far
              exceeds the fraction of the total 
number of lines of code devoted to their
              implementation. 
Unfortunately, there exists virtually no systematic approach
              for 
design and evaluation of protocols that considers
              dependability.

Previously, we have developed a systematic, semi-automatic
              
approach for validation of communication protocols. Our approach 
uses
              semi-formal representations of protocols and efficient search 
(forward search
              as well as fault-oriented test generation) to 
analyze protocols over the
              entire range of scenarios, including 
external events, faults (such as loss of
              packets, communication 
link failures, loss of state in communication nodes,
              and so on), 
as well as network topologies. The effectiveness of our approach
              
has been demonstrated via its application to a varied range of
              
protocols.

In this project, we will undertake three main tasks. First, we
              
will extend our previously developed framework to compute values 
of
              appropriate dependability metrics for existing protocols of 
interest to the
              NASA and the HDCCSR community. Second, we will 
develop the first systematic
              approach to design new protocols that 
satisfy desired dependability criteria.
              Finally, we will use 
the testbed provided by NASA in conjunction with the
              expertise 
and software made available by NASA and other HDCCSR researchers
              
to fine-tune our approaches and to demonstrate that: (i) accurate 
values of
              dependability metrics can indeed be computed for 
existing communication
              protocols using a systematic, semi-
automatic approach, (ii) new protocols can
              be designed in a 
systematic, semi-automated manner to meet desired
              dependability 
criteria, and (iii) enhancements in the dependability of
              
communication protocols can indeed significantly enhance the
              
dependabilities of many software-hardware systems of interest to 
NASA and
              the HDCCSR community. 

In addition to above technical contributions, the
              proposed 
research will have broader impact on society. First, results of
              
the proposed research will enable improvements in dependability 
of critical
              infrastructure, such as the air-traffic control 
system. Second, the research
              will develop new approaches and 
practical case studies that will provide us
              with a unique 
opportunity to educate a large and  diverse student body in
              
techniques for development of dependable protocols and systems. 

