Title       : CAREER: TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION AND KNOWLEDGE CREATION
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0234075

Award Number: 0234075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa A. Schilling mschilli@stern.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: Technological Innovation and Knowledge Creation The aim of this research
              agenda is to advance our understanding of technological innovation and the
              knowledge creation that makes it possible. Scientists from a wide range of
              disciplines study innovation and knowledge creation, making this an inherently
              interdisciplinary topic. This set of research projects seeks to exploit that
              interdisciplinarity by leveraging theoretical and empirical insights across
              domains. By building "bridges" between the different disciplines that study
              innovation and knowledge creation, this research seeks to tap synergies between
              them.

The first stream focuses on technology standards. It includes projects
              that examine the tradeoffs between monopoly costs and network externalities,
              and the impact of standards ownership on technological innovation. The second
              stream is on modularity, and includes projects that build a taxonomy of types
              of modularity, examine how flexible organizational forms impact performance,
              and how the concept of modularity can be applied to knowledge networks. The
              third stream focuses on learning and knowledge creation, and includes projects
              that apply recent "small-world" network findings to knowledge networks, and in
              doing so, explore how knowledge network structure can influence creativity and
              innovation at the individual, group, and interfirm levels. Each of these
              streams has strong connections to each other, for example, technology standards
              enable modularity in product designs, and modularity in knowledge networks may
              promote cognitive insight and faster learning. By building on these
              connections, the agenda seeks to merge these research streams over time to
              create a much deeper understanding of how knowledge is created, and how that
              enables meaningful innovation. 

