Title       : Collaborative Research: Perception of the Steroid Molting Hormone,
               20-Hydroxyecdysone (20-HE) and its Role in Orchestrating Aggressive
               Interactions in the American Lobster.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0234555

Award Number: 0234555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart I. Cromarty scromart@eve.assumption.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assumption College
	      500 Salisbury Street
	      Worcester, MA  016091265    617/752-5615

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               Perception of the Steroid Molting Hormone, 20-Hydroxyecdysone (20-HE) and its
              Role in Orchestrating Aggressive Interactions in the American Lobster.

The
              purpose of this research is to identify and analyze the role of steroid
              hormones in aggressive behavior.  The study will investigate how the perception
              of the steroid molting hormone affects aggression in a model animal, the
              American lobster. Aggression is a vital component of the survival strategies of
              all animals and is used in the acquisition of food, mates, and territory.  The
              research will contribute significantly to the understanding of how steroid
              hormones modulate aggressive behavior. We expect to show that steroids not only
              alter the internal aggressive state of an animal, but are also used as
              signaling tools to modify the behavior of an opponent in an aggressive
              interaction.
A primary goal of the project is to give undergraduates an
              intensive research experience in up-to-date methods of neurobiology.  The
              project is a collaboration between Kass-Simon at the University of Rhode
              Island, and Cromarty at Assumption College.  It will involve URI graduate
              students, Assumption College undergraduates, and under-represented minority
              undergraduates from the New England Board of Higher Education's Excellence
              Through Diversity Initiative Program. 
The following questions will be
              addressed:
1. Does smelling the steroid molting hormone affect fighting
              behavior?  These are behavioral experiments in which lobsters deprived of their
              sense of smell fight animals who are exposed to steroids (or placebos).  The
              experiments stem from earlier work showing that injected steroids increase
              lobster aggressiveness. 
2. Are there molt-related differences in the
              receptor-responses to the molting hormone?  These are electrophysiological
              experiments designed to show how olfactory cells respond electrically to the
              molting hormone as lobsters go from their hard-shelled (aggressive) to
              soft-shelled (timid) states. 
3. Where are the molting hormone receptors
              located? These are microscopy experiments, in which fluorescent antibodies are
              used to locate the steroid receptors on the olfactory nerves. The experiments
              will augment the electrophysiology experiments.

