Title       : Collaborative Research: Molecular Phylogenetics and Coevolution in Yuccas and
               Yucca Moths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0234417

Award Number: 0234417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46076              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Leebens-Mack jleebensmack@colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9229,9251,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0075871
James H. Leebens-Mack

 Dr. James H. Leebens-Mack of Colgate
              University, in collaboration with Dr. N. Olof Pellmyr at Vanderbilt Univerisity
              has beeen awarded a grant to study coveolutionary interactions between plants
              and moths.  Coevolution is an important process in driving diversification and
              speciation, but understanding of this process is hampered by a lack of
              phylogenies (family trees) for model groups of organisms.  Yuccas and yucca
              moths are tied in an obligate pollination mutualism, commonly cited as one of
              the most obvious examples of coevolution. The PIs propose to use multi-gene
              sequencing to complete robust organismal phylogenies for both yuccas
              (Agavaceae) and yucca moths (Prodoxidae: Lepidoptera). The results will be used
              to test hypotheses of coevolution, parallel speciation, and the role of host
              shifts in diversification.  Comparative analyses will be used to quantify
              coevolution at the level of individual traits in the moths and plants.  

The
              goal of objective 1 is to establish a stable phylogeny based on DNA sequence
              data for the plant genus Yucca. They will use a multi-gene approach, using both
              nuclear and cytoplasmic markers, to establish a robust species-level phylogeny.
              In objective 2, the PIs will use a similar approach to resolve relationships
              among a cluster of rapidly diversified groups of yucca moths whose origin
              coincided with much life history evolution. Objective 3 utilizes the moth and
              plant phylogenies to test hypotheses related to coevolution.  The distribution
              and frequency of cospeciation will be estimated, and and comparative analysis
              emplyed to test how host shifting and evolution of oviposition behavior affect
              diet breadth and rates of diversification.  Finally, the underlying conflict of
              interests between moth and plant should manifest through selection on traits
              with major effects on oviposition success in the moth and minimization of seed
              destruction in the plant.  Moth ovipositor shape, oviposition site, and floral
              ovary shape and thickness are candidate traits that are highly variable among
              species.  They will be the focus of ancestor reconstruction and comparative
              analyses to partition coevolutionary and phylogenetic components of
              diversification. 

Together, the results from the project should provide the
              first phylogenetic framework at the species level for any of the models of
              coevolution and mutualism. It will open a venue for analyzing how coevolution
              acts at the trait level to contribute to the generation of biodiversity.

