Title       : Belowground Meristem Populations as Regulators of Grassland Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0234159

Award Number: 0234159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336215             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Hartnett dchart@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail W. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Studies of plant populations are critical for linking organism traits to
              ecosystem function, and for understanding ecosystem response to climate change
              and patterns of biodiversity.  In perennial grasslands and other plant
              communities, the belowground population of meristems (the bud bank) plays a
              fundamental role in local plant population persistence and dynamics, and may
              also determine community diversity, stability and invasibility.  At the
              ecosystem level, bud banks and meristem limitation can strongly influence
              patterns of primary productivity and carbon dynamics and responses to
              environmental change.  This proposal tests hypotheses about the community and
              ecosystem consequences of belowground meristems in grasslands.  The specific
              objectives are to test the hypotheses that 1) bud bank densities vary across
              precipitation gradients, 2) meristem limitation constrains productivity
              responses in arid to semi-arid grasslands, 3) bud banks and meristem density
              regulate the invasibility of grassland plant communities to exotics, and 4)
              fire, grazing, and water limitation regulate the patterns of bud bank
              populations in grasslands.  The densities, dynamics, composition and viability
              of belowground meristem populations, aboveground populations, and patterns of
              aboveground net primary productivity, will be measured over a 3-yr period
              across the Great Plains in 7 sites that vary in precipitation and productivity.
               The proposed cross-site activities will include 3 LTER sites and enhance
              collaboration among grassland-based research scientists within the central U.S.
              region.  This research will provide a better predictive understanding of how
              grassland ecosystems respond to global climate change, invasion of exotic
              species, changing land management (fire and grazing regimes).
