Title       : ECOHAB PNW: Ecology and Oceanography of Toxic Pseudo-nitzschia in the Pacific
               Northwest Coastal Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2002  
File        : a0234587

Award Number: 0234587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2655000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara M. Hickey bhickey@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evelyn J. Lessard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 4444,9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is studying the physiology, toxicology, ecology and oceanography of
              toxic   Pseudo-nitzschia (PN) species off the Pacific Northwest coast, a region
              in which both macro-nutrient supply and current patterns are primarily
              controlled by seasonal coastal upwelling processes.  The long term project goal
              is to develop a mechanistic basis for forecasting toxic PN bloom development
              along the Pacific Northwest coast and in other similar coastal regions in
              Eastern Boundary upwelling systems.  The objectives are being met with an
              integrated suite of field and laboratory studies on two 21 day cruises per
              year, moored bio/chem/physical sensors as well as circulation and biophysical  
              modeling in a study area that includes both the eddy and also a typical coastal
              upwelling region.   The key factors responsible for high cell densities of
              toxigenic PN spp. and the variable levels of cell toxicity are being
              investigated with on-deck incubation studies and comprehensive in situ
              measurements including macronutrients, micronutrients (Fe, Cu), bacteria and
              grazer  abundance as well as photosynthetic radiation, stratification and
              velocity shear. Aging of blooms are being studied by following drogued patches
              of water both from the eddy and from a nearshore upwelling region. Toxification
              of coastal shellfish are being determined using beach sampling sites maintained
              by the Olympic Region HAB program. A coupled biophysical model of the region is
              being used to examine the potential for bloom generation in offshore eddy and
              nearshore upwelling regions (e.g., stratification, nutrient sources, strength
              and timing) as well as to assess transport pathways of toxic PN to the coast
              under a variety of environmental and physiological conditions.         
