Title       : Conference on New Directions in Experimental Design (DAE 2003); May 14-17, 2003;
               Chicago, IL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2002   
File        : a0234048

Award Number: 0234048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23152              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dibyen Majumdar dibyen@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angela M. Dean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn Chaloner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0234048
PI: Dibyen Majumdar
Co-PI's: Kathryn Chaloner, Angela
              Dean
Conference on New Directions in Experimental Design 
(DAE 2003,
              Chicago)
May 15-17, 2003

Abstract

The advancement of statistical theory
              and methodology over the past years has resulted in the development of
              sophisticated methods capable of analyzing complex experiments. This has given
              rise to a demand for efficient designs for these experiments. Development of
              these designs will require new approaches and new techniques. At the same time,
              a new generation of enthusiastic and talented researchers in design of
              experiments will be needed in the years to come to carry out original
              theoretical and applied research in the emerging areas. The junior researchers
              of today need to be nurtured and encouraged to assume this role.  In order to
              address these needs it is intended to bring together senior and junior
              researchers and practicing statisticians from universities and the industry for
              a three-day conference in Chicago. The emphasis will be on design of
              experiments for biomedical and pharmaceutical studies. In particular, there
              will be featured sessions on: Designs for HIV Studies; Bayesian Methods for
              Designing Clinical Trials; Chemical Compound Selection from Huge Databases;
              Crossover Designs; Designs for Random Effects, Variance Components and
              Hierarchical Models.  The conference will also give prominence to recent
              innovations in the more traditional areas of experimental design that, besides
              solving existing problems, enrich the researcher's toolkit.

The principal
              objectives of the conference are threefold: (i) to focus on future new
              directions of research on design of experiments in the biomedical and
              pharmaceutical sciences; (ii) to support, encourage and provide stimulus to
              junior researchers, that is, recent Ph.D.'s and current Ph.D. students, who are
              working on, or have a strong interest in, design of experiments; (iii) to
              create an atmosphere for the exchange of ideas and information, between
              statisticians and researchers in universities and the pharmaceutical industry. 
              It is estimated that at least half of the participants will be junior
              researchers, who will be encouraged to give talks and present posters. Other
              participants will include leading authorities from universities and the
              pharmaceutical industry. Junior researchers will be provided the opportunity to
              be matched with a senior mentor. Ample opportunities will be provided for
              formal and informal discussions.

