Title       : Multithreading: A Viable Approach for High Performance Single Chip Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0234444

Award Number: 0234444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carmen Whitson                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Luc Gaudiot gaudiot@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Most modern single processor architectures focus on exploiting instruction-level
              parallelism. However, despite continued performance improvements, there is
              increasing doubt that aggressive ILP architecture techniques would continue
              bringing the desired improvements and that there will come about a diminishing
              return in the performance of single-chip architectures.

Multithreaded
              execution models promise to exploit thread-level parallelism (TLP) beyond a
              pure ILP approach. Multithreading can be applied directly at the level of
              uniprocessor instruction-set architectures. For example, Simultaneous
              MultiThreading (SMT) is a promising approach, which is attracting the attention
              of a number of academic and industrial research groups. This technique allows
              the various pipelines of a "superscalar" processor to be efficiently utilized
              by scheduling from several "coarse-grain" threads of one (or several)
              program(s). Although exploiting both ILP and TLP is attractive, the following
              questions are investigated in the project:

- Can an architecture model,
              which integrates fine-grain multithreading support with a coarse-grain
              multithreaded architecture model such as SMT, be developed?

- What are the
              design trade-off when mapping these architecture features to single-chip
              implementations?

- What compiling methodology for the proposed architecture
              model would exploit thread-level parallelism at both coarse and fine-grain
              levels?


