Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Inca Conquest in the Colca Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0234584

Award Number: 0234584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10822              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine A. Hastorf hastorf@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Ms. Miriam Doutriaux's doctoral dissertation project will investigate the Inca
              occupation of the Collagua province, located in modern-day southern Peru. The
              variability of Inca rule is a theme that has long fascinated Andean scholars.
              After conquest, the Inca state generally sought to effect a balance between its
              own economic and political ambitions and the sociocultural and environmental
              conditions of different regions. In each case, the political and economic
              aspects of imperial rule were mutually dependent and closely intertwined, but
              not inextricably so. Indeed, similar economic interests or conditions could be
              accommodated with different political configurations to ensure the smooth
              operation of many different Inca provinces. Under the direction of Dr.
              Christine Hastorf, Ms. Doutriaux will compare two areas of the Collagua
              province located at different altitudes and inhabited by distinct cultural
              groups, to understand the way in which Inca political dynamics were articulated
              with economic strategies in the valley, and how both were tailored to
              preexisting social and political arrangements in this province. 
Historical
              documents reveal that the Collagua province was inhabited by two distinct
              "ethnic" groups, the Collaguas and the Cabanas, apparently since pre-Inca
              times. The Collaguas were Aymara speakers with a pastoral orientation, while
              the Quechua-speaking Cabanas focused on agriculture. According to historical
              accounts, the Collaguas established good relations with the conquering Incas,
              thereby securing their political dominance over the rest of the valley until
              Spanish colonial times. On the other hand, archaeological studies of the
              valley's economy suggest that Inca influence was greater in the Cabana area of
              the province, possibly as a result of the warmer climate and better
              agricultural conditions. Until now, the different focus of archaeological and
              historical studies has impeded a full consideration of the variable nature and
              impact of Inca strategies in the province as a whole. As part of her
              dissertation work, Ms. Doutriaux will do an archaeological survey of 25 sq. km.
              around the historical capital of the Cabanas. She will analyze the settlement
              pattern, site organization, architectural canons, ceramic styles and artifact
              distributions to characterize the nature of the pre-Inca and Inca occupation
              there. A comparison of this data with the results of an archaeological survey
              she recently completed around the Collagua capital will enable her to draw
              conclusions about the regional-scale dynamics of Inca imperialism.
This
              research has the potential to shed light not only on Inca empire-building, but
              also on the resulting symbiotic relationship between differently empowered
              self-interested groups in the imperial context. It also contributes a
              much-needed scholarly focus on the south-central Andes, home to the Andes' two
              main culturo-linguistic traditions. The Colca Valley's unique combination of
              these Aymara and Quechua traditions in the heartland of a single province
              offers the possibility of new insights on the distribution of power and
              resources and the relationship between Aymara and Quechua groups in late
              prehistory.

This project will serve a valuable infrastructural function
              through the training of a promising graduate student

