Title       : CAREER: Image Variability Decomposition for Recognition, Reconstruction, and
               Tracking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 2,  2002    
File        : a0234606

Award Number: 0234606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92235              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter N. Belhumeur belhumeur@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates how changes in illumination, pose, and  shape  of an
              object produce changes in the observed images.   The  central  idea is that the
              variability in the images of an  object  can  be decomposed into component
              parts - illumination, pose, and  shape - each of which, when analyzed
              separately, is well behaved.  This   paradigm,   termed  ``Image  Variability 
              Decomposition,''  differs substantially from the appearance-based paradigm in 
              that  by decomposing the variability, one is able to uncover generative 
              structures  to  the  set  of  images  over  each  source  of  the  variability.
               Thus, unlike appearance-based methods,  it  is  not  necessary  to  have seen
              the object under all  of  the  seemingly  infinite possible permutations of
              lighting conditions, pose,  and  shape.  Instead,  each  component of  the 
              image  variability  is  explicitly  modeled.   This research is applied  to 
              problems  in  which this variability plays an important role: face recognition,
               change  detection,  structure from motion, and  visual  tracking.  The 
              education component of this award focuses on laboratory  and  project  
              intensive   teaching.  Students,  both   graduate   and  undergraduate, are not
              only taught about known unsolved problems,  but  are  encouraged to consider
              posing new problems in  computer  vision,  robotics,  and pattern recognition. 
              Students  are  also  rewarded  for  finding  new  applications  in  new 
              domains.  The  education  activities will center around the  construction  of 
              a  computer vision laboratory within Yale University's newly  formed  Center 
              for  Computational  Vision and  Control,  the  design  of  laboratory intensive
              courses on both computer vision and  pattern  and  object  recognition, and the
              completion  of  a  textbook  on  computer vision.
