Title       : Meiotic Silencing by Unpaired DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0234421

Award Number: 0234421
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190383             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Metzenberg rmetzenberg@yahoo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1116,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Viruses, retrotransposons, and insertion sequences put the genomic integrity of
              all organisms at risk.  Fungi are arguably under even greater jeopardy than
              plants and animals because they are organized coenocytically:  a macroscopic
              "individual" may contain millions of nuclei sharing a continuous cytoplasm that
              is undivided by septa or cell membranes.  Unsurprisingly, fungi have at least
              three sophisticated mechanisms for fighting back: quelling, RIP, and meiotic
              silencing by unpaired DNA (MSUD). The research that is the subject of this
              project is aimed at understanding the mechanism of MSUD and its role in the
              overall biology of one experimental organism, Neurospora crassa.   Earlier work
              showed that during the very brief diploid phase of this organism, presumably
              when homologs are paired in the pachytene stage of meiosis, any sizeable
              stretch of unpaired DNA is "seen" by the organism as a foreign sequence, one
              that was not present in both parents at the same locus, and hence having the
              capacity for mischief.  A signal in the form of double-stranded RNA is
              generated. Ultimately, this silences the expression not only of the unpaired
              DNA, but also any other DNA of the same sequence, whether paired or unpaired. 
              Selecting and screening for suppressor mutations which fail in this silencing
              process has already been rewarding in terms of insight gained; one called Sad-1
              (suppressor of ascus dominance) encodes a sexual-phase specific RNA-directed
              RNA polymerase, and other Sad mutants will be sought and studied.  A major
              focus of the research will be on the role of two paralogous genes called
              dicer-1 and dicer-2  thought to be involved in quelling.  In many organisms,
              and in the vegetative phase of fungal growth, these aptly-names genes are
              thought to dice up long double-stranded RNA molecules into short,
              double-stranded pieces which, in turn, give rise to single-stranded molecules. 
              These then direct the destruction of mRNA homologous to them, resulting in
              "silencing".    It is not clear that they have a similar role in MSUD, and a
              sizeable effort will be expended in trying to illuminate this issue.  Finally,
              it has become clear that functional Sad genes are necessary for the completion
              of meiosis.  This suggests that some of the machinery of silencing, presumably
              involving double-stranded RNA and its cleavage, is shared with the machinery of
              meiosis.  A search for the key molecules is an additional  aim of this
              research.  

All organisms are under continuous challenge by "selfish" DNA
              sequences or molecular parasites that are able to reproduce themselves at the
              expense of the host organism.  Often the host has sophisticated machinery for
              fighting back, either by attacking and mutating the parasitic DNA to a harmless
              condition, or by preventing the parasitic DNA from making molecules  necessary
              for its multiplication.  An understanding of how these silencing mechanisms
              work would make it possible to prevent not only the reproduction of viruses,
              but also to prevent other cellular genes from making undesired products, or
              from making benign  products in excessive amounts.  



