Title       : Webs on the Web: Internet Database, Analysis, and Visualization of Ecological
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0234980

Award Number: 0234980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1443830            (Estimated)
Investigator: Neo D. Martinez   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ilmi Yoon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew B. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer A. Dunne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project will establish an Internet database of food web, which describe the
              trophic structure and function of ecological networks, combined with tools that
              will increase the ability of scientists and students to exchange and analyze
              information about the networks.  The database design will be extensible to
              other ecological interactions and network types.  The content will focus on
              trophic interactions among organisms and also bioenergetic parameters that
              enable the modeling of network dynamics.  These biocomplexity informatics
              activities serve the user interested in network theory relating to biological
              and non-biological systems.  The project involves an interdisciplinary
              collaboration in ecology, informatics, computer science and information
              technology.  In addition to San Francisco State University, the Santa Fe
              Institute and the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis are
              involved.  Broader impacts include establishing an interdisciplinary
              interdepartmental collaboration at a minority inner-city public university and
              increasing the participation of underrepresented minorities in ecology and
              computer science.
