Title       : Genetics of Bacteriophage Lambda Red-Mediated Recombination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0234991

Award Number: 0234991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony R. Poteete anthony.poteete@umassmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Med Sch Worceste
	      55 Lake Avenue North
	      Worcester, MA  016550002    508/856-2119

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the research is to further the development and analysis of a simple
              prokaryotic system which models the complex process of homologous recombination
              in eukaryotes. The investigators have replaced the normal recombination system
              of the bacterium Escherichia coli with the Red recombination system of
              bacteriophage lambda. This switch to the Red system makes the bacterium far
              more prone to carry out recombination events involving linear double-stranded
              DNA molecules in the size range of single genes. The recombining DNA will be
              delivered into the Red-expressing bacteria by infection with a modified version
              of bacteriophage lambda. This bacteriophage injects its chromosome, which is
              cut in two places by a restriction endonuclease present in the bacterium,
              releasing a linear double stranded DNA molecule containing the antibiotic
              resistance gene cat, flanked by sequences identical to parts of the lacZ gene
              in the bacterial chromosome. Recombination between the linear DNA and the
              circular bacterial chromosome produces a strain in which lacZ is replaced by
              cat. Unlike the starting strain, these recombinants are both
              antibiotic-resistant and unable to utilize the sugar lactose; they are readily
              selected and enumerated. Experiments are proposed to explore the involvement of
              various recombination-promoting genes in Red-mediated gene replacement. The
              bacterial genes recF, recO, recR, recA, and recQ, and the lambda genes orf and
              rap will be studied in particular. In a second set of experiments, the
              dependence of the recombination event upon structural features of the linear
              recombining DNA species will be examined. Questions to be addressed include
              whether the system responds more efficiently to some sequences than to others,
              and whether various artificial DNAs bearing indigestible phosphorothioate
              linkages are active in Red-mediated recombination.
