Title       : SOFTWARE: Adaptive-XML: Tools for Collaborative Network Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0234323

Award Number: 0234323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $503780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karsten Schwan schwan@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Calton Pu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Greg S. Eisenhauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Modern science is an increasingly distributed enterprise, particularly when
              addressing challenging scientific problems with multidisciplinary
              researchteams, where team members are routinely assembled from multiple
              universities,the national labs, and industry participants. A problem pervasive
              to suchdistributed endeavors is the need to efficiently share scientific data
              across
multiple teams, sites, applications, and machines. 

This project's
              focus is on the ability to represent such data so that it is easily shared
              across research teams that each use their own, well-defined and domain-specific
              data representations. S(cientific)-XML is a suite of tools that translate
              user-friendly XML-based meta-information about shared data to/from the
              application-specific, efficient, binary-based data structure descriptions used
              by high performance scientific codes. With S-XML, end users can conveniently
              express and view their structured data, but all data manipulation and exchanges
              are performed using efficient binary data representations. Complementing these
              tools is the XML-ECho adaptive XML-conscious peer-to-peer communication
              infrastructure, which implements the wide-area exchange of the large-scale
              binary data used in scientific collaborations.

This middleware uses runtime
              adaptation to dynamically adjust its data transport and manipulation actions to
              meet application-level quality of service needs. Specifically, via XML-based
              descriptions of data structure, end users can dynamically express and alter
              interest expression that state what data is most important to them and should
              therefore, be transported preferentially.

The resulting Adaptive-XML tools
              and data exchange middleware will enable
effective collaboration in scientific
              endeavors that remain infeasible with today's technologies, a concrete example
              being the Terascale Supernova Initiative now being undertaken by a large
              research team distributed across U.S. universities and national labs. Project
              outcomes will also benefit U.S. corporations, as evident from our discussions
              with companies like Schlumberger and also from the deployment of some of our
              technologies in industry testbed (e.g., at Delta Air Lines).


