Title       : Neuroendocrine Regulation of Behavioral Differences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0234740

Award Number: 0234740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $707747             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juli S. Wade wadej@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Gender and seasonal differences in reproductive behaviors are often paralleled
              by differences in the morphology of structures controlling them.  Although such
              dimorphisms are fundamental characteristics of numerous vertebrates, the
              mechanisms involved appear to vary.  Steroid hormones often mediate both
              anatomy and function, but organisms differ in which hormone is important and
              critical age and in which sex it acts.  Some of these differences may reflect
              constraints imposed by the animals or their environments, but others may
              reflect the type of system (e.g., courtship or copulatory).  The proposed
              experiments investigate two neuromuscular systems required to coordinate a
              suite of masculine reproductive behaviors in green anole lizards.   Males
              extend a throat fan (dewlap) to court females, and the motoneurons and muscles
              controlling this display have several male-biased characteristics.  The
              hypothesis that steroid hormones regulate differentiation of these structures
              will be tested, and hormones specifically involved will be identified, thus
              determining when and where they act.  Males also use one of two hemipenes
              during copulation, which are controlled by two pairs of muscles.  Adult females
              do not have these structures.  Relevant spinal motoneurons are larger and more
              numerous in males.  Unlike the dewlap system, which appears stable in
              adulthood, preliminary results suggest that at least the copulatory muscles are
              plastic in adult males.  Experiments will investigate whether the copulatory
              muscles and motoneurons change morphologically between the breeding and
              non-breeding seasons, and whether these changes can be induced by testosterone.
               Then, as for the dewlap system, the role of gonadal hormones in sexual
              differentiation of the copulatory neuromuscular structures will be assessed. 
              The courtship system differentiates in juveniles, whereas the copulatory system
              is sexually dimorphic at hatching. This proposal will address the important
              question, "Why do some systems loose their responsiveness to gonadal hormones
              while others remain plastic during development and into adulthood ?".The
              broader impacts of the proposed work involve advancing scientific discovery by
              increasing the understanding of mechanisms involved in sculpting the structure
              of the nervous system and muscles, both in developmental organization and adult
              plasticity. At the same time teaching, training, and learning will be promoted,
              the participation of underrepresented groups in lab work will be encouraged,
              scientific result will be disseminated in a timely fashion, and the
              infrastructure for neuroendocrine research at this university will be enhanced
