Title       : NIRT: Surface Gradients and the Mechanism of Neuronal Axon Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0234005

Award Number: 0234005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaoyang Zhu zhu@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Da-Ren Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Y.H. Pui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul C. Letourneau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1402,1674,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the announcement NSF 01-157.

They
              have organized a Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) motivated by
              the hypothesis that understanding of the roles that concentration gradients of
              signal molecules play in cell dynamics, neuronal axon growth in particular,
              with unprecedented spatial resolution and
chemical control is very important. 
              The team consists of four PIs from Chemistry, Neuroscience, and Mechanical
              Engineering, with expertise in surface functionalization and biomolecule
              immobilization, neuronal axon growth mechanisms, and nano-delivery and
              characterization tools for biomolecules. The combination of expertise and
              synergy from this collaboration will allow them to develop methodology for the
              generation of chemical and biochemical gradients that possess the following
              attributes: (a) the gradients are supported on a solid surface for precise
              control and quantification; (b) the gradients possess cellular (~um) and
              sub-cellular (~102 nm) spatial resolution; (c) arbitrary or "designer" gradient
              profiles, including digital (discrete) or analog (continuous) gradients, are
              possible; (d) the method are not molecule-specific and the gradients may
              include multiple components. 
The proposed method will be based on a precision
              nano-delivery tool, an electrospray system capable of 10-18 liter volume
              resolution, to deliver chemical or biological samples onto a functionalized
              solid surface. A "designer" gradient will be generated by a programmed
              voltage
pulse-train in combination with programmed movement of the sample.
              Monolayer assemblies on
the solid surface will be designed to confine the
              nano-droplet for high resolution, to immobilize
signal molecules in the
              nano-droplet, and to provide chemical or biological compatibility for
              cell
adhesion and growth. They plan to use neurons as a model biological
              system to explore the roles of gradients of extrinsic molecules in guiding
              neuronal axon growth.

The proposed research will provide an excellent
              opportunity for participating students to work at
one of the forefronts of
              nanoscience/technology, i.e., molecular nano-biology and nanobiotechnology. In
              addition to graduate training, the PIs plan to develop and co-teach a freshman
              seminar course annually on, "Nanobiology: science and engineering of neuron
              growth," to stimulate undergraduates' interest and participation. It is
              anticipated that their proposed activities will contribute to the preparation
              of future innovators and leaders in nanoscience in neurobiology and its
              practical application. 


