Title       : Purchase of a MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0234954

Award Number: 0234954
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Berliner berliner@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce E. Bowler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Dores  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip B. Danielson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrei G. Kutateladze  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
              Program, the Department of Chemistry at the University of Denver will acquire a
              Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption Ionization - Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF) Mass
              Spectrometer. This instrument will be used in a wide variety of research
              projects, including a) structural and thermodynamic properties responsible for
              the proper/improper protein folding; b) the mechanisms by which halogens cause
              degradation of polyamide membranes used in municipal water filtration systems;
              c) photocleavage of molecular scaffolds; and d) posttranslational processing
              and modification of analgesic neuropeptide hormones involved in the management
              of pain and stress by the brain.  

Matrix-assisted laser desorption
              ionization (MALDI) time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometry is the technique of
              choice for obtaining accurate molecular weights on molecules up to and over
              300,000 daltons, with extremely high sensitivity. Use of a MALDI-TOF mass
              spectrometer has therefore become a standard technique in studies involving
              biomolecules.  At the University of Denver, this instrument will be used not
              only by graduate students in their research but also by undergraduates in
              laboratory courses where students work with professors in project-oriented
              teams that conduct experiments involve the purification and characterization of
              proteins and other macromolecules.    

