Title       : RUI: Effect of Amino Acid Substitutions on the Production, Localization,
               Processing, Stability and Function of Subunit II of Cytochrome c Oxidase in
               Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0234731

Award Number: 0234731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki L. Cameron cameron@ithaca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ithaca College
	      Danby Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/274-3111

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1116,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Cytochrome c oxidase (CcO) is an enzyme complex required for respiration in all
              eukaryotes and some prokaryotes.  The enzyme complex is the terminal member of
              the electron transport chain and is responsible for transferring electrons from
              cytochrome c to molecular oxygen.  The number of subunits in CcO is variable,
              ranging from three or four in bacteria to as many as 13 in the bovine enzyme
              complex.  The three largest subunits, Cox1p, Cox2p, and Cox3p are encoded on
              mitochondrial DNA in eukaryotes and are closely related to the three subunits
              found in prokaryotes.  Therefore, it is likely that these mitochondrially
              encoded subunits represent the catalytically significant subunits of the
              eukaryotic enzyme.  Cox2p has been shown to carry a binuclear copper center,
              which is the initial site of electron entry from cytochrome c.  To better
              understand the function of Cox2p, yeast strains with defects in cellular
              respiration due to mutations in the COX2 gene have been identified or created. 
              For the site-directed mutations which have been created in this gene, the
              mutant strains will be characterized both genotypically and phenotypically. 
              For each mutant strain, a large collection of  revertant strains which have
              recovered respiratory function will be identified and characterized, and the
              nature of the genetic change which restores function will be determined.  The
              mutant strains which bear amino acid substitutions will also be analyzed to
              determine the effect of each of the mutations on the localization, stability,
              processing, and assembly of Cox2p.  Some of the mutations may interfere with
              one of these aspects but not others.  For example, some mutations may produce a
              stable protein, which is assembled with the other Cox polypeptides into a
              complex, which is however, inactive.  Other mutations may affect stability or
              localization to the correct cellular compartment.


Because the Cox2p amino
              acid sequence is so highly conserved, information deduced about the function of
              this protein in yeast should help to elucidate the function of the protein in
              higher organisms.  Such an understanding is of importance because of the
              profound effect of the protein on the basic energy metabolism of a broad range
              of organisms, from bacteria to primates.  In addition to expanding our
              knowledge of this important protein, the project will involve undergraduate
              collaborators at all stages, including those of carrying out the actual
              experiments, drafting  manuscripts, and presenting their results at scientific
              conferences.   The hands-on training provided to students in the course of the
              research will help prepare them for graduate and professional school and will
              provide them with both technical and critical thinking skills.

