Title       : Novel Tools for the Vertical Analysis of Genomic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0234806

Award Number: 0234806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1222334            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sorin Draghici sod@cs.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Tainsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Krawetz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      656 W. Kirby
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Due to the scarcity of good bioinformatics professionals, many
              expensive
genomics experiments remain under-analyzed. The goal of this
              proposal is to provide a suite of turnkey bioinformatics tools that: i) can
              process extremely large amounts of data as those coming from current
              high-throughput technologies such as microarrays, and ii) allow vertical
              inferences assembling system level information from component level data. The
              work proposed here will provide a novel database and associated data mining
              tools allowing: (1)Translation of gene expression profiles into functional
              profiles showing how various cellular functions are changed in the given
              condition and assessing their statistical significance, (2) Discovering those
              biological processes whose interaction in a given condition is significantly
              different  their normal interaction.  (3)Identifying those pathways that are
              most likely to be biologically relevant in agiven experiment and quantitatively
              assessing their impact.  (4)Validating high-throughput experiments, such as
              microarrays, by checking the consistency of their results against existing
              biological knowledge   (5) In-silico whole-body data mining techniques able to
              provide in a short time an expression profile of any given gene across all
              tissues of interest.

The broader impact aspects of this proposal include the
              following:
1. Enhance the research infrastructure by constructing and
              maintaining a public database with advanced data mining capabilities. 2.
              Cross-train researchers in computer science and biology.3. Broaden the
              participation of under-represented groups by: i) recruiting Ph.D. students ii)
              undertaking two annual recruitment visits to specific minority-serving
              institutions; iii) organizing an open house for disadvantaged K-12 students;
              and iv) targeted advertising of the positions funded through this project. 4.
              Broadly disseminating scientific knowledge by: i) providing a web interface to
              the tools developed during this project allowing the scientific community to
              access them easily ; and ii)organizing an annual multidisciplinary conference
              bringing together computer scientists and biologists.


