Title       : Spaces of Kleinian Groups and Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0234540

Award Number: 0234540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yair N. Minsky yair@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0234540
Yair N. Minsky

The proposer is co-organizing a workshop at the
              Newton Institute in
Cambridge, UK, on the subject of ``Spaces of Kleinian
              groups and
hyperbolic 3-manifolds'', for the summer of 2003.  The
              4-week
workshop, including a 1-week conference, will bring
              together
researchers active on a number of foundational topics in the
              field:
relationships between the analytic, combinatorial and
              geometric
structure of hyperbolic 3-manifolds; topology of deformation
              spaces
and the arrangement of their components; classification of
              hyperbolic
3-manifolds by asymptotic invariants; complex projective
              structures;
convex hull boundaries; cone manifolds, orbifolds and knot groups;
              the
combinatorial structure of Teichmuller spaces, mapping class groups,
and
              spaces of curves on surfaces.  Recent years have seen substantial
progress on
              longstanding foundational conjectures such as the
Bers/Sullivan/Thurston
              Density Conjecture, Ahlfors' Measure
Conjecture, Thurston's Ending Lamination
              Conjecture and Marden's
Tameness Conjecture.  The time is therefore ripe for a
              conference on
these topics.

In the study of low-dimensional geometry,
              topology and dynamics, there
is a remarkable depth of interconnection between
              fields of
mathematics. Henri Poincare, who studied both celestial dynamics
              and
complex analysis (among many other things), observed in the 19th
century
              that the standard round sphere, the setting of classical
analysis and
              geometry, functioned also as a "horizon at infinity" for
an exotic
              non-Euclidean geometry that we now call Hyperbolic
Space. Dynamical properties
              of transformations of the sphere translate
to geometric properties of rigid
              motions of this space, and give rise
to families of symmetric tilings whose
              structure we can study by
geometric and topological methods.  The properties
              of these tilings,
and the way in which they change when the tilings are varied
              through
families (or "parameter spaces"), are still linked to some of
              the
motivating questions about physical systems of which Poincare was
aware a
              hundred years ago. Issues such as classification of systems,
mapping out
              regions of stability and instability, deformation and
bifurcation of families
              of systems, and probabilistic properties such
as ergodicity, all have
              significance in both pure and applied
mathematics. In the setting of
              hyperbolic geometry, recent years have
seen significant progress on these
              issues, with both theoretical
advances and computational approaches playing a
              role. This conference
will bring together leading researchers in this area and
              promising
young mathematicians, to disseminate recent advances and continue
              work
on open problems.

 

