Title       : SGER: Durable Goods, Borrowing Constraints and the Business Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0234267

Award Number: 0234267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde jesusfv@ssc.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Grant for Exploratory Research supports a quantitative study of how
              households borrowing constraints interact with aggregate activity over the
              business cycle. In particular it explores how shocks to fundamentals
              (technology, wealth distribution or fiscal policy among others) might generate
              large and persistent fluctuations through their feedback with borrowing
              constraints. The project also evaluates the effects of exogenous changes in the
              credit markets structure on the quantitative properties of the business cycle.
              The key new element will be the presence of durables goods. These goods will
              play a dual role, both delivering direct utility and providing collateral
              services to the households that own them. This second role will induce a new
              and powerful transmission mechanism from shocks to fundamentals.   The
              importance of durable goods in this research project is motivated by their high
              participation in output and wealth.  The project will help answer questions
              like what are the effects of borrowing constraints on aggregate activity? And
              what are the effects of policy changes that affect these constraints?   This
              project is part of a broad attempt to explicitly incorporate individual
              heterogeneity into macroeconomics, in order to study how the interaction
              between individual behavior and macroeconomic aggregates moves in response to
              changes in economic policy. 


