Title       : Advanced Approaches for Integration and Analysis of Genomic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0234895

Award Number: 0234895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1628007            (Estimated)
Investigator: Aidong Zhang azhang@cse.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rohit Bakshi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurizio Trevisan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Murali Ramanathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bianca Weinstock-Guttman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The over-availability of data and the under-availability of knowledge present a
              critical challenge for biological informatics in the years to come.  Clearly,
              effective techniques are need not only for storage and retrieval purposes, but
              also for mining genomic data to increase our knowledge.  However, the high
              dimensionality and enormous size of genomic data pose very challenging problems
              in analysis and visualization of the data sets.  This project investigates
              novel approaches to analyzing gene expression data and integrating them into
              biological research.  New algorithms and tools that can be used iteratively and
              interactively to mine the data will be developed.  The strategies include a
              meta data hierarchy for integration of heterogeneous data, cluster-based
              indexing for high-dimensional data, inter-dimensional analysis for
              classification, and dynamic interactive visualization for pattern analysis. 
              The approaches will be field-tested by biologists investigating an organism's
              phenotype and genotype iterations.  The project will deliver a flexible,
              scalable workbench environment ready to be used for general genomic data
              analysis.  In addition to education development activities, the project's
              impact will be enhanced by 
broad applications in other fields that handle
              large-scale multi-dimensional data sets.

