Title       : The Implmentation of Disaster Assistance in New York in the Aftermath of
               September 11: The Dynamics of Multiorganizational Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0234100

Award Number: 0234100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80389              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Stehr stehr@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              THE IMPLEMENTATION OF DISASTER ASSISTANCE IN NEW YORK IN THE AFTERMATH OF
              SEPTEMBER 11: THE DYNAMICS OF MULTIORGANIZATIONAL RESPONSE


Following the
              terrorist attack on the World Trade Center Towers in New York City, a massive
              mobilization of disaster assistance and relief efforts took place.  These
              relief efforts raise a number of questions that have both practical and
              theoretical importance particularly with regard to the organizational and
              administrative processes employed by the governmental agencies, non-profit
              charities, and private sector groups involved in delivering disaster
              assistance.
The principal objective of this research is to develop a more
              comprehensive and systematic understanding of the disaster assistance process,
              particularly as it relates to programs that benefit individuals and households.
               Data will be obtained through a brief questionnaire-type survey that will be
              administered to representatives of each of the more than 200 private or
              non-profit agencies and the administrators of the more than 50 federal and
              state run assistance programs involved in the disaster relief effort in New
              York.  Follow up interviews will be conducted with selected officials.  We will
              seek to identify and code the types of assistance offered, the number of
              victims who sought assistance and the number of recipients who ultimately
              received aid, and the costs associated with providing this assistance, among
              other information.   

We believe that this line of research will provide a
              more detailed understanding of the inter-organizational dynamics associated
              with disaster recovery and will provide a starting point for more in-depth
              analysis of the political and organizational aspects of large-scale victim
              assistance following a disaster.   On a theoretical level, this research will
              contribute to our understanding of patterns of behavior in multi-organizational
              systems in disaster settings-questions of long-standing interest in both the
              sociological and public administration literatures.  In addition, it will
              provide a foundation for better understanding of the interplay between those
              providing and those receiving disaster assistance.  This research will also
              yield benefits to policy makers (both inside and outside of government) and
              disaster assistance program administrators.  The disaster in New York City
              provides an opportunity to examine the rationale underpinning the existing
              disaster relief system and to evaluate how the system was implemented in this
              particular case.  This information can then be incorporated into future
              disaster recovery plans.

