Title       : Acquisition of Powder X-Ray Diffraction Instrumentation at Syracuse University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0234912

Award Number: 0234912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82877              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karin Ruhlandt-Senge kruhland@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon A. Zubieta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Program, the
              Department of Chemistry at Syracuse University will acquire a powder X-ray
              diffractometer. This equipment will enhance research in a number of areas such
              as the structure and dynamics of molecules and the chemistry of materials,
              including species as diverse as metal oxides, metal borides, metal
              chalcogenides, cluster-based nanostructures and extended metal-organic
              pi-systems.  Other projects which will benefit include the characterization of
              solid state products of hydrothermal reactions, the characterization of thin
              film samples, and the identification of the products from the removal of
              solvent and interstitial or interlamellar components from layered and open
              framework materials.  Specifically, researchers will use the instrument to
              carry out bulk analyses of samples, identify temperature-dependent phase
              changes, identify the degree of crystallinity in polymers, and explore the
              preffered orientation of such materials.
The X-ray diffractometer allows
              accurate and precise measurements of the full three dimensional structure of a
              molecule, including bond distances and angles, and it provides accurate
              information about the spatial arrangement of the molecule relative to the
              neighboring molecules. These studies will have an impact in a number of areas,
              especially materials chemistry.  The instrument will also be used for formal
              instruction in the Chemistry and Earth Sciences Departments at Syracuse
              University. 

