Title       : Meristem Identity Genes and the Evolution of Plant Architecture in Brassicaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0234118

Award Number: 0234118
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Baum dbaum@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0234118
Baum

The development of plants is controlled by meristems, areas of
              organized cell division and differentiation.  Shoot meristems can take on
              either a floral or vegetative identity depending upon the activity of a set of
              meristem identity genes.  Because flowers terminate shoot growth, the
              distribution of flowers, and hence the regulation of meristem identity genes,
              may have a profound affect upon plant architecture.  Thus, it has been
              hypothesized that the architectural differences between species are largely
              driven by changes in meristem identity genes.  In the proposed work we will
              evaluate the role of three meristem identity genes, LFY, TFL1, and AP1, in
              explaining why three species of the mustard/cabbage family (Brassicaceae)
              produce flowers from the basal rosette of leaves rather than on an elongated
              leafless stem (the inflorescence).

In previous work the PI studied LFY genes
              from three rosette flowering species, Ionopsidium acaule (Ia), Idahoa scapigera
              (Is), and Leavenworthia crassa (Lc).  They used transformation to introduce LFY
              genes from these three species into plants of an inflorescence flowering
              species, Arabidopsis thaliana (that lacked a functional endogenous copy of
              LFY).  They found that whereas Ia-LFY had no affect on plant architecture, the
              IsLFY and LcLFY genes tended to induce modifications to plant architecture
              reminiscent of rosette flowering, but they did not cause complete conversion to
              rosette flowering.  This result suggests that evolutionary changes at the LFY
              locus contributed to the parallel evolution of rosette flowering in these
              species, but point to additional, as yet unidentified, genetic changes.  The
              proposed work will include follow-up experiments on LFY aimed at determining
              whether the important differences between species are located in the
              protein-coding region or the adjacent regulatory DNA.  Similar experiments with
              AP1 and TFL1 will be done to see if they may have contributed to the evolution
              of rosette flowering.  Specifically, the goal is to clarify the molecular
              evolution of the genes and move them from the rosette flowering species into A.
              thaliana to see if they can induce rosette-flowering individually or jointly
              with the exogenous LFY genes.

This proposed study will shed light on how
              evolutionary changes in DNA translate into difference in the morphology of
              living species.  In particular, the work will clarify: (1) the extent to which
              genetic changes are concentrated in a small set of developmental genes, (2) the
              relative importance of protein versus regulatory changes, and (3) the extent to
              which parallel evolution in independent lineages uses the same genetic toolbox.
               Additionally, the specific understanding of how plant architecture is
              regulated could ultimately have significance for efforts to modify crop plants
              to facilitate higher productivity and easier harvesting.

The research will
              contribute to the training of one graduate student and one postdoctoral
              scientist.

