Title       : DIVER: Distributed Collaborative Analysis of Video Records in the Human Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a0234456

Award Number: 0234456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97133              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy D. Pea roypea@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the  design and prototype development of a Web-based
              application for collaborative analysis of video records in the human sciences. 
              This  application, DIVER (Digital Interactive Video Exploration and
              Reflection), addresses a  critical need for .collaboratory. functions in the
              human sciences, where common tools  and a shared corpus of human interaction
              datasets can be used for investigating questions  of theory  and practice.  
              The proposed  effort will leverage an NSF-MRI  Award (NSF-0216334) for related
              work and capitalize on an NSF-funded Center for Innovative Learning 
              Technologies (CILT) workshop on Digital Video  Inquiry in late November 2002.  
              The  CILT  workshop  will  enable  the introduction of   the  tool  to  a 
              community  of  NSF  project  researchers, graduate students, and
              teacher-researchers, and to engage them in the further  design and development
              of DIVER. This feedback is crucial for an application that is  intended to help
              constitute and serve a community of users.  The  DIVER  application  will 
              consist  of  a  server  holding  analyses  of  video  data,  consisting of
              video sources and a series of annotated selections cropped in both time and
              space. Viewers of a DIVER analysis will be able to respond using threaded
              discussions attached  to  particular  scenes  from the  original  analysis, 
              and  they  can  return  to  the  base video clip to create their own selections
              as their responses warrant.   Several substantial technical issues, primary
              among them  the manipulation of multimedia records in a web browser
              environment, and the storage, indexing, and retrieval  of complex annotated 
              multimedia documents need to be resolved.  


