Title       : SGER: Air Entrapment for Liquefaction Mitigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0234365

Award Number: 0234365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mishac Yegian myegian@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Akram N. Alshawabkeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0234365, Mishac Yegian, Northeastern University
"Air Entrapment for
              Liquefaction Mitigation"

This action is to support a study of the scientific
              and technical feasibility of an innovative approach for mitigating soil
              liquefaction.

Liquefaction-induced damage to the built environment can be
              catastrophic.  During the past four decades, intensive efforts have been made
              to understand the mechanism of liquefaction, and to develop procedures for
              analyzing the liquefaction potential at a site during a given seismic event. 
              While research on liquefaction continues, geotechnical engineering practice has
              developed various techniques for site improvement that can mitigate the
              potential effects of liquefaction.  Such mitigation measures are expensive, and
              often can only be utilized for a new project.  Mitigating the
              liquefaction-induced damage to an existing structure in an urban community
              remains a major challenge.

The concept is to introduce air in a saturated
              sand deposit to increase its resistance against liquefaction.  Laboratory and
              field experiences suggest that only slight amounts of air in the voids of
              otherwise fully saturated sands (enough to reduce the degree of saturation by 1
              to 2%) can significantly increase the liquefaction strength, and decrease the
              shear wave velocity.  Hence, through air entrapment, a new or an existing site
              can potentially be improved to resist liquefaction, and through shear wave
              velocity measurements, its adequacy can be verified.

The research has a
              number of specific objectives that are aimed at providing a preliminary
              understanding of the behavior of air-entrapped sands, and of identifying
              important areas for future research that would be needed to advance the concept
              to a fully developed and practical measure for liquefaction mitigation.  The
              objectives of the research can be stated in the form of questions as
              follows:
1. How can air be introduced in loose saturated sands?
2. How can
              samples of varying degrees of saturation (from 95 to 100%) be prepared?
3. How
              can the degree of saturation be measured accurately (up to 0.1%)?
4. How will
              air entrapment affect the liquefaction strength?
5. How are other soil
              properties influenced by the presence of air?
6. How does the grain size
              distribution and angularity of the sand influence the above results?
7. How
              long can air stay trapped under different flow gradients?

The research will
              be a significant contribution to the development of cost-effective measures for
              liquefaction mitigation.  It will also have a broader impact on improving the
              ability to reduce the expected losses to a community from an earthquake.  The
              research will draw upon the expertise in the geo-environmental field that uses
              air injection for remediation.

