Title       : Polymer Morphology and Crystal Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a0234678

Award Number: 0234678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip H. Geil geil@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,5930,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator (P.I.) proposes research in two areas: 1) continued
              exploitation of the researcher's confined thin film melt polymerization (CTFMP)
              technique for the simultaneous polymerization/crystallization of single
              crystals of condensation polymers suitable for electron diffraction (ED)
              determination of crystal structures and 2) a re-examination of two "overlooked
              problems" in polymer morphology. Utilization of the CTFMP technique is proposed
              for a number of polymers of interest: a) extension of the poly(n-glycol
              naphthalate) series to n values above 2; b) utilization of a base substrate
              treatment technique to produce phase II poly(p-oxybenzoate) single crystals
              complemented by attempts to "catalyze" phase II whisker growth; c) the
              symmetric poly(2,6-naphthalene 2,6-naphthalate and poly(2,6-naphthalene
              terephthalate); and d) the  kinked homopolymer and copolymer polyesters of
              m-oxybenzoate and o-oxybenzoate with p-oxybenzoate and 2,6-oxynaphthoate.
              Crystal structures, from ED data aided by modeling, morphology by transmission
              electron microscopy (TEM), and thermal properties by DSC will be determined for
              all of the above. Transition behavior will also be characterized by TEM hot
              stage ED as appropriate. X-ray diffraction, for comparison with the ED, and
              FTIR, for composition, proof of polymerization and molecular weight
              characterization, will complement the ED, TEM and DSC studies. For several of
              the systems interest also lies in the origin of aperiodic meridional spacings.
              In addition the P.I. proposes to reexamine and extend prior studies of the
              effect of simultaneous biaxial deformation of crystalline polymer films and the
              morphology of melt-crystallized poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) Recent studies
              of PTFE suggest single molecule single crystals (SMSC), folded and extended
              chain lamellae and isolated shish-kebabs can all be grown from dispersed
              dispersion particles on substrates, accompanied by large scale molecular
              mobility.

X-ray diffraction from fibers has long been used for polymer
              crystal structure determination. One portion of the research proposed here
              continues efforts in demonstrating the desirability of complementing, sometimes
              replacing, x-ray studies with electron diffraction; combined with the
              researcher's unique polymer single crystal sample preparation technique, the
              electron diffraction method is often simpler, with the (reciprocal) lattice
              being directly visualized. The polymers chosen for the research include those
              with both rigid (liquid crystalline) and flexible backbones, with many being of
              current and/or potential commercial interest. This research will continue the
              collaboration with Prof. Rybnikar of the new University of Tomas Bata (formerly
              part of Technical University of Brno) in Zlin, Czech Republic. International
              Program funds in the previous grant were instrumental in aiding in the
              development of computer and scanning facilities at the University, with 19
              papers being co-authored over the last decade. Two additional proposed topics
              involve developing an understanding of the biaxial deformation involved in the
              production of many polymer films and the nano-structure of PTFE (i.e., Teflon).
              The latter is in collaboration with Dr. P. Xu of Gore & Assoc., Inc. and is of
              practical concern relative to both the use of PTFE as nano-scale coatings and
              the polymerization process. In addition to the two graduate students to be
              supported by this grant, the incorporation in the research program of two
              undergraduates from the Polymer Concentration in the University of Illinois's
              Materials Science and Engineering Department is expected to encourage their
              continuation for advanced degrees. All recent NSF supported undergraduates
              conducting research with the P.I. have both been co-authors of published papers
              and have continued on for advanced degrees.


