Title       : Evolution and Diversification of Azaleas and Rhododendrons (Rhododendron,
               Rhodoreae, Ericoideae, Ericaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0234043

Award Number: 0234043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Kron kronka@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      1834 Wake Forest Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27106    336/758-5000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Kathleen Kron at Wake Forest University to
              study the evolutionary relationships of azaleas and rhododendrons. Azaleas and
              rhododendrons belong to the genus Rhododendron which contains more than 900
              spp. These plants are among the showiest shrubs in the world, are of enormous
              importance horticulturally and form the dominant vegetation in many habitats
              throughout the temperate zone and in the Asian tropics.  Despite their high
              visibility, azaleas and rhododendrons have been difficult to study because of
              their tremendous morphological diversity and variability.   This study
              investigates the geneological relationships of major groups within Rhododendron
              using DNA sequence data from six genes and morphological characteristics to
              establish the evolutionary history of major lineages of azaleas and
              rhododendrons.  Morphological data will be recorded using digital image capture
              and storage on a public accessible website.
The broader impacts of this study
              include the development of a framework for future studies in a group of plants
              that are ecologically, economically, and evolutionarily important.  Because
              these plants have a nearly worldwide distribution, this study will also
              significantly contribute to a better understanding of the history of the earth.
               At least one female graduate student will be trained as a result of this
              project.  The information gained will be disseminated in electronic and print
              form, in both scholarly and lay texts.  The newly obtained results will be
              incorporated into Dr. Kron's teaching and curriculum development at the
              undergraduate and graduate levels.

