Title       : Collaborative Research: Constraining Late Pleistocene Tropical Climates by
               Dating and Modeling Former Glaciers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0234056

Award Number: 0234056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117062             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Kurz mkurz@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award funds collaborative research to reconstruct climate during the Last
              Glacial Maximum (LGM) at 21,000 years ago by dating and modeling former late
              Pleistocene glaciers from Mauna Kea, Hawaii, and Mt. Giluwe, Papua New Guinea. 
              The researchers will examine glacial moraines from the Earth's tropics to gain
              a greater understanding of the sensitivity of the climate system to radiative
              forcing.   Excess radiation received at low latitudes is a key driving force of
              the Earth's climate system.  The overall goal of the research is to examine
              some fundamental physical elements of the response of Earth's climate to
              planetary radiative forcing that is significantly different from the present.
              

Glacial moraines will be dated using cosmogenic nuclides measured on
              samples from surface boulders.  For each field area, samples collected from
              moraines generally thought to represent the LGM will be dated by 3He (helium)
              and 36Cl (chlorine).  To address questions regarding scaling and production
              rates of 3He at low latitudes, the project includes calibrations using Hawaiian
              radiocarbon dated lava flows. 

Climate modeling will be guided by the desire
              to apply improved modeling strategies to reconstruct the climate change
              required to sustain late Pleistocene tropical glaciation.   Specifically,
              modeling efforts will use a physically based mass- and energy-balance glacier
              model that has been validated and applied to several glaciers in different
              topographic and climatic environments. The glacier model accounts for
              topographic shading, time and space varying albedo, explicit treatment of the
              radiation budget, and turbulent fluxes.  These are important controls of
              glacier mass balance.

The research is important because it has the potential
              for improving our understanding of fundamental climate processes in the tropics
              by providing a high-resolution chronology of glaciation in the region at the
              LGM, a time of important reorganization of Earth's climate regime.  The
              research will provide a multidisciplinary educational experience in
              paleoclimate research for graduate students at two institutions.

