Title       : Icosahedral Virion Scaffolding Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0234976

Award Number: 0234976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381677             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bentley A. Fane bfane@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The assembly of proteins and nucleic acids into viruses involves numerous
              molecular interactions. Often assembly is dependent on scaffolding proteins.
              Analogous to scaffoldings used in building construction, these proteins assist
              assembly, but are not found in the final product. The broad objective of this
              research is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of scaffolding-mediated viral
              morphogenesis, using the Microviridae, a family of small single-stranded DNA
              viruses. The functions of scaffolding protein domains are elucidated with
              chimeric proteins, constructed between related viruses, or proteins containing
              a deletion of a specific domain. These altered proteins only perform a subset
              of the natural functions, thus arresting virion  morphogenesis at distinct
              stages. By analyzing the deleterious effects of these altered proteins and how
              viruses can mutate to overcome these effects (second-site genetic analyses), a
              more detailed picture of viral morphogenesis emerges. In addition to
              scaffolding proteins, protein interactions with single-stranded Microviridae
              DNA genomes appear to affect the last stage of assembly. A combination of
              genetic and structural approaches (X-ray crystallography) will be used to
              further elucidate this relatively new phenomenon. 

Broader Impact: The
              project includes the scientific education of graduate and undergraduate
              students in the Principal Investigator's laboratory. In addition, viral and
              host cell strains generated as part of the research are used in a large
              undergraduate Microbiology course, taught by the Principal Investigator, to
              illustrate the concepts of both classical and molecular genetics.


