Title       : NIH-NSF BBSI: Southern California Bioinformatics Summer Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0234129

Award Number: 0234129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $699708             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jamil A. Momand jmomand@calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra B. Sharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wendie A. Johnston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy J. Warter-Perez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    323/343-4970

NSF Program : 1758      Bioengineering & Bioinformatic
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1758,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.:  0234129
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Jamil Momand
INSTITUTION NAME:
               California State LA University Aux Serv
TITLE:  NIH-NSF BBSI Southern
              California Bioinformatics Summer Institute

ABSTRACT

This Summer Institute
              is composed of a  Host Institution and seven Research Mentor Institutions.  The
              Host institution is California State University Los Angeles (Cal State LA). 
              The Research Mentor Institutes are BioDiscovery, Caltech, City of Hope National
              Medical Center, Protein Pathways, UCLA, University of Southern California,
              ViaLogy all of which are in the greater Los Angeles area.  The major focus of
              the institute is bioinformatics. 

The mission of the Southern
              California-Bioinformatics Summer Institute (SoCal-BSI) is to identify and
              educate college students for a successful career in bioinformatics. The
              SoCal-BSI will offer lectures, workshops, research training, and career
              counseling to selected college students in this fast growing field. Students
              with a background in molecular life sciences and/or computer sciences and who
              have completed their second year of college but have not entered their third
              year of graduate school are welcome to apply. Current professional
              bioinformaticists generally fall into one of two categories: those that use
              existing software programs to address molecular life science issues and those
              that develop new software programs. The SoCal-BSI will train students to be
              proficient at using existing bioinformatics software programs and at developing
              bioinformatics programs on their own. Students will be provided with
              internships to perform bioinformatics research at an academic research
              institute or at a bioinformatics company in the Southern California area. In
              this research environment they will apply the knowledge gained from the
              didactic training portion of the course. Students may apply for a second year
              at the SoCal-BSI in which they will receive more advanced training in
              bioinformatics. It is the overall goal of the SoCal-BSI to provide students
              with the motivation and intellectual tools to pursue a successful career in
              bioinformatics.

