Title       : Improving Accuracy and Availability of Productivity Methods for a Keystone
               Functional Group of Microbes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0234357

Award Number: 0234357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112185             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Y. Newell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Proposal: Improving Accuracy and Availability of Productivity
              Methods for a Keystone Functional Group of Microbes


Salt marsh plants
              exceedingly productive, as also are the ascomycetes (fungi) that are secondary
              microbial producers utilizing marsh plant organic matter as an energy source.
              The combination of marsh grass-marsh fungal high production is likely to be one
              of the basic factors underlying the high output of marine animals from salt
              marsh ecosystems. Because fungi in the standing-decaying marsh grass systems
              grow almost exclusively within the opaque solid dead plant mass, monitoring
              their productivity and biomass accumulation are technically difficult. This
              problem has been surmounted by development of biochemical analytical methods
              that make use of fungal-proxy molecules. The best of these has proven to be
              ergosterol, a cell-membrane component nearly unique to fungal cells. Ergosterol
              is an indicator molecule for living fungal mass and is Ergosterol relatively
              easily extracted from naturally decaying materials and measured by HPLC
              (high-performance liquid chromatography). Rates of fungal synthesis (= fungal
              productivity) can be measured as rates of incorporation of C14 into ergosterol,
              where the rate of increase in radioactivity in ergosterol parallels the rate at
              which the fungus is growing. It is herein proposed to seek two basic
              improvements to the fungal-productivity method.

The acetate-to-ergosterol
              method has only recently become available and there remains much to be done
              regarding refinement of the method. One very basic item that needs attention is
              the conversion factor for calculating the rate of fungal organic-mass
              production from the rate of acetate incorporation into ergosterol. There are
              values available for this factor, but they range widely, and no one of the five
              or six investigators currently working in the field of fungal productivity has
              concentrated experimental efforts on this specific problem. It is proposed
              herein to do so, testing a range of environmental conditions and a range of
              target fungal species. Such a method, using the well-known dansyl fluorophore,
              has appeared in the drug-testing literature that is directly analogous to the
              acetate-to-ergosterol method. It is proposed herein to test whether this method
              can be used to measure fungal productivity in naturally decaying marsh grass
              leaves. If it can be so used, the ability to measure fungal productivity in
              ecosystems would become available in a wider range of laboratories (as opposed
              to its current restriction to those licensed for handling of radioisotopes).
              

Broader Impacts: The research proposed would improve the utility of the
              methods now available for monitoring fungal production. This would provide
              better tools for investigators working at the edges of coastal oceans, marine
              sites that are currently in urgent need of attention due to their
              susceptibility to anthropogenic damage. More importantly, the new
              methodological information would also be of considerable value to forestry
              scientists, aquatic-ecosystem scientists, agricultural scientists, and
              industrial-fermentation scientists, because of the great importance of fungal
              activities in these fields.

