Title       : NIH-NSF BBSI: Bioengineering Summer Institute in Biomaterials Science and
               Engineering at Clemson University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0234082

Award Number: 0234082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $719946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martine LaBerge martine.laberge@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1758      Bioengineering & Bioinformatic
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1758,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.:  0234082
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Martine LaBerge
INSTITUTION
              NAME:  Clemson University
TITLE:  NIH-NSF BBSI in Biomaterials Science and
              Engineering

ABSTRACT

The Departments of Bioengineering, Physics and
              Astronomy, and Genetics and Biochemistry, and the School of Nursing at Clemson
              University in collaboration with the Department of Surgery at the Greenville
              Hospital System will host a NIH-NSF Bioengineering Summer Institute in
              Biomaterials Science and Engineering. This multidisciplinary Institute targets
              undergraduate students, who have completed their sophomore year, and graduate
              students, within the first two years of entry into their graduate education
              program, majoring in the life and applied sciences, nursing, and engineering.
              The major goal of this Institute is to offer a unique didactic experience where
              students will learn the basic principles necessary for the understanding of
              medical device development, clinical applications, and failure assessment, and
              will apply these principles in state-of-the-art research projects. Over a
              period of ten weeks, this unique interdisciplinary program will integrate
              education and research in the field of biomaterials and medical device design
              from concept to clinical applications, with a focus on cardiovascular and
              orthopaedic applications. A follow-up course will focus on the clinical aspects
              of biomaterials and medical devices, failure assessment of implants for
              cardiovascular and orthopaedic applications, tissue engineered substitutes and
              biotechnology, and biomaterials implantology.

Research projects will be
              conducted in the Laboratory of Vascular Research, the Cardiovascular Implant
              Research Laboratory, the Tissue Engineering Laboratory, the Laboratory of
              Polymeric Bearing Modeling, the Nanoscale Biointerfaces Laboratory, and the
              Laboratory of Biomedical Optical Imaging and Spectroscopy at Clemson
              University. A national search will be conducted to recruit participants in the
              Institute with a focus on cultural and academic diversity. Selection will be
              based on grade point average, a statement of career plans, research interests,
              and benefits to be realized by the participation in the Institute, as well as
              recommendation letters from two advisors or instructors. Students will be
              encouraged to participate in the Institute for up to two consecutive summer
              programs; acceptance for a second summer will be based on performance during
              the first summer and recommendation by the mentoring team. Following their
              first summer, students can apply for stipend support to participate in research
              projects at their home institutions during the academic year; funds will be
              available on a competitive basis. Funding will be awarded for collaborative
              research between a junior faculty in the Institute and the faculty advisor of
              the student at the home institution. 

