Title       : RCN: ARIDnet for the Americas: A Research Network for Testing New Paradigms for
               Global Desertification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0234186

Award Number: 0234186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $458947             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Reynolds james.f.reynolds@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1664,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              There is a great deal of disagreement about the causes and extent of
              desertification and about what part of
its impact on human well-being is
              manageable, and how.  A new synthetic paradigm for
desertification must be
              developed, one that is based on the simultaneous roles of the meteorological
              and
ecological dimensions of desertification (the biophysical factors) and the
              human dimensions of
desertification (the socio-economic factors). This
              proposal will establish ARIDnet to provide the
intellectual leadership for
              developing and testing this new paradigm. Planned activities: ARIDnet will
              (i)
conduct workshops to debate the Dahlem Desertification Paradigm (DDP)a
              product of the 2001
Dahlem Conference on desertificationfor critical
              evaluation and refinement; (ii) formulate working
groups to develop
              comparative case studies to test the DDP; (iii) conduct a quantitative
              synthesis of what
matters in desertification, when and where it matters, and
              why; (iv) recruit new researchers and
stakeholders into ARIDnet so a
              broad-based and useful approach to desertification problems can be
developed;
              and (v) maintain a website to support networking activity. Anticipated impact:
              Arguments
surrounding the topic of desertification create confusion in policy
              and management programs intended to
help many of the worlds poorest people.
              Hence, there is an urgent need for new, interdisciplinary
approaches for
              addressing this global problem. ARIDnet will provide the leadership to support
              on-going
international discussions and strengthen recruitment of researchers,
              including undergraduate students, to
study the principles, criteria, and
              policies related to global desertification, especially as outlined under
              the
UN Convention to Combat Desertification.
