Title       : Theoretical Framework of the Adaptive Evolution of Premating Isolation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2002  
File        : a0234849

Award Number: 0234849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria R. Servedio servedio@bio.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1649,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              There are still large gaps in our knowledge of how new species form.  One of the
              critical stages of speciation may often be the development of mating
              preferences that prevent interbreeding between members of diverging
              populations.  Servedio and Turelli are using a series of mathematical models to
              systematically examine the roles that a number of proposed factors may play in
              driving this preference evolution.  They will assess the importance of several
              mechanisms that lower the number of healthy and fertile offspring produced by
              pairs of hybridizing individuals.  Emerging species may also occupy divergent
              habitats in which different traits may contribute to survival.  The role of
              this phenomenon in driving speciation will also be assessed.

By
              concentrating on the consequences of contact between populations that are in
              the process of speciating, this project will help to elucidate what mechanisms
              produce and maintain biological diversity.  The exploration of these processes
              also has implications for the conservation of this diversity.  As human
              disturbance erodes barriers and alters species ranges, it is becoming
              increasingly essential to understand the conditions that promote species
              divergence versus extinction in the face of new contacts between closely
              related species.

