Title       : RUI: Elucidating the Mechanisms Governing Differential Expression of the Lat
               Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0234997

Award Number: 0234997
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382673             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Finco tfinco@agnesscott.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Agnes Scott College
	      
	      Decatur, GA  30030    404/373-2571

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The mammalian lat gene encodes an adaptor protein (LAT) that is expressed in
              only a limited number of cell types, including T cells, mast cells, natural
              killer cells, and platelets.  Tyrosine phosphorylation of the LAT protein
              following receptor engagement results in its interaction with a variety of
              downstream signaling molecules, an event essential for proper cellular
              function.  In addition to its cell-type restricted expression pattern, the
              level of lat mRNA is altered during the process by which T cells are activated
              to elicit an immune response.  Interestingly, it appears that certain signal
              transduction pathways in T cells stimulate lat gene expression whereas others
              have an inhibitory effect.  The objective of this research is to initiate a
              comprehensive study into the various molecular processes responsible for
              differential expression of the lat gene. This objective will be accomplished by
              the following means: (1) identification of the DNA elements comprising the
              proximal lat promoter; (2) characterization of the proteins that interact with
              these defined DNA elements and a determination of their functional relevance in
              controlling lat gene expression; (3) investigation into the role of the
              proximal lat promoter in the genes' cell-type specific expression and its
              differential expression during T cell activation; and (4) examination of the
              contribution of RNA stability and the role of distal control regions to the
              regulation of lat gene expression.  Studies of the regulation of the lat gene
              will not only provide important information concerning the molecular mechanisms
              controlling its expression but in addition will contribute to the establishment
              of general principles of gene regulation which will be applicable to other
              genes in a variety of living organisms.  This research will be conducted as a
              collaboration between the principal investigator and undergraduate students at
              Agnes Scott College, a four-year liberal arts institution for women.
