Title       : Comparative Microphysical Characteristics of Numerically Simulated Warm-Season
               Thunderstorms in Diverse Climatic Regimes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0234744

Award Number: 0234744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214932             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pao-Kuan Wang pao@windy.meteor.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Schlesinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigator will use an existing three-dimensional,
              time-dependent quasi-compressible research cloud model to study the bulk
              microphysical structure of warm?season deep convective storms for diverse
              geographical environments from tropical to mid?latitude.  This project will
              investigate the effects of the geographical environment on the following
              volume-integrated properties relating to the storm-scale water cycle: the total
              condensate mass, the production and depletion of the precipitation within this
              condensate pool, and especially the partitioning of the mass by hydrometeor
              types and of the microphysical transfer rates by the individual processes
              contributing to them. 
 
A recently completed project by the Principal
              Investigator has laid a foundation for the work by simulating and analyzing
              thunderstorms in the semi-arid High Plains of North America and the humid
              subtropics.  The Principal Investigators will extend their approach to
              substantially more regions in recognition that: (a) several contrasting North
              American thunderstorm climatologies have been documented for regions other than
              those two, (b) several other regions of the world from the Tropics through
              mid?latitudes are subject to especially frequent or intense convective storms,
              and (c) in low latitudes, deep convection has repeatedly been observed to be
              systematically weaker at sea than over land, with significantly different
              microphysical makeup. 

The researchers will investigate up to approximately
              ten locations, subject to availability of data suitably representative of
              pre-storm environmental conditions for the control experiments. Thunderstorm
              environments under consideration include the summer monsoon of North America's
              subtropical desert southwest, tropical and subtropical Asia and Western Europe.
               Comparison of model results among the control experiments for different
              regions will emphasize the volume-integrated bulk microphysical properties
              noted above, and especially the time-averaged percentage breakdowns of their
              partitioning during the mature phase of a storm. 
 
The research, if
              successful, will be significant to the advancement of knowledge in mesoscale
              atmospheric dynamics and will increase fundamental understanding of the nature
              of convective activity under various climatic regimes.

