Title       : Phylogeny of the Metastrongyloid Nematodes: Inferring Patterns of Infection Site
               and Life Cycle Evolution Among 'Lungworms'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0234520

Award Number: 0234520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramon A. Carreno racarreno@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Nadler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio Wesleyan University
	      
	      Delaware, OH  43015    614/369-4431

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Ramon Carreno of Ohio Wesleyan University and
              Dr. Steven Nadler at the University of California, Davis to to study the
              phylogeny of the Metastrongyloid Nematodes. Nematode parasites occurring in the
              respiratory tracts of mammals and known collectively as "lungworms" include
              many species that can be highly pathogenic to their hosts.  These nematodes
              show a wide range of variation in morphological features and life history
              strategies, and some have established infection sites in their mammalian hosts
              that are outside of the respiratory tract.  The main objective of this research
              is to use DNA sequence data to reconstruct the genealogical (phylogenetic)
              relationships of lungworms in the nematode superfamily Metastrongyloidea, and
              to use this genealogy to understand the history of changes in life cycles,
              morphology, and infection site specificity among members of this group. 
              Results from DNA sequence data will be complemented by an independent
              genealogical analysis of morphological features from museum and field-collected
              specimens.  In addition to understanding patterns of change in life cycles and
              tissue/organ specificity, the origins of a perplexing group, lungworms
              parasitizing marine mammals, will also be determined from phylogenetic
              analyses.  For example, the origin of a group of lungworms that are found
              almost exclusively in toothed whales has been widely disputed.  Likewise, some
              species that parasitize seals and sea lions have striking morphological
              similarities to those infecting terrestrial carnivores.  Although many
              different views on the evolutionary history of the Metastrongyloidea have been
              proposed during the last 50 years, there have been no attempts to estimate
              their phylogeny using modern analytical methods.  This research will provide a
              foundation of knowledge for understanding patterns of evolution among these
              nematode parasites, and will provide an historical framework for the taxonomy
              of this superfamily.  This investigation will include scientific training
              opportunities in parasitology and molecular biology for undergraduate and
              graduate students , and research outcomes will lead to increased understanding
              of the biology of parasitism in nematodes.     


