Title       : RCN: Fiber Diffraction From Biological Polymers and Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0234001

Award Number: 0234001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $506045             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald Stubbs gerald.stubbs@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1166,1664,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project will create a network to coordinate development of biological fiber
              diffraction methods, particularly computational methods. Many biological
              molecular assemblies are long helical structures, and have a natural tendency
              to form fibers.  Structural studies of these fibers are difficult; conventional
              macromolecular crystallography is not usually possible.  Fiber diffraction,
              however, is a powerful technique for determining the structural details of such
              assemblies. Activities will include development and integration of software for
              biological fiber diffraction, and exchange of information about fiber
              diffraction methods through retreats, workshops, and a public web site.
              Software applications will be adapted to various platforms, integrated with the
              suite of programs available through the British Collaborative Computational
              Project for Fibre Diffraction (CCP13), and made available to the scientific
              community. New software will be developed where existing software is
              inadequate. The network software will be complementary to CCP13 software;
              together, they will eventually cover all aspects of biological fiber
              diffraction. The network will integrate fiber diffraction groups in the USA
              with each other and with the world fiber diffraction community, particularly
              with CCP13. This will be done through workshops organized by the core
              participants, including workshops at the BioCAT facility at Argonne National
              Laboratory, and through partial sponsorship of sessions organized by the fiber
              diffraction Special Interest Group of the American Crystallographic
              Association.

Broader impact will be through involvement of undergraduates,
              graduate students and others in the workshops and the research, and through
              enhancement of infrastructure for research and education.


