Title       : Field Application Effects in Rapid Sintering of Activated Powders by a
               Manufacture Friendly Consolidation Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9532072

Award Number: 9532072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanna R. Groza jrgroza@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kazuo Yamazaki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Subhash H. Risbud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1771,9146,9162,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9532072    Groza    In the prior NSF funded research, the investigators have
              demonstrated that metals and ceramics powders can be rapidly consolidated to
              very high density by applying electric fields as well as pressure in a
              specified manner.  The process is termed  "Plasma Activated Sintering."  The
              underlying hypothesis is that electric discharge creates plasma between
              particles causing local changes on the surface which facilitates the rapid
              sintering in the subsequent resistant heating under pressure.  However, the
              exact mechanism has not been verified.  In the current research, the
              investigators will use fiber optics to see whether there is indeed plasma
              between particles.  The role of electric field will be studied since the
              process appears to work on both highly conductive metals (nickel) as well as
              less conductive ceramics (aluminum oxide).  While prior work has suggested
              atomic level interfacial bonding with clean oxide free grain boundaries in
              aluminum nitride, what is going on at the particle surface has not yet been
              understood. The research will also include developing and verifying sintering
              models under field assisted consolidation.  The resultant microstructures will
              be correlated to the process to develop controls needed to make useful parts
              from powder materials.    Powder consolidation is central to the manufacture of
              several classes of  advanced structural ceramics as well as many powder metal
              parts used in the industry.  Starting from very fine powders is the desired
              approach to maximize the material properties. However, in processing  fine
              powders, elimination of pores between particles is very difficult without
              losing  the intrinsic advantage of the starting fine particle size.  Since
              pores weaken the parts, any process such as the one described here which can
              rapidly consolidate the powders offers a new manufacturing avenue.  This
              research will lay the foundation for the necessary large scale equipment needed
              for the process to be scaled up from the  research stage to deve lopment and 
              final commercialization.  Several industrial powder processing manufactures
              have shown interest in this novel process.
