Title       : Acquisition and Use of 222Rn Measurements in Development and Validation of a
               Global Transport Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9532006

Award Number: 9532006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185268             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Kritz mkritz@asrc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1307,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract ATM-9532006  Kritz, Mark A., State University of New York-Albany 
              Title: Acquisition and Use of 222Rn Measurements in the Development  and
              Validation of a Global Transport Model    The primary objective of this program
              is to obtain and use a set of  free tropospheric radon (222Rn) measurements in
              the development and  validation of an off-line global 3-D model under
              development at the  Climate and Global Dynamics Group at the National Center
              for  Atmospheric Research.  To this end the PI will work interactively  with
              members of the NCAR group on questions of transport  parameterization and
              sub-grid scale processes, flight planning and  sampling strategy, and the
              application of the results.  There are  also two secondary objectives: First in
              cooperation with Dr. Pieter  Tans (NOAA/CMDL) Boulder) to acquire simultaneous
              CO, CO2, CH4  Measurements in the course of those flights, for use in model 
              validation and to further our understanding of the global carbon  budget. 
              Second, by concentrating the flights in one season, to  acquire a data set
              which will be useful in the development and  validation of other regional and
              global models as well, such as 3-D  GCM-based climate and chemical transport
              models.    Measurements will be made aboard a NASA Lear 24 jet aircraft flying 
              in the central and western United States, using a fast sampling  system which
              the PI has flown aboard NASA C-141 and C-130 aircraft.   The flight series will
              consist of five round trip flights between  Moffett Field, CA and Minneapolis,
              MN (with a refueling stop in  Colorado) and five local (offshore) flights out
              of Moffett Field,  to be flown over a five week period in the summer of 1996. 
              The  sampling strategy for both the outbound and return flight will be 
              similar, with vertical profiles obtained over specified locations  in Colorado
              and Minnesota, and upper level observations made in the  course of the flight
              legs between Moffett, Colorado and Minnesota  locations.  Present plans call
              for the outbound legs to be fl own on  Tuesdays of the five successive weeks,
              and the returns on Thursday  or Friday; however there is enough flexibility in
              the timing of the  outbound and return legs to avoid possible problems due to 
              aliasing, or recurrent synoptic situations.  Vertical profiles in  the vicinity
              of Moffett, and 200 miles offshore will be acquired on  each of the offshore
              flights, to investigate modeling artifacts  associated with boundary layer
              parameterization and continental  edge effects.    The PI will work with NCAR
              and other interested modeling groups in  the application of the radon data, and
              with NOAA and others on the  application of the trace constituent data set. 
              The radon results  will be archived and made available via anonymous ftp and
              "3.5  floppy discs.    This research is important because it will provide
              valuable  observations that are needed to test and evaluate atmospheric 
              general circulation models that are being developed to include  chemistry
              processes.
