Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Classical Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9532078

Award Number: 9532078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Marshall marshall@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-9532087  PI: Marshall    Under this grant, Marshall will
              investigate problems in three areas of analytic function theory.  A new
              approach to constructing good metrics for lower bounds for extremal distance
              will be applied to the Angular Derivative Problem of Ahlfors  1930 .  Secondly,
              he will investigate the accuracy of a promising new technique for the numerical
              computation of conformal maps. Thirdly, he will attempt to improve  
              constructions of interpolating functions for the Dirichlet space and its
              multipliers, using more natural linear combinations of reproducing kernels.    
              Conformal mapping has been used as a tool in science and engineering for many
              years. One way conformal maps are used is to transform a problem on a
              complicated region in the complex plane to a related problem on a "standard"
              region, such as a disk or half-plane, where known techniques can be used.  The
              solution on the standard region is then transformed by the inverse of the
              conformal map to a solution of the original problem on the original region.
              Classically, this method was used for problems related to Laplace's equation. 
              For example, temperature at equilibrium on a thin metallic plate satisfies
              Laplace's equation. There have been numerous non-classical applications of
              conformal maps developed in the last twenty five years, many of which are not
              governed by Laplace's equation. There are applications in electro-magnetics,
              vibrating membranes and acoustics, transverse vibrations and buckling of
              plates, elasticity, heat transfer, and fluid flow for example.  While early
              applications used explicit analytic representations for conformal maps, modern
              uses require conformal maps of more complicated regions which cannot be
              represented easily in terms of elementary functions. One must therefore resort
              to  numerical approximations to the desired conformal maps.  Marshall will
              investigate the accuracy of a new technique which rapidly computes conformal
              maps and their inverses.  This technique is fast  enough that it can be used
              for experimentation on a typical workstation. The angular derivative problem he
              will  investigate is about geometrical conditions on the boundary of a region
              that guarantee that certain conformal maps (defined inside the region) extend
              to be conformal at a point on the boundary.  Dirichlet functions on the disk
              are not conformal, but the image of the disk has finite area (counting
              overlaps). They arise from potentials with bounded total energy. The
              interpolation problems Marshall will study are closely related to constructing
              a temperature distribution on a thin metal plate with preassigned values at
              certain points on the plate, and with smallest possible total energy.
