Title       : Wavelets and Multi-resolution Analysis in Models for Layout Design of Mechanical
               Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9532066

Award Number: 9532066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alejandro R. Diaz diaz@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
               This award provides support to study the use of wavelet-based, computer aided
              methods to design mechanical components.  The research seeks alternatives to
              the standard, finite-element based modeling practice that are simpler to use
              and do not sacrifice accuracy or mathematical rigor.  Methods to be
              investigated are intended to be used at the conceptual design stage.  They will
              enhance the design process by relieving much of the burden associated with the
              detailed modeling of component geometries that is typical in standard
              finite-element based methodologies.  The research also focuses on the use of
              wavelet-based approaches to the solution of the problem of optimization of the
              layout of material to enhance structural performance.   If successful, this
              investigation will provide the foundation for new computer-aided tools for
              design of mechanical components with a variety of applications, typically in
              automotive and aerospace industries.  These new tools will be simpler to use
              and more accessible than those that are currently available to designers in
              standard practice.  They also will address the problem of design of structural
              components at a stage where improvements can have most impact on cost or
              overall performance.  The result should be enhanced productivity by putting
              better, more effective tools in the hands of a broader audience.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
