Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Variational Analysis in L-Infinity".
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9532030

Award Number: 9532030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmanuel N. Barron enb@math.luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wenxiong Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9532030  Barron, Jensen  and Liu        Calculus of variations problems in which
              the performance functional is the  supremum of the admissible functions and
              their derivatives are the focus of this project.  The specific projects under
              consideration include the following: (1) determination of the  function from
              the class of Lipschitz functions with prescribed Lipschitz constant that is 
              closest to a given function in the sup norm; (2) determination of the
              relaxation of  multidimensional sup norm functionals; (3) finding the limit, if
              it exists in any sense, of  homogenized functionals in the sup norm; (4)
              extending the theory of Young measures  to sup norm functionals; (5)
              determination of the associated Euler-Aronsson conditions  for variational
              problems in L-infinity subject to constraints; (6) characterizing the 
              Lavrentiev phenomenon in L-infinity; (7) analysis of the problem of shape
              optimization  when the cost involves the sup norm; (8) extending the theory of
              robust and H-infinity  control to maximum cost functionals. Auxiliary problems
              in optimal control, differential  games, and Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman theory are
              also part of this investigation.        Many problems in engineering,
              economics, medicine, and in other fields require  the minimization of some
              performance criterion subject to various constraints on the  design variables. 
              In order to simplify the analysis, the most appropriate performance  criterion
              for a particular application is often replaced by another that is more amenable
               to mathematical analysis but is suboptimal for the problem under
              consideration.  For  example, in the design of the shape of a structural
              member, the designer may be  primarily interested in minimizing the largest
              stresses in the member, but in fact may  select design parameters based on
              minimizing the average of such stresses.  Similarly,  In designing a liftoff
              plan for a space vehicle, it may be the maximum acceleration and  its attendant
              forces on the vehicle that should be minimized, not the aver age  acceleration
              and forces.  In drug or radiation therapy it is the maximum level of the  tumor
              load that the therapy is attempting to minimize, not the average tumor load. 
              In  general, replacing a performance criterion based on an average of some
              density with  one based on the maximum of that density enormously complicates
              the analysis of the  problem.  This project has the goal of providing the
              tools, methodology, and theory that  will allow the direct treatment of such
              problems.  Consequences of the research will be  improved performance in many
              important applications areas such as those described  above.  ***
