Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Diophantine Approximations of Algebraic Points
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1997  
File        : a9532018

Award Number: 9532018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138885             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Vojta vojta@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project deals with diophantine approximation and value  distribution theory
              of holomorphic functions. Work by P. Vojta,  C. Osgood, and others has shown
              that these two fields are in fact  connected by a formal analogy. This
              observation has led to new  conjectures, shorter proofs of old theorems, and
              proofs of new  theorems. This project will continue this trend, primarily 
              working in the field of diophantine approximation. Results whose  proofs may be
              simplified include finiteness theorems for rational  points on abelian
              varieties and Faltings' theorem on the  finiteness of principally polarized
              abelian varieties over a  given field with finite reduction. New results which
              may be  proved include "moving targets" type results; i.e., diophantine 
              approximation statements which involve a slowly varying family of  equations. A
              distant goal is the "abc conjecture." Technical  improvements in proofs using
              Thue's method will also be pursued.   This research falls into the general
              mathematical field of Number  Theory.  Number theory has its historical roots
              in the study of  the whole numbers,  addressing such questions as those dealing
               with the divisibility of one  whole number by another. It is  among the oldest
              branches of mathematics and  was pursued for  many centuries for purely
              aesthetic reasons. However, within  the  last half century it has become an
              indispensable tool in diverse   applications in areas such as data transmission
              and processing,  and  communication systems.
