Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis Method in Certain Evolution Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1996     
File        : a9532033

Award Number: 9532033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73098              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Yang pyang@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wensheng Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract   Yang  9532033      The proposed will develop harmonic analysis
              methods to solve   a number of nonlinear evolution equations including the
              nonlinear   Schrodinger equation, the nonlinear wave equation, the modified  
              Korteweg-de Vries equation, the Zakharov systems and a fourth order   elliptic
              equation arising in conformal geometry. In the analysis of   the relevant
              integral operators, harmonic analysis estimates will  be used to analyze the
              oscillatory kernels. The known body of results   concerning these equation deal
              mainly with the equation in the whole   space.  New ideas and techniques will
              be needed to handle the problem   on domains with boundary. The fourth order
              equation will require  an understanding of the Sobolev inequalities for higher
              order derivatives.   In particular, a search for analogue of the positive mass
              theorem  is required.       All of the evolution equations mentioned above
              represent various  models in materials science and fluid mechanics. For
              example, the   collective response of a nearly collisionless plasma when the
              electron   temperature is much greater than the ion temperature is dominated by
                electron plasma waves (Langmuir waves) and ion acoustic waves. Under  
              appropriate conditions (energy density of the waves small compared to  
              particle thermal energy densities, and characteristic scales large   compared
              to a Debye length), Zakharov's model is a useful description   of the nonlinear
              coupling of these collective models. Schrodinger   equation can be understood
              as a limit case of Zakharov's model and can   also be used to describe in
              certain regimes the Langmuir waves in a   plasma, i.e., the time evolution of
              the envelope of the propagating   electric field. Our main project is to
              analyze the solutions of the   equations by using the tools of harmonic
              analysis. For example, we want   to understand the development of singularity
              at certain time, which   represents, in the Schrodinger models, how the
              Langmuir waves collapse.   This typical proble m is understood when the models
              are on the whole   physical space. Part of our work is to study the situation
              when the   models are confined in a bounded region in the physical space. The  
              other project we are working on is to study a non-linear problem  in geometry.
              Here we are looking for a conserved quantity analogous to   the total mass of a
              gravitational systems which will play an important   role to the solvability of
              the equation.
