Title       : Analytical Investigation of the Wave-Induced Responses of Very Large Floating
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9532037

Award Number: 9532037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295395             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Ronald Riggs riggs@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Cengiz Ertekin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9532037  Riggs  The term very large floating structure (VLFS) is often used  to
              describe floating structures which are at lease an order  of magnitude larger
              than existing floating structures.  Implicit in the definition of VLFS is that
              the wave-induced  motions of these structures will be significantly affected, 
              if not dominated, by the flexible, deformational motion of  the structure. 
              This is in contrast to traditional floating  structures (such as a ship), the
              design and analysis of  which are usually based on the hydrodynamics of a rigid
               body.  Potential applications of VLFS technology include  offshore waste
              treatment plants, electrical power plants,  water desalination plants,
              mariculture platforms,  oceanographic research facilities, airports, and
              military  bases.  Unfortunately, the field data and experience upon  which to
              base the design of a VLFS is limited to much  smaller structures.    It is the
              objective of this project to develop further the  analysis capabilities and the
              fundamental understanding of  the response of VLFSs to the ocean environment. 
              Because of  their size and complexity, efficient methods and simplified  models
              are required for their design and analysis.  The work  proposed herein builds
              on the existing technology base for  the analysis of large floating structures.
               Such work is  required prior to the construction of any VLFS, and hence  the
              results will represent a significant advancement in the  state-of-the-art in
              offshore floating structure technology.  This research program proposed to:  1)
              improve existing  linear analysis methods; 2) establish simplified analysis 
              models to be used for design; and 3) develop a nonlinear  analysis methodology
              to determine the response to extreme  events.  ***
