Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Modeling of Material Processing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9532021

Award Number: 9532021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59714              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald W. Young gwyoung@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9532021  Young    The proposed project will examine the continuous casting of
              steel, the   horizontal Ohno continuous casting of pure and cored fibers, and
              the   photocopolymerization of multiple monomer systems into optical fibers.   
              The general goals of the models are to determine the process sensitivity to  
              the operating conditions, describe the scientific phenomena of heat, solute,  
              and momentum transport within the system, and to elucidate the coupled  
              dynamics of these transport mechanisms.  A combination of asymptotic  
              techniques coupled with practical computational methods will be used to  
              simulate these systems.  Primary emphasis will be placed upon the   development
              of approximate analytical solutions to the systems of equations   governing
              these processing techniques.  In instances where this is not   practical, an
              asymptotic approach will be used to reduce the governing set   of equations to
              a simpler set of evolution equations.  Numerical simulation   of these
              equations will be conducted.    The proposed project will examine mathematical
              models of several material   and manufacturing processes.  In particular, the
              continuous casting of steel,   the horizontal Ohno continuous casting of pure
              and cored fibers, and the   photocopolymerization of multiple monomer systems
              into optical fibers will   be investigated.  The proposed solution
              methodologies enable one to   represent the general trends that material and
              system parameters have on the   system performance.  This approach also allows
              one to investigate a variety   of models in response to changing technologies,
              and can be modified to new   areas of application.  Further, the design of
              real-time controllers, real-time   optimization methods for complex,
              multi-stage, manufacturing processes,   and the desire for quick evaluation of
              a large number of alternative process   designs, require models which capture
              system trends and are not   computationally intensive.
