Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Representation Theoretical Methods in the Theory of
               Special Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9532049

Award Number: 9532049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106548             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adriano M. Garsia garsia@schur.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 9532049 Garsia  This award supports an investigation that straddles the
              boundary between Representation Theory and the Theory of Special Functions. The
              bridge between Representation Theory and Special Functions is provided by the
              Theory of Symmetric Functions. In 1988,  Macdonald introduced a symmetric
              function basis containing two free parameters q and t. This basis promises to
              be a central element in the connnection between Representation Theory and the
              Theory of Special Functions. The investigation is a continuation of a project
              that the investigator and his collaborators have pursued for more than four
              years. The main object is to understand the Representation Theoretical and
              Special Function Theoretical properties of this new basis. Earlier joint work
              with M. Haiman has lead to the construction of some natural bigraded modules 
              whose bivariate Frobenius characteristic appear to be very  closely related to
              Macdonald polynomials. An extensive computer calculation carried out by the
              investigator and his collaborators produced a variety of conjectures. Some of
              these conjectures have been proved in full generality; others only in special
              cases. The central one, the n-factorial conjecture, has lead to  mathematical
              problems of the first magnitude in various areas of Mathematics that range from
              Combinatorics to Algebraic Geometry. The primary object of this investigation
              is to explore the various Representation Theoretical, Special Function
              Theoretical, and Combinatorial implications of the recent  discoveries with a
              view to resolving some of the open Garsia- Haiman and Macdonald conjectures.  
              This research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of  the goals of
              Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of  studying how discrete
              collections of objects can be arranged.  The behavior of discrete systems is
              extremely important to  modern communications. For example, the design of large
              networks, such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of 
              algorithms in computer science  deal with discrete sets of  objects, and this
              makes use of combinatorial research.
