Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Chromosome Geometry and Chromosome Aberrations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9532055

Award Number: 9532055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rainer K. Sachs sachs@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sachs  9532055       The investigator models chromosome aberrations in live 
              mammalian cells, emphasizing implications for large-scale  chromosome geometry
              and for the biology of ionizing radiation  damage.  He analyzes formation of
              chromosome aberrations after  induction of DNA double strand breaks by
              radiation during the  interphase part of the cell cycle, using probabilistic
              models for  DNA geometry, motion, and reactions at the macromolecular level. 
              For example, one area concerns the combinatorics and kinetics of  illegitimate
              recombinations, involving the exchange of fragments  between several different
              chromosomes.  Polymer models are used  for large-scale chromosome structure and
              motion.  Statistical  questions arise when very detailed experimental
              information about  specific individual chromosomes is made available by modern 
              fluorescent in situ hybridization techniques; these he addresses  by extending
              already developed Monte-Carlo simulations.  The  study involves developing
              computer algorithms, explicitly solving  stochastic process models, and
              collaborating with experimental  groups.       Ionizing radiation damage to
              chromosomes is being studied  mathematically.  When ionizing radiation hits
              cells, as occurs for  example in tumor radiotherapy or radiation accidents, one
              gets  breakage and large-scale reshuffling of DNA molecules.  The  resulting
              chromosome aberrations have been implicated as symptoms  or causes of most
              major radiobiological effects.  They are  especially important in biodosimetry,
              the estimation of past  exposure to radiation dose by looking at residual
              cellular  damage.  They are also a window on fundamental biology because  they
              are influenced by, and symptomatic of, chromosome geometry  and motion.  Recent
              developments, whereby specific human  chromosomes can be "painted" different
              colors, have dramatically  increased the amount of information obtained from
              aberration  studies.  A very rich and colorful variety of aberrations can now 
              be observed.  Trying to und erstand the number and kind of  reshufflings one
              sees leads to mathematically nontrivial  problems, amenable to computer
              simulations or "pen and paper"  calculations.  The simulations and calculations
              are being carried  out under the grant.  The results allow systematic
              comparisons of  cellular radiation damage effects observed by different 
              laboratories using different chromosome painting schemes.  In  addition,
              mechanistic modeling of how chromosome aberrations  evolve in time is helping
              to attack the main mystery of  radiobiology: how to extrapolate from the larger
              doses needed for  statistically significant experimental results to the much 
              smaller doses relevant to risk estimates for large human  populations subjected
              to radiation from environmental or man-made  sources.
