Title       : SBIR Phase I: Low Cost, High Power Gradient Cryo-Amplifiers for Magnetic
               Resonance Imaging (MRI)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9796142

Award Number: 9796142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 3,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Otward Mueller LTEMueller@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Low Temperature
	      96 Sweet Road
	      Ballston Lake, NY  12019    518/399-6516

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              ***  96-61055  Mueller     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project proposes an investigation of the new High-Speed CryoPower  concept for
              magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) power systems, especially their gradient/radio
              frequency (RF) amplifiers.  It introduces herewith a "new technology to reduce
              the cost of health care without reducing quality of care" by decreasing the
              equipment size, facilities and operating costs as well as the space
              requirements of this relatively new imaging modality.  By cryogenically cooling
              the semiconductor devices used and combining them eventually with high
              temperature superconductors (HTS), substantial enhancements in performance can
              be expected.  Superconductivity and low temperature superconducting magnets
              enabled Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) thus making possible one of the most
              successful medical diagnostic tools.  But unique high-speed cryogenic power
              electronics can do even more for the world-wide Public Health Service by
              drastically reducing the cost, size, weight and air-conditioning requirements
              of key and expensive power electronic components of an MRI system.  In Phase I,
              a cryogenic miniature switchmode pulse-width modulation (PWM) gradient
              amplifier (300-600 V, 100-400 A) of high-efficiency will be constructed for a
              technical/economic assessment.  A special and key feature will be high-speed
              PWM switching (200-500 kHz).  MRI systems are uniquely suited for the first
              implementation of this new concept because (1) the cryogenics is already
              available, (2) the duty cycles are low, and (3) more gradient power is
              desirable in general and for angiography and fast-scan MRI in particular.   The
              project has potential for commercial applications in various areas of power
              electronics.  The new concept for Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) systems will
              promote exports.  Potential commercial applications include cost- and
              size-reduced MRI systems providing improved performance for lower-cost health
              care, mass screening, etc., especially in rural area s.  ***
