Title       : SBIR Phase II: Q-Switched Operation of Microchip Laser Composite Cavities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1997     
File        : a9796148

Award Number: 9796148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89036              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Keszenheimer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Focused Manufacturing
	      174 Littleton Road
	      Westford, MA  01886    508/692-1883

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9300486  Keszenheimer    Q-switching a laser is a practical means of producing
              short, high intensity optical pulses.  For some applications the physical size
              and robustness of the laser is an important consideration, and in these cases
              Q-switched, composite-cavity, microchip lasers are highly desirable.   
              Conventional laser technology uses discrete optical components which are
              subject to misalignment due to thermal cycling or vibration.  Composite-cavity
              microchip laser technology eliminates the superfluous space present in
              conventional lasers allowing the smallest  possible package size for the laser.
                 Q-switched lasers can be designed independently to optimize peak power,
              pulse energy, power efficiency, or pulse width.  The primary goal of this
              research is to develop composite-cavity microchip lasers from a variety of
              laser materials which optimize these parameters.    This is a SBIR Phase II
              project that provides data on performance tradeoffs that will enable Q-switched
              microchip lasers to be designed for many applications.  Such applications of
              Q-switched composite-cavity microchip lasers include:  materials processing
              (welding, soldering, ablation, etc.), laser range finding (topographic mapping,
              collision avoidance, optical time domain reflectivity, laser radar), and
              generation of visible radiation via frequency conversion ,e.g., for optical
              recording.  ***
