Title       : EPWG: Teacher Education Mentor Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1998 
File        : a9796265

Award Number: 9796265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $677925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo Sanders jsanders@wri-edu.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington Research Inst
	      150 Nickerson Street
	      Seattle, WA  98109    206/285-9317

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9555665  Sanders  The Teacher Education Equity Project is a collaboration of 61 
              teacher educators at 38  colleges and universities in 26 states working
              together to remedy  the lack of attention  to gender equity in the preparation
              of future mathematics, science  and technology  teachers. Each of seven major
              teacher preparation universities will  form a team  consisting of the education
              dean or department chair and  professors, and field  placement school
              principals and teachers. The teams will look at  the need for gender  equity
              instruction in their programs and develop action plans to  improve their 
              programs.  Professors who are knowledgeable about mathematics,  science and/or 
              technology education as well as gender equity will act as mentors  to the
              teams.  Teams will attend a seminar about institutional change to extend  their
              knowledge and  enable them to have gender equity impact on entire schools, 
              departments of  education, and field placement schools with which they work. An
               electronic list will  permit project participants to exchange innovative ideas
              and  teaching practices.  Six  national professional associations will
              collaborate with the  mentors by providing them  with opportunities and venues
              to work with additional teacher  education programs  toward the end of the
              project and in the future.    Over 7,000 student teachers will learn about
              equity in mathematics,  science, and  technology teaching in new courses
              developed by university teams.   Advisors from  universities that have changed
              their teacher training courses will  help others modify  and improve the way
              they teach the teachers.  The benefit will  include an improved  classroom
              climate for all children and an increase in the number of  girls in science and
               upper level math courses.  ***
