Title       : Molecular Mechanisms of Toothlessness in Aves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1998   
File        : a9796321

Award Number: 9796321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239337             (Estimated)
Investigator: YiPing Chen ychen@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                  Chen  9603081    Tooth development provides an excellent model for studying
              epithelial-mesenchymal tissue interactions leading to organogenesis during
              vertebrate development. While teeth have been missing from Aves for nearly 100
              million years, in the avian oral cavity there does exist a residual structure
              resembling the tooth rudiment at the lamina stage in reptiles and mammals. This
              arrest of tooth development in Aves is believed to be due to the failed
              interactions between the presumptive dental epithelium and mesenchyme. A
              similar phenotype is observed in the mouse Msxl and Msx2 double mutants in
              which tooth development is also arrested at the lamina stage. To date there is
              no information available on the arrest of tooth development and its underlying
              molecular mechanisms in Aves. This proposal is aimed at defining the failure of
              epithelial-mesenchymal interactions and to determine the molecular mechanisms
              underlying the arrest of avian tooth development, with a goal of generating an
              avian tooth bud in vitro and in viva. In situ hybridization, in vitro tissue
              recombination, in vitro organ culture will be employed to examine the
              expression of important genes, to localize the odontogenic defect to the tissue
              compartment in the chick presumptive tooth germ, and to verify the conservation
              of signaling pathways in the dental mesenchyme between mouse and chick. A
              possible conservation of signaling pathways in the formation of tooth and limb
              will be also verified by replacing chick limb AER with mouse dental epithelium
              and vice versa. Chick CAM culture and mouse intraocular graft techniques will
              be used to enhance chick tooth germ development. Effort will also be made to
              generate a chick tooth germ by restoring gene expression in the chick
              presumptive tooth germ in vitro and in viva with retroviral infection. The
              long-term goal of this study is to substantiate our understanding of the
              molecular basis of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during organogenesis.
