Title       : Strengthening of Steel Girder Bridges w/ Carbon Composites Laminates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1997     
File        : a9796077

Award Number: 9796077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137903             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cornelia E. Demers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9521652  Demers  This project will demonstrate experimentally and  analytically
              the feasibility of strengthening and  retrofitting steel girders in composite
              steel concrete  bridges with epoxy bonded carbon fiber laminates.  To  upgrade
              the flexural capacity, carbon fiber plates or tapes  are epoxy bonded to the
              girder tension flange. For  retrofitting, this material is epoxy bonded to the
              girder  tension flange which may contain pre-existing fatigue  cracks.  Three
              beams will be tested under static loading to  determine the flexural strength
              of a composite section of  concrete deck, steel girder, carbon fiber tape, and
              epoxy.  This will investigate:  Fatigue strength in the positive  moment region
              with pre-existing fatigue cracks; fatigue  strength as a function of applied
              stress range;  classification of fatigue strength according to the AASHTO's 
              Standard Categories; and the ability of retrofit to arrest  fatigue crack
              growth.    This project is a joint effort between the University of  Arizona
              and the Worcester Polytechnic Institute.  All full-  scale tests will be
              conducted at the University of Arizona.  The coupon tests will be performed at
              the Worcester  Polytechnic Institute.  The analysis of results and  development
              of guidelines and methodology for application of  this technique will be
              performed by the investigators at  both institutions.  ***
