Title       : Enhancement of Undergraduate Field and Laboratory Research Experiences In Lake
               and Wetland Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9796242

Award Number: 9796242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Ridky                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2991               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Young rsyoung@wcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               This project supports an undergraduate research initiative in Lake and Wetland
              Studies within the Geology Department. New equipment enhances undergraduate
              field and laboratory research experiences in two new courses (Coastal and
              Wetland Geology, Modern Sediments) and several existing courses. The project
              provides a vibracoring rig, a rapid grain size analysis system (settling tube),
              a video core logging system, and two water level float recorders. This
              equipment is being used to introduce focused Lake Champlain Basin research
              problems into the undergraduate curriculum at all levels.   For example, the
              Modern Sediments course is aimed at advanced undergraduates and should prove to
              be a springboard to senior research for many of them. This course has the
              format of a lab seminar course. The course meets once a week for 3 hours.
              Initial sessions focus on background reading and discussion directed toward the
              solving of a particular research problem. The remainder of the course is
              entirely made up of stating the problem and solving it through fieldwork and
              laboratory analysis with the class working together as a whole. Students
              collect cores and water-level data, perform grain size analysis, video-log the
              cores, and describe the Holocene evolution of lakeshore wetlands and the
              Champlain Basin. The ultimate goal of the course is to produce original
              scientific research worthy of presentation at a professional meeting.
              Introductory level courses, such as Oceanography, can benefit as well; the
              class participates in the taking of a sediment core and some very basic facies
              analysis to illustrate concepts of environmental change and basic stratigraphy,
              providing some insight into how scientists have deciphered the evolution of the
              ocean basins and large lakes such as Lake Champlain.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
