Title       : The Very Fast Dynamics of Protein Unfolding/Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1997     
File        : a9796260

Award Number: 9796260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Callender   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva U Albert Einstein
	      500 West 185th Street
	      Bronx, NY  104587809    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9417892  Callender  Over the past year or so, a laser-induced temperature jump 
              apparatus (T-jump) was developed which can rapidly, within 100 ps  or even
              faster, raise the temperature of a protein solution 30  C  or more.  Since
              proteins unfold usually over a temperature range  smaller than this, it is now
              possible to study the dynamics of  protein unfolding with a resolution some 107
              times faster than  previously possible .  We will study the unfolding/folding
              dynamics  of small peptide systems and proteins using this new laser induced  
              T-jump apparatus to initiate the process and time-resolved infrared 
              spectroscopy to follow the time course of these reactions.  In  addition,
              static IR and very sensitive novel Raman difference  spectroscopies will be
              employed to characterize the structures of  the peptide and protein systems and
              their changes upon reversible  temperature induced unfolding/folding. 
              Vibrational measurements as  structure-specific probes of proteins and peptides
              are well  established and, moreover, can follow the kinetics of chemical 
              dynamics down to femtoseconds.  For our first measurements, we will  study the
              unfolding steps of ribonuclease A in depth.  RNase A is  a small monomeric
              enzyme of 124 residues, consisting of an N-  terminal alpha-helix (the
              S-peptide region) and two shorter helices  packed against a central
              antiparallel  -sheet.  The S-peptide may  be cleaved and isolated from and
              regenerated with the rest of the  protein.  In solution, the S-peptide forms
              considerable helical  structure.  Since it is possible to selectively
              isotopically label  individual atoms of peptides during peptide synthesis using
              labeled  peptides, it is feasible to 'tag' the peptide and so obtain 
              structural information and follow the dynamics down to the level of  individual
              bonds with our vibrational techniques.  The helix is a  key structural motif of
              proteins.  For the RNase system, it will  thus be possible to examine
              selectively the structure and dynamics  of the helix to individua l bonds in
              solution and bound to protein  and to contrast these dynamics with those
              occurring elsewhere in  the rest of the protein during the unfolding process. 
              We will also  study the structure and fast dynamics of other short de novo 
              peptides as models of helixes; these include the FS peptide,  previously
              characterized in Peter Kim's laboratory, and the XA4-  peptide, which has been
              extensively characterized by other means in  Neville Kallenbach's laboratory. 
              In addition, we will investigate  alpha-lactalbumin because it forms a stable
              'molten-globule' state  and these states are believed to be very early steps on
              the kinetic  pathway of protein folding.  %%%  It is known that the shape, or
              three dimensional structure, of a  protein must be just right so that it may
              carry out its biochemical  task.  It is also believed that this shape is
              determined uniquely  by the sequence of the protein's amino acid building
              blocks.  It is  therefore very important to understand how the sequence of
              residues  determines the pathway by which the protein folds from a very large 
              number of possible disordered shapes into highly ordered just  correct one if
              it is to become possible to design proteins from  scratch.  Rationally designed
              protein may be made to perform any  number of desired biochemical functions,
              i.e. act as drugs.  At  present, kinetic measurements of protein folding, or
              the reverse  situation of protein unfolding, are performed by using
              stopped-flow  techniques which are too slow to determine early key steps.  Over
               the past year or so, preliminary research has developed equipment  to initiate
              the folding steps and follow them with a resolution of  100 picoseconds, some
              107 times faster than previously possible.   This unique instrumentation
              involves a laser induced temperature  jump apparatus (T-jump) which can rapidly
              raise the temperature of  a protein solution 30  C or more.  Since proteins
              unfold over a  temperature range smaller than this, it is now feasible to study
               the kinetic steps  of protein unfolding.  The work will study the  unfolding
              dynamics of small peptide systems and proteins using this  new laser induced
              T-jump apparatus to initiate the process and  time-resolved infrared
              spectroscopy to follow the time course of  these reactions.  In addition,
              static infrared and very sensitive  novel Raman difference spectroscopies will
              be employed to  characterize the structures of the peptide and protein systems
              and  their changes upon reversible temperature induced  unfolding/folding.  ***
