Title       : SBIR Phase I: Thermophotovoltaic Devices Based on II3V2 Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9796116

Award Number: 9796116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74515              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony W. Catalano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MVSystems, Inc.
	      327 Lamb Lane
	      Golden, CO  80401    303/526-9016

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              ***  9660767  Catalano      This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              program will prove the feasibility of polycrystalline, thin film heterojunction
              infrared photovoltaic devices based on the II3V2 class of semiconducting
              compounds. Though these materials have not been extensively investigated, they
              possess numerous properties which make them well suited for many electro-optic
              applications, potentially rivaling III-V materials in importance. The devices
              developed in this study are intended to be used in broad band
              thermophotovoltaic (TPV) converters for a variety of commercial applications.
              This work will develop the deposition processes, characterize the materials,
              and prepare, test and characterize the appropriate II3V2 devices.
              Organometallic chemical vapor deposition (OMCVD) will be used to deposit the
              material. Because these compounds possess essentially the same crystal
              structure, and prior investigations have shown little minority carrier loss due
              to grain boundary recombination, we feel that polycrystalline devices have a
              high probability of success. Moreover, the high light flux densities
              encountered in the TPV application, should help overcome recombination losses
              via this mechanism. Several different device geometries will be examined.   The
              proposed technology is essential to producing low cost thermophotovoltaic (TPV)
              converters.  Such devices will lower the cost of TPV systems to the extent they
              will be competitive with other forms of power generation.  The potential size
              of the market for these products is extremely large.  ***
