Title       : CRB: Dispersal, Metapopulation Dynamics, and Conservation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1996   
File        : a9796048

Award Number: 9796048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27274              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Reed mreed@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis W. Oring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               Ninety-three percent of avian extinctions since 1600 have occurred on islands
              and half of the extant endangered birds in the world are island forms. All
              endemic waterbirds in Hawaii are endangered. These species exist as
              metapopulations because they occupy fragmented habitats and local dynamics are
              influenced by neighboring populations. Metapopulation models have served as a
              source of information regarding the status of endangered  species in fragmented
              environments. Shorebird populations in fragmented wetlands provide an excellent
              natural laboratory to test assumptions and predictions of metapopulation models
              and their relevance to conservation biology. Thus, the purpose of this research
              is to quantify survival, reproduction, and movement among populations of the
              endangered Hawaiian stilt (Himantopus mexicanus knudseni), and to use these
              data as parameters for development of a model of metapopulation dynamics.
              Specifically, this research will (1) develop a metapopulation model that avoids
              errors due to incomplete knowledge of individual movements, (2) apply directly
              to understanding local population persistence and extinction of an endangered
              species, (3) provide an initial model applicable to additional endangered
              waterbirds in the Hawaiian Islands, and elsewhere, and (4) help to validate
              critical metapopulation model assumptions.  %%%  This study will provide
              critical information on rare species conservation. Results from this research
              will aid reserve design, site selection for wetland loss remediation, and
              predictions of population response to management actions. In addition, the
              model developed for Hawaiian Stilts will serve as a preliminary model for the
              conservation of other endangered waterbirds in Hawaii and worldwide.
