Title       : Dynamic Joint Decisions: Free-Riding, Multi-Issue Bargaining, and Contract
               Revision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1997   
File        : a9796279

Award Number: 9796279
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129101             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Matthews stevenma@ssc.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Steven Matthews  Northwestern University  SBR-9511953     The proposal consists
              of three related projects centered on the revision of contracts and the
              intentional sequencing of agreements and actions.  The first project examines
              the hypothesis that when contracts cannot be enforced, then the parties may
              need to take actions piecemeal over time. One application of this idea concerns
              the classic case of voluntary contributions to a public good.  If contributors
              have to give at the same time, then the only equilibrium results in no
              contributions being given as everyone tries to "free-ride."  But if individuals
              can spread out their contributions over time, in general an equilibrium will
              exist in which full contributions are made in finite time.  The research will
              explore the robustness of this result to the underlying assumptions made. The
              second project looks at multi-issue bargaining when not all actions are
              contractible.  Again the goal is to understand why contractual agreements are
              often reached in piecemeal fashion, when current models predict that everything
              should be negotiated at the beginning with no delay. The third project concerns
              the evolution of contractual agreements. A model is presented that suggests
              that in a principal-agent model in which contracts are contrained by limited
              liability, the equiibrium initial contract takes the form of simple debt which
              is later renegotiated.
