Title       : Parallelization of Particle Transport Algorithms in Semiconductor Device Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1997    
File        : a9796280

Award Number: 9796280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir J. Lumelsky                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96152              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Goodnick goodnick@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9312240  Goodnick  This is a renewal project to continue the development of
              parallelized algorithms for semiconductor device simulation using particle
              methods. Improvements will be made to the prototype multiprocessor code PMC-3D
              to include state of the art physics such as full band structure effects, and
              generalize the code for a variety of different device technologies and
              arbitrary geometries.  The codes will be developed in a high level parallel
              language (Dataparallel C) to increase their portability from machine to
              machine.  Furthermore, full electromagnetic solutions rather than Poission's
              equation will be coupled in the particle-force calculation, in order to develop
              simulation tools for high frequency microwave and optoelectronic device
              applications.  Parallel particle transport algorithms for semiconductor devices
              to include molecular dynamics and cellular automata techniques will developed.
              In the molecular dynamics case, hybrid particle-particle particle-mesh methods
              will be investigated to find efficient parallel algorithms which would greatly
              reduce the computational requirements of this technique.  Parallel cellular
              automata device simulation algorithms in three dimensions will be developed and
              compared with Monte Carlo methods as a cost effective alternative to the latter
              technique.  ***
