Title       : Faraday-Stark Optoelectronic Effect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9796270

Award Number: 9796270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Heiman heiman@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9623248  Heiman  The aim of this proposal is to investigate a new optoelectronic
              effect  based on Faraday rotation in quantum well structures. Preliminary work
              has  demonstrated that an applied voltage can be used to control the degree of 
              Faraday rotation. This effect is novel in the sense that the degree of 
              rotation is controlled by an electric field as opposed to a magnetic field. 
              This could lead to electronic control of light switches and wide bandwidth 
              optical modulators.    Optoelectronic devices based on the Faraday-Stark effect
              would require only  a low switching voltage (~ volt) and a small dc magnetic
              field (< l tesla)  supplied by a permanent magnet. Some unique features for
              optical modulators  include:    * high-bandwidth light modulation, >10^10 Hz;  
               * very low transmission in the off-state, < 10^-5; and > 40 dB modulation
              depth;    * compatibility with microlithography and waveguides.    Initial
              experiments on the Faraday-Stark effect were performed on a GaAs  quantum well
              sample grown at UC Santa Barbara (group of A.C. Gossard).  Although this
              structure was not optimized for the Faraday-Stark effect,  improved structures
              are being grown in the Electrical Engineering  Department at MIT (group of C.
              Fonstad). Of particular importance for room  temperature devices are structures
              made from II-VI magnetic semiconductor  structures. These will be grown in our
              own MBE machine, which was  fabricated with funding from an NSF Engineering
              Research Grant and seed  funding from AT&T.    A variety of II-VI and III-V
              material structures will be investigated using  magneto-optical experiments.
              These results will be helpful in examining the  possibilities for designing
              devices that operate at wavelengths of  interest. Our ambition is to determine
              the limitations and optimum  conditions required for optoelectronic light
              switches, modulators, and  electrically-controlled optical isolators.    This
              research program will provide students with a broad education in  engineering,
              physics, and materi als science. It also provides hands-on  training in many
              areas including optics, magnetism, semiconductors, MBE  crystal growth,
              microfabrication, low-dimensional science, high-speed  electronics, cryogenics,
              and high-field magnets. Such a broad-based  education is likely to impact on
              the future employment of both graduate and  undergraduate students. In
              addition, an education in the field of optics is  exceptionally valuable since
              that job market usually exceeds the number of  qualified graduates.  ***
