Title       : Host-plant Age, Phenology, and Vigor as Determinants of Herbivore Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1996   
File        : a9796044

Award Number: 9796044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44267              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Auerbach   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College/Univ of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Plant-feeding insects are generally not uniformly distributed             
              among host plants or within individual hosts.  Instead, certain                
              hosts, and sites within hosts, are preferentially attacked by                  
              insects.  The timing of feeding within a growing season is also                
              frequently circumscribed.  Determining the extent to which theses              
              feeding preferences are correlated with insect survival and                    
              fecundity is crucial to understanding what factors trigger and                 
              terminate periodic outbreaks of insects.  The proposed research                
              will examine interactions between a leaf-mining moth and its                   
              quaking aspen host trees in northern Minnesota, where the moth                 
              frequently reaches outbreak densities.  Experiments will test                  
              whether miners preferentially feed at particular sites within                  
              leaves, or on leaves on particularly large and/or rapidly growing              
              shoots and branches, as some current theory suggests; if the                   
              distribution of feeding over the growing season is correlated with             
              herbivore performance; and whether aspen trees develop resistance              
              to herbivory as they mature.                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Outbreaks of herbivorous insects occur both in natural & human                 
              dominated ecological systems.This research addresses pivotal                   
              questions concerning how natural temporal and spatial variation in             
              foliage quality influences herbivore performance & potential for               
              population outbreaks.  It details the extent to which high                     
              herbivore density results in the use of inferior resources, an                 
              important component of the population dynamics of plant-feeding                
              insects.  In addition, the results will have important implications            
              for management of stands of quaking aspen, a commercially valuable             
              tree species.
