Title       : Itzaj Maya Grammar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1996   
File        : a9796031

Award Number: 9796031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4611               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Hofling ahofling@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This research is undertaken in order to complete a reference  grammar of
              Itzaj Maya, a Yucatecan Mayan language on the verge of  extinction in Peten,
              Guatemala. No modern reference grammars  exist for any of the extant Yucatecan
              languages. The Itzaj Maya  were the last major indigenous group in Mesoamerica
              to be  conquered by the Spanish and were conservators of Mayan culture, 
              including hieroglyphic writing, long after most Mayan groups were  overwhelmed
              by the Spanish invaders. It is critically important  for Mayan linguistics and
              epigraphy to document Itzaj as soon as  possible.       The grammar will
              complete basic documentation of the Itzaj  Maya language. Based on prior
              grammatical research and drawing on  extensive textual and lexical databases, a
              comprehensive, heavily  exemplified grammar will be prepared for use by
              linguists,  anthropologists, epigraphers, those involved in language  pedagogy,
              and others interested in a general reference work. The  grammar will be
              completed in twelve months, including two months  of fieldwork with an
              experienced language consultant.
