Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Arithmetic of L-Values and Iwasawa Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1997  
File        : a9796122

Award Number: 9796122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew G. Earnest                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Li Guo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award supports research centered on Iwasawa theory and special values of
              Hecke L-functions. This project involves work on three questions regarding
              these special values, the first two of which are concerned with the conjectures
              made by Beilinson and Bloch-Kato. These conjectures reveal an intrinsic
              connection between the special values of a motivic L-function and the
              arithmetic properties of the motive. The first part of this research deals with
              the Bloch-Kato conjecture at critical values of Hecke L-functions from CM
              elliptic curves. The second part addresses the Beilinson conjecture at the
              central critical values of Hecke L-functions. The third part explores a
              possible duality property in Iwasawa theory induced by the generalized Tate
              duality for p-adic Galois representations.     This project falls into the
              general area of arithmetic geometry - a subject that blends two of the oldest
              areas of mathematics: number theory and geometry. This combination has proved
              extraordinarily fruitful, having recently solved problems that have withstood
              generations. Among its many consequences are new error-correcting codes. Such
              codes are essential for both modern computers (hard disks) and compact disks.
