Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Deformation Quantization of SymmetricSpaces and Their
               Quotients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1997       
File        : a9796195

Award Number: 9796195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23600              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Borthwick davidb@mathcs.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9401807  Borthwick       The long term goal of this project is to understand the
               algebraic structure and the geometry of non-commutative spaces  obtained
              through deformization quantization. Many examples of  such spaces have been
              constructed using the Berezin-Toeplitz  quantization. The investigator plans to
              construct Fredholm  modules for these quantized spaces and so compute their
              Chern  characters. It will then be possible to investigate how the  quantum
              Chern character relates to that of the original manifold  in the semiclassical
              limit. The investigator further intends to  construct the unitary
              representations of the quantum algebras by  finding generators and relations
              and then to study the connection  between these representations and the
              geometry of the original  manifold.       This project lies at the interface
              between geometry,  analysis and algebras. A modern approach of Connes studies 
              geometrical invariants using non-commutative algebraic  structures. These
              structures have been explicitly realized only  in a few cases. The completion
              of this project will provide new  explicit examples of this non-commutative
              geometry. The  mathematical benefit will be in knowing explicit geometric 
              invariants.  ***
