Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of Calcium Phosphate Microcarriers as Suspendable,
               Mitogenic Substrates for Mammalian Cell Culture Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9796096

Award Number: 9796096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Brian Starling jcapbio@cs.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CaP Biotechnology Incorpor
	      6010 Wright Street
	      Arvada, CO  80004    303/277-1152

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              ***  96-60306  Starling     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will develop a method for producing a novel form of a calcium phosphate
              (CaP) ceramic microcarrier for use in anchorage-dependent mammalian cell
              culturing applications. The developed microcarrier will be biomimetic in
              substance and will be fabricated in the form of a hollow microsphere in the
              size range of 1.0 to 3.0 mm. with wall thicknesses that result in a sintered
              density in the range of  ~ 1.02 to 1.04 gins/cc. The CaP microcarrier beads
              must be sintered to function as a suspendable microcarrier for anchorage
              dependent cell cultures. The proper mixture of ceramic hydroxylapatite,
              tricalcium phosphate, and porosity phases in the microstructure provides the
              mitogenic and non-toxic property of the CaP substrate as unique features for
              mammalian cell culturing applications. Specialized fabrication methods will be
              explored for developing hollow microspheres.    The use of mitogenic CaP
              substrates can offer  several advantages for mammalian cell culturing
              applications. As a result of this program, the availability of mitogenic CaP
              substrates in a suspendable form has great potential to revolutionize the
              production of high volume cell cultured products of significant commercial
              value. Suspendable microcarriers for anchorage-dependent mammalian cell
              cultures will be used in large quantities for the production of cell-derived
              pharmaceuticals in bioreactors.  This product addresses the rapidly expanding
              markets for monoclonal antibodies and genetically engineered bioproducts.  This
              form of CaP substrate affords the opportunity of growing multi-cell thick
              layers of cells that maintain their  phenotype over extended time periods for
              harvesting high volume biological products.  ***
