Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Use of Enhancement Techniques and A Priori Information in
               Electrical Impedance Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  1996   
File        : a9796009

Award Number: 9796009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10512              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fadil Santosa santosa@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              DMS-9503114 Santosa  Our approach is to pose the imaging problem  as an
              optimization problem with constraints and penalty terms.  The constraints would
              represent a priori information, while the  penalty terms are added to achieve
              certain quality in the image.  One of the main difficulties in this approach is
              development of  specialized optimization methods. The optimization methods must
               be capable of (1) solving large problems, (2) dealing with  constraints, (3)
              dealing with nondifferentiability of the cost  function. To this end, we will
              explore the use of interior point  methods. While this imaging technique has
              several attractive  features such as low-cost and portability, it suffers from
              the  ability to resolve fine features in the image. We propose to  overcome
              this difficulty by incorporating known side information  as well as applying
              enhancement techniques in the reconstruction  process.   This research concerns
              the use of recent techniques in  image enhancement and computer vision in
              overcoming the blurring  effects of an imaging method known as electrical
              impedance  tomography. Electrical impedance tomography is a technique for 
              imaging the interior of a specimen using DC electrical  measurements collected
              on the boundary of the specimen. It has  found use in clinical applications,
              geophysical prospecting, and  nondestructive evaluations. It is anticipated
              that we will be  able to develop software, that when used with electrical 
              impedance tomographic devices, would deliver images with high  resolution.
