Title       : U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research: Enumeration of the Flora of the Mixteca Region
               of Oaxaca and Puebla, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1997  
File        : a9796128

Award Number: 9796128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4033               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose L. Panero panero@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               9416309    Panero    This Americas Program award will  fund a  research 
              collaboration between Dr. Jose Panero, Michigan State  University Herbarium and
              Drs. Patricia Davila and  Jose L.  Villasenor,  Universidad Nacional Autonoma
              de Mexico,  for a  botanical exploration of the Mixteca Alta region of Oaxaca 
              and Puebla, leading to an  inventory of all vascular plants  of the region.  
              This project is part of an ongoing  collaboration  between the Michigan State
              University  Herbarium and the National Herbarium of Mexico to publish  the
              Flora of Oaxaca and adjacent regions.   The Oaxaca area  has been divided into
              ten study  regions to concentrate  attention on one particular sub-flora at a
              time.  The  present research will serve as a  pilot project for the  entire
              Flora of Oaxaca project.  It will  include  enumeration of the flora, and
              implementation of a database  system to generate a specimen database that will
              produce an  accurate account of the floristic diversity and distribution  in
              the State of Oaxaca.  As the project matures, several  other components of the
              relational database system will be  developed.  The composition and
              distribution of the major  vegetation assemblages in the region will  also be
              examined  at this time as part of a project to prepare a chorological  atlas
              for the  state of Oaxaca.    The southern Mexican state of Oaxaca harbors the
              richest  flora in that country.  In spite of the high species  diversity and
              high level of endemism, the flora of the state  has never been systematically
              inventoried, nor all of its  areas collected.  Adequately documenting and
              describing this  flora is important in understanding the evolution of a major 
              portion of North America flora.  Because the area is under  increasing human
              pressure, there is a need to document its  floristic composition before further
              disappearance of the  native flora. Therefore, the initial collecting efforts
              of  this project will be directed at gathering as many specimens  as possible
              in an area where the flo ra is most threatened by  extinction.  ***
