Title       : Molecular Characterization of a Eukaryotic Fe(II) Transporter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1997  
File        : a9796108

Award Number: 9796108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86400              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Eide eided@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9405200  Eide  In yeast, extracellular Fe(III) is first reduced to Fe(II) by a
              plasma membrane Fe(III) reductase. The  Fe(II) product is then transported into
              the cell by Fe(II)-specific transport systems. This strategy of  iron uptake is
              common in nature, having been found in other fungi, plants, and even animal
              cells.  Yet, despite this ubiquity, an Fe(II) transporter gene has yet to be
              isolated from any organism. We  have recently isolated a gene, FET4, that is
              required for Fe(II) uptake. Our preliminary studies  indicate that this gene
              encodes an Fe(II) transporter. The analysis of the FET4 gene will add much to 
              our understanding of the molecular mechanism of iron uptake in yeast.
              Furthermore, our analysis of  FET4 will provide the reagents (e.g. yeast
              mutants, DNA probes, antibodies, etc.) necessary to begin  a molecular analysis
              of Fe(II) uptake in other eukaryotes.  Experiments described in this proposal
              are designed to assess the role of the FET4 gene product,  Fet4p, as an Fe(II)
              transporter. Antibodies will be prepared against Fet4p which will then be used
              to  determine the subcellular location of the protein. The identity of Fet4p as
              an Fe(II) transporter will be  confirmed by biochemical analysis of iron uptake
              in Xenopus oocytes or baculovirus-infected S.  frugiperda (Sf9) cells that
              express Fet4p. Preliminary studies suggest that Fet4p may also transport  other
              essential divalent cations such as Co(II). We will determine if Fet4p is
              involved in the uptake of  any transition metals in addition to Fe(II). To gain
              a more complete picture of the mechanism of iron  uptake, we will extend our
              genetic analysis to isolate and characterize other yeast genes required for 
              the process. Finally, we will isolate Fe(II) transporter genes from other
              organisms, specifically  Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Arabidopsis thaliana, and
              humans, by complementation cloning. These  genes will provide the necessary
              material for a comparative analysis of Fe(II) transporter structure as  well as
              the reagents nee ded to begin a molecular analysis of iron uptake in these
              organisms.  %%%  Iron plays an essential role in cellular biochemistry.
              Although this metal is abundant in the  environment, the oxidized form of iron,
              Fe(III), is extremely insoluble. Therefore, organisms possess  efficient iron
              uptake systems. The long-range goal of the proposed research is to understand
              the  molecular mechanism of iron uptake in eukaryotic cells. We are pursuing
              this goal through a  combined genetic, biochemical, and molecular analysis of
              iron uptake in the yeast Saccharomyces  cerevisiae. This organism has proven to
              be a useful model system for the study of many cellular  processes and its
              utility in studying iron uptake is becoming increasingly clear. We have
              identified a  new yeast gene, FET4, that may encode an iron transport protein.
              Experiments are proposed to test  this hypothesis. Also, using yeast strains
              defective for iron uptake and a method known as  complementation cloning, we
              will identify and characterize iron transporter genes from other fungi as  well
              as plant and mammalian species. These genes will provide the necessary material
              for a  comparative analysis of iron transporter structure as well as the
              reagents needed to begin a molecular  analysis of iron uptake in these
              organisms.  ***
