Title       : The Evaluation of Cooperation in Social Dilemmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1999       
File        : a9796338

Award Number: 9796338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41215              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Macy mwm14@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                     This study is designed to systematically map the evolution of cooperation
              in a game where actors can avoid those they do not trust.  It departs from a
              long tradition in game theory, in which studies of the Prisoners' Dilemma
              rested on the assumption that actors were not free to walk away from
              undesirable partners.  Computer simulations are used to systematically explore
              the conditions under which actors learn when and with whom to interact, to be
              later tested in laboratory experiments with human subjects.   The computer
              simulation uses artificial neural networks to model a self-organizing system of
              interdependent, co-adaptive actors.  The results are expected to produce a
              learning theory model of adaptation to changing conditions, relevant to the
              individual participant, in contrast to current theories based on the Prisoners'
              Dilemma, which assume that adaptation occurs through changes at the population
              level.  %%%   The proposed research will make fundamental contributions to
              social theory by offering new insights into the ways individuals  learn to
              handle social dilemmas .  It makes comparably innovative methodological
              contributions through the use of artificial neural networks.  These are also
              used to provide a more realistic construction of social dilemmas that promises
              to be applicable outside the laboratory.
