Title       : CAREER: Robustness Analysis in the Design of Nonlinear Feedback
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9796099

Award Number: 9796099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandre Megretski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9624885  Megretski    The proposed research will concentrate on rigorous
              analysis of  special classes of essentially nonlinear feedback design with 
              application in self-tuning, delta-sigma modulators, anti-reset  windup, and
              computer simulated locomotion.  One major objective  of the research is to
              demonstrate how the local analysis of  robustness can be used in the global
              analysis of essentially  nonlinear feedback systems, to produce results not
              matched by any  other approach.  Another general objective is to propose new 
              solutions, and analyze the known "ad-hoc" solution to several  well-known
              nonlinear feedback problems.    Analysis of relay feedback systems.  Feedback
              interconnection of  a relay feedback with a linear time-variant plant will be 
              considered.  The situation in which such interconnection induces 
              self-oscillation (a limit cycle) will be of most interest.   Sufficient
              conditions for the global stability of such limit  cycles will be derived, and
              the sensitivity of the oscillations  in the presence of external inputs will be
              estimated.  In  particular, analysis of relay-based self-tunning of PID
              feedback  will be done.  Another application will be the analysis of delta- 
              sigma modulators.  In general, this part of the research project  is aimed to
              compensate for the lack of methods suitable for  rigorous analysis of piecewise
              linear systems.    Feedback control with magnitude and rate constraints.  The 
              problem of control of linear and mildly nonlinear systems with  constraints
              imposed on control signal rate and magnitude will be  considered.  The prime
              objective will be to improve the speed and  efficiency of the control response,
              expressed in terms of induced  norms and other parameters characterizing the
              transient behavior.  Another objective is to provide a rigorous basis for a 
              comparative study of different anti-reset windup designs.    Feedback control
              of computer animation.  This part of the project  involves research on the
              feasibility of real-time dynamically  simulate d computer animation of an
              open-loop unstable object.   The "object" will be a three-dimensional system on
              joints,  normally having at any time one or two joint ends touching the 
              ground, and maintaining stability by changing the angles between  the joints in
              a coordinated manner.  Ultimately, the object will  have most of the dynamical
              features of a human body, through the  initial models will have less degrees of
              freedom.  The goal is to  teach the object to "walk" in the presence of the
              gravity force.   It is most likely that the stability of the human body motion
              is  ensured by several feedback loops governed by the autonomic  nervous
              system.  However, the actual control laws defining these  feedbacks are not
              known.  The main objective of the proposed  research is to show that, using an
              advanced nonlinear feedback  control methodology, it is possible to find
              algorithms for real-  time stabilization of the open-loop locomotion, at least
              in the  case of a simplified model.  The research will also be aimed at 
              studying the algorithms for stabilization of repetitive open-loop  unstable
              motion.    Integrated educational software.  The educational component of  the
              proposal is aimed at the development of an integrated  software package and
              special methodology for the undergraduate  class in "Systems and signals", to
              provide a tool for state-of-  the-art, learning based, and practice-oriented
              education.  The  system will provide    (a) computer-assisted multimedia-based
              presentations of course  concepts;    (b) student self-training using random
              generators of drill  problems;    (c) automatic problem generation and
              evaluation programs for  official testing;    (d) an open architecture allowing
              further accumulation of the  knowledge.    Ultimately, the proposed development
              should facilitate a major  change in the forms of the university education. 
              ***
