Title       : Formation and Segmentation of Leech Endoderm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9796063

Award Number: 9796063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130207             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Martin Shankland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                  9506352  Shankland    This study will yield novel insights into the
              formation, regional  specification and segmentation of the endodermal germ
              layer in the  glossiphoniid leech, Helobdella. The leech endoderm shows an
              overt  pattern of segmentally periodic differentiation, and the  mechanistic
              basis of this segmental patterning will be investigated  through a combination
              of experimental embryology and molecular  biology. The developmental origin of
              the definitive endodermal  tissues will be characterized to ascertain whether
              particular cells  have a stereotyped or variable lineage, the latter being
              suggestive  that segmental organization is not intrinsic to the endoderm at the
               time of its formation. Another set of experiments will examine the 
              development of the endoderm following either ablation or abnormal 
              juxtaposition of the overlying mesoderm. These experiments will  test the
              hypothesis that segmentation and regionalization are  imprinted onto an
              initially unpatterned endodermal cell layer by  local inductive cues from the
              adjacent mesoderm. A third set of  experiments will perturb the segmental
              pattern of a particular  homeobox gene within the endoderm, examining whether
              that gene is  either necessary or sufficient to bring about the segmentation of
               the endodermal germ layer. The final set of experiments will  investigate the
              derivation of the nuclei that take part in endoderm  formation. The leech's
              endoderm arises from a midgut primordium  which is formed by cell fusion early
              in embryogenesis, and which  gives rise to a cellularized gut wall several days
              later. A nuclear   lineage tracer will be used to follow the fate of individual
              pre-  fusion nuclei, with the express purpose of testing whether some or  all
              of these nuclei arise from ectodermal or mesodermal cell  lineages. Should this
              prove tho be the case, it would suggest that  the nuclei of ectodermal and
              mesodermal cells are respecified to an  endodermal fate by cytoplasmic
              determinants encountered following  their fusion i nto the midgut primordium. 
              ***
