Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellow/Presidential Early Career Awards for Scientists and
               Engineers (PFF/PECASE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9796299

Award Number: 9796299
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc Edwards edwardsm@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9629008  Edwards  This is an award to provide the support this investigator 
              requested in response to NSF 94-134, "Presidential Faculty Fellow  Awards." The
              research component of this project is a continuation  of the research this
              investigator has been conducting under NSF  Grant No. 95-03079, "Copper Pitting
              and New Approaches to  Teaching: A Career Development Plan," as part of the
              National  Science Foundation Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) 
              Program.  His research is directed toward improving our  fundamental
              understanding of factors that result in corrosive  behavior of materials used
              in distribution systems for water.  Materials used in construction of water
              distribution systems are  subject to corrosion over long periods of time which
              reduces the  effective life of the system's components and has a potentially 
              degrading effect on the quality of water delivered to users  through the
              distribution system.    Procedures to adequately determine the effect of
              corrosion can be  useful in improving the engineering design of water
              distribution  systems.  This award also continues to have the intent of 
              encouraging the investigator's early development as an educator.  The
              investigator's education plan involves exploring changes in  basic course
              structure that include active learning, development  of supportive learning
              classroom environments,, and  implementation of a reward structure that
              encourages development  of non-traditional target skills such as teamwork,
              class  motivation and interest in learning outside the classroom.  His 
              teaching plan involves implementation and evaluation of new  approaches to
              learning in the undergraduate engineering classroom  environment that will
              improve the way in which undergraduate  engineering courses are taught.  ***
