Title       : SBIR Phase II: Direct Micromechanical Simulations for Damage Accumulation in
               Composite Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1998     
File        : a9796231

Award Number: 9796231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226403             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Mueller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Analytical and
	      116 Smith Street
	      Seattle, WA  98109    206/285-8664

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              ***  Mueller  9408572         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project addresses the need for "bridging" a technology: a broad analytical tool
              to evaluate composite material deformation, fracture, damage accumulation, and
              failure based on the underlying microstructural defects and the evolution of
              the microstructural state under multiaxial loading. Phase II work will expand
              on the current capabilities of MISTRA, a Windows-based finite element analysis
              code designed specifically for microstructural analysis and developed at QUEST.
              MISTRA allows the user to easily construct a microscopic unit cell geometry,
              assign material properties to the phases, and conduct finite element
              simulations of standard mechanical tests of the composite material to evaluate
              macroscopic properties such as anisotropic stiffness and yielding and
              microscopic features such as residual stresses. In Phase I, the notion of
              damage and failure was introduced by allowing cracks to grow in the microscopic
              geometry based on the fracture mechanics principle of critical strain energy
              release rate. Also, a means to generate unstructured grids from
              photomicrographs was developed. During Phase II, further development of the
              simulations in both two and three dimensions will be developed, as will the
              graphical user interface to allow the user to quickly construct the
              microstructural grids, perform the micromechanical simulations, and visualize
              the results. These micromechanical simulations establish a relationship between
              the evolution of the microdamage accumulation and the loss of load-carrying
              capability of the bulk composite material. This innovative approach would allow
              the design engineer to directly ascertain the effects of the microscopic
              material design and processing on the ultimate design of the composite
              structure as a whole.       Potential commercial applications of this new
              analysis tool range from critical defense-related component analysis to
              fundamental research in earth sciences to the evaluation of prod ucts for
              recreational use. It is expected that this software will be marketed to
              universities, corporations, and government agencies as a tool to evaluate
              advanced composite materials and to speed the acceptance of new materials in
              critical component applications require high stiffness/weight ratios, low
              thermal expansion, dimensional stability, and abrasion and fracture resistance.
                 Keywords    Composite materials, Damage, Finite element analysis, Nonlinear
              micromechanics, Ceramics    ***
