Title       : Influence of Solvent-Solute Interactions on Molecular Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1999   
File        : a9796257

Award Number: 9796257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347474             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graham R. Fleming fleming@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Graham Fleming of the University of Chicago will examine   chemical dynamics in
              condensed phases on a femtosecond time scale.    Ultrafast spectroscopy and
              non-linear spectroscopic techniques will be   used to probe the molecular
              dynamics in solution which are usually masked   by the featureless nature of
              liquid-phase electronic spectra.  Ultrashort   pulses will be combined with
              pulse sequences to study the full range of   time scales present in the
              experimental system and its solvent.    Structures to be studied include
              biological systems with a photosynthetic   reaction center. Various chemical
              phenomena such as electron transfer   will be rationalized and predicted using
              spectral densities.  The cage   effect on the dissociation of iodine will be
              observed to determine the   mechanism of solvent-induced curve crossing.   
              This research will attempt to find examine several issues.  One involves   the
              effect of solvent molecules in liquid solutions on reactions in an   attempt to
              determine, for example, under what conditions the solvents   form cages around
              reactive species and keep them close enough for   reaction to occur.  Do these
              solvent molecules modify the reactive   condition of these reagent molecules? 
              How are proteins affected in the   water solutions which are characteristic of
              living systems?  These   experiments will also examine some aspects of the
              mechanism of   photosynthesis in order to gain a fuller understanding of this
              important   life process.
