Title       : Research Planning Grant: Adaptive Performability Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9796223

Award Number: 9796223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16762              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann T. Tai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9308912  Tai  In many real-time distributed systems where both performance and 
              dependability are critical, the conditions affecting these two  attributes in
              the system itself as well as its environment may  change dynamically.  In order
              to assure high performance  dependable computing, a computer/communication
              system's  operational strategies and requirements have to be adjusted 
              responsively.    The research studies adaptive performability management 
              (performability is a combined measure of performance and  dependability) for
              assuring performance and dependability goals  simultaneously via run-time
              model-based decision making.  The  method will provide a computer system with
              the capability to  determine,  based on the underlying performability model,
              whether  it achieves its performance and dependability goals.  If not, it  will
              select an alternative strategy.  The objectives of this  research are to
              investigate the utility of performability  concepts and modeling techniques
              when the object system is in  operation, and to investigate the effectiveness
              of the resulting  methodology in assuring high performance dependable
              computing.  Accordingly, the focus will be on: 1) methods of model 
              construction which stress the tradeoffs among performance,  dependability and
              other critical attributes and facilitate  adaptive performability management,
              2) methods of model solution  which are sufficiently efficient to support
              run-time decision  making, and 3) methods for evaluating the effectiveness of
              an  adaptive performability management scheme.  ***
