Title       : X-Ray Microbeam Studies of Electromigration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9796284

Award Number: 9796284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454054             (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Cargill gsc3@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1771,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9708003  Cargill    This study of electromigration using X-ray microdiffraction 
              and electron microscopy builds on the experience and  confidence gained during
              work supported by a one-year SGER  NSF award.  This work has shown that thermal
              and  electromigration induced strains can be successfully  measured with 10
              micron spatial resolution and with strain  sensitivities on the order of 
              0.0002 by X-ray  microdiffraction.  The past work has confirmed that linear 
              strain gradients develop during electromigration in  conductor lines with no
              reservoirs and that abrupt strain  relaxation occurs during the later stages of
               electromigration under the conditions used in the studies.  The new project
              extends the work on a limited number of 10  micron-wide, 200 micron-long pure
              Al conductor lines to  narrower line widths with bamboo and near-bamboo 
              microstructures, to shorter lines which should be able to  sustain larger
              strain gradients, to A1(Cu) lines where  electromigration of Cu and of A1 can
              be separately followed  by X-ray microfluorescence, and finally to Cu and
              Cu(Sn)  lines, which should be more resistant to electromigration  than A1(Cu).
               The work utilizes higher spatial resolution X-  ray instrumentation to extend
              composition, microstructure  and strain mapping to the submicron scale and to
              permit  measurements on single grains within polycrystalline  conductor lines. 
              The study includes transmission electron  microscopy, scanning electron
              microscopy (SEM), and SEM-  based grain orientation mapping  observations as
              complements  to the X-ray microbeam microstructure, composition, and  strain
              mapping.  Finite element modeling is employed with  realistic microstructures
              and misorientation dependent grain-  boundary diffusivities.  The study will be
              extended to short  range, microstructure related strain gradients, and to 
              effects of pulsed and reversal current on electromigration  strains.  %%%  The
              expected significance of the research is that it  provides a better
              experimental base for underst anding  electromigration.   Successful direct
              measurements of strain  distributions during electromigration will provide
              tests and  focus for further theoretical work in this area.  ***
