Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Electron Transfer Photochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1996  
File        : a9796064

Award Number: 9796064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40240              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick S. Mariano mariano@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                      9511989  Mariano    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Patrick S.
              Mariano, Department of Chemistry, University of Maryland at College Park, to
              pursue  with Professor Ung Chan Yoon, Department of Chemistry, Pusan National
              University, Korea, for 36 months, a program of cooperative  research in the
              area of electron transfer photochemistry.  The four thrusts of this project are
              to (1) probe important scientific questions  regarding the mechanisms and
              synthetic applications of organic photochemical reactions which are promoted by
              excited state electron  transfer, (2) bring an international cooperative
              perspective to an ongoing research project supported by the Chemistry Division,
              National  Science Foundation (NSF), (3) develop strong scientific interactions
              between scientists at the University of Maryland and their counterparts  at
              Korean institutions, and (4) provide an introduction of young American
              scientists to unique research opportunities as part of their doctoral 
              dissertation research.    It is well recognized that electron transfer (SET)
              photochemistry is a key mechanistic event in a wide variety of ground and
              excited state  chemical and biochemical processes.  Organic photochemistry is
              one discipline where this recognition has profoundly impacted the 
              understanding of mechanistic pathways and the development of new reactions. 
              The PI and his Korean collaborator have made a number of  significant
              contributions in the field of SET-photochemistry and are highly respected
              researchers in the field of the proposal.  This project is  relevant to the
              objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
              increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and  Korean scientists and
              engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
              techniques and through collaboration on  problems of mutual benefit.  Korean
              participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering
              Foundation (KOSEF).   This project adds an international coopera tive dimension
              to the PI's ongoing research under NSF Grant No. CHE-9420889  ***
