Title       : US-Indo Collaborative Research: Design and Analysis of Highly Available
               Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9796179

Award Number: 9796179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Satish K. Tripathi tripathi@engr.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311483  Tripathi  Description:  This proposal will support  linkage costs of a
              collaboration between Satish  K. Tripathi, Chair, Department of Computer 
              Science, University of Maryland and Pankaj  Jalote, Dept. of Computer Science,
              Indian  Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur. This  project addresses a number
              of design and  analysis issues relating to replicated systems.   Its basic goal
              is to enable the designer to  analyze replicated systems for the purpose of 
              predicting performance and tuning them to  obtain the highest availability. 
              The most  important issues include: availability  analysis, the effect of
              parameters such as  degree of replication and node/network  reliability,
              parameters to maximize system   availability, and preferred protocols.   
              Scope:  Considering the growing need for  computer systems that offer high
              availability,  this research is timely and has broad  application potential. 
              The P.I.s have  complementary expertise in two areas critical  for the
              research.  Jalote is internationally  known in fault-tolerance and software 
              engineering.  Tripathi is an accomplished  computer scientist and well known
              for his work  in performance evaluation.  Computer science is  an area of 
              exceptional strength in India and  the IIT Kanpur one of the top research 
              institutions in this field.  The collaboration  should be productive with many
              mutual benefits  anticipated.    ***
