Title       : Popular Support for Democratization In Post-Communist Societies: Comparative
               Trend Data and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1998  
File        : a9796080

Award Number: 9796080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130914             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Mishler mishler@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Most member states of the United Nations are not democratic.  Developments over
              the past decade have shown, however,  that undemocratic regimes are
              increasingly unstable.  The collapse of Communism offers an extraordinary
              opportunity to study the process of change from authoritarian to democratic
              regime.  Democratic transitions are occurring simultaneously in more than a
              dozen Central and Eastern European countries.  And, unlike transitions
              elsewhere, democratization is occurring simultaneously with the transition from
              non-market to market economy.  Every one of the democratizing regimes faces
              major problems that threaten the establishment and maintenance of their
              representative institutions.      This project investigates the evolution of
              political support for new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe. A pooled,
              time series data set will be created from a series of 46 New Democracies
              Barometer surveys conducted over the past five years in the nations of
              Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovenia, Belarus
              and Ukraine.  This data set will allow the testing of political-cultural,
              economic, and social theories of mass support for (or rejection of) democratic
              regimes.
