Title       : Transnational Communities: Their Emergence and Effects Among Latin American
               Immigrants in the U.S.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9796286

Award Number: 9796286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alejandro Portes aportes@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               This is a study of the emergence of transnational communities involving the
              United States and Latin American countries.  Transnational communities are
              created by immigrants who engage in a pattern of repeated back-and-forth
              movements between countries, using such displacements in order to implement
              complex economic strategies. Transnational communities can be defined as the
              sum total of actors in an immigrant population whose prime occupational
              activity requires long-distance contacts across national borders.  For the most
              part, these contacts involve the immigrants' countries of origin and their
              purpose is primarily economic.  However, as transnational networks develop,
              they come to encompass social and political activities as well, and to involve
              third countries.  This study will examine the origins, characteristics, and
              effects of this novel phenomenon as it has developed among Salvadoran and
              Dominican immigrants, two of the largest groups arriving in the United States
              in recent years.     Processes of return migration, the sending of remittances
              to family members, and the sponsorship of kin left behind are all familiar
              events that have been studied in the past as manifestations of the enduring
              ties of immigrants to their home countries. The novel development at present is
              the proliferation of such ties to the point that sending and receiving areas
              become integrated into unified social structures and those involved acquire a
              status that transcends that of conventional immigrant.     To address this
              phenomenon, this project will conduct an integrated primary data collection
              effort involving immigrant communities in the United States and selected cities
              in the two sending countries.  Two phases of data collection will be supported
              by the National Science Foundation.  In the first, informant interviews will be
              conducted in two areas of concentration of each immigrant group and in two
              cities of each sending country in order to identify the extent and range of
              transnational enterprises.  In the s econd phase, a survey of transnational
              entrepreneurs and a matched sample of regular immigrants will be conducted in
              four target communities in the United States.  The resultant data file will
              comprise 2,300 interviews in 8 different field sites.     This research will
              add considerably to our understanding of this new immigration-related
              phenomenon, by mapping the social networks underlying the emergence of
              transnational communities and testing hypotheses about the structure of
              networks of successful transnational entrepreneurs.  Because transnational
              communities link populations across national boundaries, their growth in the
              modern world represents a significant aspect of global change that will have
              great consequences for the world's social, cultural, economic and natural
              environment.
