Title       : Low Energy Shock in E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9796157

Award Number: 9796157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10092              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim Lewis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Lewis  9317013  Addition of uncouplers to E. coli causes a low energy shock 
              response that is accompanied by induction of multidrug resistance  pumps.  A
              Summary of the objectives aimed at identifying the  components of the response
              and understanding their interactions is  given below.  1.  Expression of a
              target gene.  Regulatory mutations in emrD, a  multidrug resistance gene, that
              lead to constitutive expression  will be used to determine the upstream site
              controlling uncoupler-  dependent expression.  2.  The signal.  Expression of
              emrD in an ATPase mutant in response  to an uncoupler will be measured to
              determine whether the signal  originates prior to, or after ATP synthesis. 
              Changes in pmf will  be measured in parallel to determine the quantitative
              requirements  for the inducing signal.  3.  The sensor.  Regulatory mutations
              leading to constitutive  expression of emrD will be used to clone the regulator
              genes.  It  is expected that one of the genes will code for the receptor that 
              senses uncoupling.  4.  Are other MDR's target genes of low energy shock?  Five
              more  putative MDR's have been found in E. coli.  the possibility that  they
              are also induced by uncoupling will be studied using Northern  blotting. 
              Significance: it is of general importance in understanding cell  metabolism to
              learn how the cell senses its energy status and  activates a response
              mechanism.  %%%  Cells obtain energy through respiration.  This is a process of
               oxidation of various nutrients such as sugars by oxygen.   Respiration takes
              place in the cell membrane.  The energy released  in the course of respiration
              is stored in the form of a "high  energy" molecule, ATP.  A large number of
              toxic substances affects  the membrane and leads to an "Energy Shock", or loss
              of energy-  producing capability.  We found that the cell responds to such 
              toxins by inducing the synthesis of a special class of proteins,  multiple drug
              resistance pumps, that extrude the toxins from the  cell.  How does a cell
              sense the presence of t oxins?  What is the  mechanism for the induction of the
              multidrug resistance pumps?   These are the questions that will be studied in
              this project.      ***
