Title       : CAREER: Parallel Integer Programming for Architectural-LevelVLSI Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1999      
File        : a9796145

Award Number: 9796145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marios C. Papaefthymiou marios@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The research component of this project will result in the  design and
              development of portable parallel software for  solving architectural-level
              optimization problems that arise  in the design of VLSI systems.  Several of
              these problems  can be formulated as very large scale integer programs that 
              can be solved in polynomial time using iterative relaxation  techniques. The
              practical running times of these algorithms  on serial computers can be
              prohibitively long, however,  especially for interactive design environments. 
              The  scaleable parallel software developed in this project will  be able to
              execute orders of magnitude faster than  conventional serial code.  It will
              thus enable VLSI  designers to interactively explore their design space at an 
              early stage in the design process and to efficiently  consider several
              architectural alternatives before  committing to any particular implementation.
                 The educational part of this project aims at the seamless  integration of
              parallel computation in the undergraduate and  graduate curriculum.  To that
              effect, two new courses will  be developed at Yale.  The first course will
              introduce  undergraduates to the basics of serial and parallel computer 
              systems organization.  The second course will cover  algorithms for
              computer-aided design of VLSI systems with a  research  focus on parallel
              electronic design  automation. ***
