Title       : Experimental Methods in Structural Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1996  
File        : a9796071

Award Number: 9796071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29591              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicos Makris makris@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9451838  Makris  Instructive experiments in Structural Engineering are to be 
              conducted by undergraduate students in the Department of Civil  Engineering and
              Geological Sciences. The scope of this project is  the development of
              laboratory course in experimental structural  engineering in order to expose
              students to modern methods.  Too  large-scale experiments will be conducted.
              The first experiment is  associated with the Reinforced Concrete Design course
              and is the  study of the behavior of a reinforced concrete column under static 
              and cyclic loading. Students will measure quantities of significant  importance
              in structural analysis and design, such as initial  stiffness, yield point,
              ultimate strength, dissipated energy,  member ductility and stiffness
              deterioration. The second experiment  is associated with the Reduction of
              Natural Hazards course and is  the study of determination of damping of a
              structural component.  Students will conduct oscillatory tests at different
              frequencies to  extract the dynamic mechanical characteristics of structural 
              component.  A capstone project will complete the course.  The  objectives in
              offering the course are twofold: a) to increase the  physical understanding of
              students, about structural behavior, in  a systematic and comprehensive way
              that will support and clarify  their theoretical knowledge, and b) to
              familiarize them with  current experimental techniques used in the
              state-of-the-art  industrial and academic laboratories.
