Title       : Precision Micromanufacturing Processes Applied to Miniaturization Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9796246

Award Number: 9796246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87401              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig R. Friedrich craig@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert X. Gao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jun-Ing Ker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roy M. Schubert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Vasile  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Bruno Frazier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert O. Warrington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Jara-Almonte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9420600  Warrington    ABSTRACT     "Precision Micromanufacturing Processes
              Applied to Miniaturization Technologies," is a three-year project by the
              Institute for Micromanufacturing at Louisiana Tech University and will
              integrate the results of a very interdisciplinary research program of national
              importance into the undergraduate and graduate engineering curricula.  The
              research results, and course laboratory materials developed for this
              integration will be suitable for use in colleges and universities with program
              from manufacturing technology through graduate engineering and industry.  The
              research results are from a team of eight researchers and spans many years. 
              The project is centered around precision micromanufacturing processes which
              include diamond machining, microdrilling, micromilling, micro electrical
              discharge machining, focused ion beam micromachining, laser micromachining, and
              generation of molds for microparts by x-ray and deep ultraviolet lithography. 
              The results will be integrated into the curricula by way of a new introductory
              undergraduate course, three new graduate courses, and a series of enrichment
              seminars.  The results will also be integrated into existing undergraduate and
              graduate courses, in four eneineering disciplines, which address conventional
              processes.  A comparison and contrast between micromanufacturing processes and
              conventional processes will result.  The long-term goal is to develop a
              complete graduate degree program in this vital technology and to develop a
              multimedia database for use by others interested in doing the same.   The
              course materials developed for the project will be widely disseminated by way
              of an interactive CD-ROM tutorial which will provide both teachers and students
              the widest possible access to the research results.  The content of the
              tutorials, as well as the project itself, will be evaluated by both internal
              and external experts in the field.  The tutorials will be presented at a
              national meeting of precision engineers and the comm ents and critiques will be
              used to generate the final version for distribution to university and college
              teachers.   The impact on the academic and industrial communities will be
              significant.  At present there are no textbooks or other course materials in
              the area of precision micromanufacturing processes.  The equipment used in
              these processes, although not excessively expensive, is very specialized. 
              Therefore, engineering students do not normally learn about the processes or
              equipment which will become a dominant sector in manufacturing into the next
              century.  The results of the project will provide educators, technologists, and
              present and future engineers with a background in a very diverse field of
              technical and economic importance.  ***
