Title       : CAREER: Gate-Level Performance Optimization of Pipelines and General Sequential
               Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9796305

Award Number: 9796305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sachin S. Sapatnekar sachin@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with performance optimization of high-  speed
              synchronous digital circuits It addresses the application of  timing
              optimizations to pipelines and general sequential circuits  in high-performance
              systems.  The core of the research effort is  directed towards the method of
              retiming at the gate level.   Retiming is a sequential logic optimization
              technique that  repositions memory elements, namely, edge-triggered flip-flops
              and  level-triggered latches, within a circuits to optimize the timing 
              behavior of the circuit.  The use of retiming optimization methods,  chiefly
              device sizing, is also being investigated.    Under the educational part of
              this project, the PI is incorporating  CAD techniques in the undergraduate
              program from the sophomore  level by the use of CAD tools in teaching.  At the
              graduate level,  he is involved in developing courses, the supporting existing 
              courses, and in advising graduate students.  He is also exposing 
              undergraduates to his research for a better appreciation of the  state of the
              art, and to motivate them towards higher education.   he is also contributing
              towards outreach activities by focusing  towards distance education through
              teaching courses to sites in the  state of Iowa via television, and around the
              country through the  medium of satellite.
