Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Theoretical Studies of Irreversible Adsorption
               at the Solid Liquid Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9796199

Award Number: 9796199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 30,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8936               (Estimated)
Investigator: Julian Talbot talbot@space1.chemistry.duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9416956  Talbot    This three-year award will support U.S.-France collaborative 
              research in chemical engineering between Julian Talbot of  Purdue University
              and Pascal Viot of the Laboratory for  Theoretical Physics of Liquids, the
              French National Center  for Scientific Research (CNRS). They will conduct 
              theoretical, analytical and computational studies of  irreversible adsorption
              of large molecules from solutions  onto solid surfaces.  The objective of their
              research is to  understand the kinetics of the adsorption, the structure of 
              the deposited films and their connection to equilibrium  processes.  Molecules
              of proteins, latex spheres and  bacteria will be used in their studies.    The
              U.S. investigator and his group will focus primarily on  numerical simulation
              of adsorption processes and the  application of the results to actual
              experimental data.  This is enhanced by French theoretical expertise.  The 
              collaboration balances complementary expertise in chemical  engineering
              (Purdue) and in theoretical physics and  chemistry (CNRS).  Theoretical
              understanding of surface  adsorption is a relatively new research area.  Past
              research  on surface adsorption focused on experimental studies.  This 
              research project will provide a much needed theory of  surface adsorption. 
              These processes underlie important  phenomena, including catalysis, cell
              function, and coating.  ***
