Title       : CAREER: Mixed Integer Programming-Parallelism and Applications to Statistical
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9796312

Award Number: 9796312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63924              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva K. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                A major focus of this research is to develop a general   ``industrial
              strength'' mixed integer programming (MIP) code   with  parallel  distributed
              computing capability --- in particular, a  code   that allows parallel 
              execution on clusters of personal  computers or various types   of workstation 
              platforms.    A second focus of the research is to explore   new applications
              of  mixed integer programming to problems in discriminant   analysis.  A
              recently  developed MIP model of a problem in discriminant  analysis   opens up
              a new avenue  for approaching this important  area of statistics.  The  
              polyhedral structure of  this class of  problems is being investigated, and
              efficient   strategies to solve real instances are being developed.    In  
              conjunction with the  research plan, a concerted effort is being  expended to  
              arouse more interest in  mathematical programming  (especially integer
              programming)   and its computational  aspects  among engineering students.  New
              courses/seminars on    linear algebra, parallel computation and mixed  integer 
               programming are  planned.  In addition, an effort  is being made to establish 
               interaction with  industry, thereby  exposing students to important issues in 
               building and  analyzing  models for real-world problems and in deriving and  
              solutions.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
