Title       : Assembly of Coplex III of the Yeast Respiratory Chain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9796205

Award Number: 9796205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary D. Crivellone   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    9630788  Crivellone   The aim of the proposed research is to define the
              mechanism of action of two enzyme-specific chaperones during the assembly of a
              multisubunit enzyme of the mitochondrial respiratory chain,
              ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase (complex III).  A testable model for the role
              of the two enzyme-specific chaperones, CBP3 and CBP4 proteins, in the assembly
              of the yeast enzyme has been outlined in the proposal.  Preliminary studies
              show that the CBP4 protein physically interacts with one of the enzyme subunits
              (core 5) and that the two assembly proteins interact. The model suggests that
              the CBP3 protein may interact with one (or more) subunits of complex III. 
              Subsequent interaction between the two assembly proteins would bring together
              two (or more) subunits of the enzyme, forming an assembly nucleus. This protein
              nucleus would be recognized by other enzyme subunits, and promote continued
              assembly of the complex. The model will be tested using a collection of cbp3
              and cbp4 mutants available in the laboratory. Specific questions to be asked
              include whether the association between the CBP3 and CBP4 chaperones is a
              requirement for complex III assembly, which enzyme subunits are essential for
              this interaction, and whether the CBP3 and CBP4 proteins play a role in
              stabilizing assembled enzyme in vivo. Interactions between the CBP3 protein and
              complex III subunits will be determined. A possible role of the assembly
              proteins in insertion of the heme group into the cytochrome b subunit during
              the assembly process will be examined. The results of the proposed studies wiIl
              provide valuable insight into the assembly of complex III and into
              chaperone-assisted assembly of multisubunit complexes in general.  %%% 
              Assembly of protein complexes is a fundamental yet essential process for cell
              survival. Relatively little is known is known about the assembly processes,
              although in many cases it has been firmly established that chaperone proteins
              are essential components. The proposed research will  be invaluable towards
              defining the mechanism of action of two chaperones which are specific for the
              assembly of an enzyme of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. The enzyme,
              ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase (or complex III), is an essential part of a
              biochemical pathway which is responsible for the synthesis of the majority of
              the energy utilized by the cell. Complex III is an ideal enzyme for assembly
              studies since it is remarkably well conserved in fungi, plants and animals. 
              Information gained on the mechanism of assembly of complex III in a lower, more
              easily manipulated organism, such as fungi, will likely be applicable to
              similar studies in higher organisms. Moreover, since complex III is a
              multisubunit enzyme whose subunits originate in two separate compartments of 
              the cell, information acquired through our investigations on the mechanism of
              assembly of this enzyme will be important towards better understanding
              intracellular communication.  ***      ??
