Title       : Experimental Studies of Correlation Effects in Quantum Insulators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1997 
File        : a9796339

Award Number: 9796339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dragana Popovic dragana@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sean Washburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9510355  Popovic    During the grant period several problems in quantum
              insulators will be  explored    on   small   Si   metal-oxide-semiconductor  
              field-effect  transistors  fabricated at IBM.  Issues that will be studied 
              include:  (1)  Kondo  impurity  vs  Coulomb blockade in disordered  hopping 
              and  tunneling  systems, (2) statistics of localized states  and  noise  in 
              correlated  insulators, (3) lineshape of resonance peaks in correlated 
              insulators,  (4) direct measurement of resonant tunneling and  hopping 
              conduction  via  two  different paths, (5) Hall effects  and  magnetic  field 
              driven metal-insulator transitions in Kondo systems, (6) length  scales 
              associated with quantum interference in correlated insulators.  The  
              experiments  will  comprise  linear  and  non-linear   transport  meassurements
                in  zero  magnetic  field  and  in   non-zero   field.  Equilibrium  and shot
              noise experiments will be analyzed in  terms  of  recent  theoretical 
              developments about  noise  and  the  response  of  correlated  systems  to 
              shed new light on the problem  of  correlated  electron transport in quantum
              insulators.  %%%  During the period of this award,  recently discovered
              behavior in very  short   transistors  that  cannot  be  understood  in  terms 
              of   the  conventional physics of electronic devices will be explored through 
              a  variety  of  experiments.  The research will be centered on electronic 
              quantum  transport (discrete moverment of electrons) in submicron-size  silicon
               transistors (one micron =  40 millionths of  an  inch).   One  focus  of  this
               effort will be nonlinear effects (the  quality  which  gives  any  transistor 
              the  ability  to  amplify),  which  are   also  significant for a wide variety
              of applications.  This research project  will  be a university-industry
              collaboration among three institutions:  the measurements will be performed at
              the City College of CUNY and the  University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
              and the transistors  will  be fabricated at t he IBM T. J. Watson Research
              Center.  ***
