Title       : Vision Algorithms for Analysis of Tissue and Fluid Deformations from Medical
               Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1997   
File        : a9796078

Award Number: 9796078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amir A. Amini   (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Gore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Duncan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Forrester Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas K. Egglin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The aim of this research is to develop vision algorithms for  analysis of
              non-rigid motion from medical imagery. We will continue  our algorithm
              development in snake tracking and image velocity  field computation for
              assessment of tissue deformations and  analysis of fluid flow from MRI and
              X-ray imagery, and extend the  techniques to 3D. MRI is unique in its ability
              to non-invasively  and selectively alter tissue magnetization, and create
              tagged  patterns within deforming tissue such as the heart muscle. The 
              resulting pattern defines a time-varying curvilinear coordinate  system on the
              underlying tissue, allowing for precise and  quantitative measurement of tissue
              motion and deformation from a  sequence of images. The motion of these visible
              tag lines is  tracked with Dynamic Programming (DP) B-spline snakes, and 
              interacting B-spline deformable grids. Warp algorithms have been  developed
              which continuously map two tissue regions in the plane  such that two embedded
              grids of curves are brought into  registration. For fluid flow field analysis,
              a scalar function  formulation for optical flow has been developed. The novel
              aspect  of the new optical flow framework is that it automatically enforces 
              incompressibility on the resulting velocity field. Applications of  the
              techniques to various experimental conditions are planned.
