Title       : Model-Based Design of Optimal Nonlinear Filters for Binary Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9796118

Award Number: 9796118
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129829             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward R. Dougherty e-dougherty@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              All translation-invariant binary image filters possess morphological 
              representations.  Hence, finding an optimal filter involves finding the 
              structuring elements that yield a filter having minimum error - in our case, 
              mean-absolute error (MAE).  This observation leads to automated design
              procedures  for restoration and enhancement filters when treating both the
              observed  (corrupted) and ideal images as random set processes.  A key design
              aspect is  postulation of image models for the ideal and observed processes. 
              This research  concerns filter robustness relative to modeling assumptions: to
              what degree is  filter performance degraded relative to deviations from the
              design assumptions?   Our approach is to assume parameterized ideal and
              observed image processes and  to consider the effects of applying an optimal
              filter for a given parameter  vector to images corresponding to different
              parameter vectors.    The design of enhancement algorithms is an integral part
              of the manufacture of  electronic office equipment.  This time-consuming (up to
              a year), and performance  is limited by the ability of a human being to
              consider only a relatively small  number of possible algorithms.  Recently,
              enhancement algorithms have been  automatically designed by higher-level
              algorithms that use statistics in  conjunction with mathematical models of
              images and imaging systems, thereby  significantly cutting design time while at
              the same time producing better  enhancement.  The present research investigates
              design from various image models.   It also addresses the "robustness"
              question: since a designed enhancement  algorithm is based on modeling
              assumptions, practical application requires that  we have a reasonable idea of
              how it will perform on image data that differs to  varying degrees from the
              data on which it has been designed.
