Title       : Integration of Planning and Control Using Multiple Models, Switching, and Tuning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9796241

Award Number: 9796241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. T. Venkataraman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              IRI-9530915  Venkataraman, Subramanian  Yale University  $75,692 - 12 mos       
               This research addressed the integration of planning and  control in
              intelligent systems from a systems theoretic  viewpoint.  In doing so, it
              investigates the relevance of two  ideas to integration of planning and
              control.  First, it studies  the relationship between a plan element (or action
              or behavior)  and the concept of a reference model in control theory.  This, in
               conjunction with the arsenal of tools available in control theory  for the
              synthesis and analysis of controllers that guarantee  reference model
              following, may then be used to formally specify  the control performance of
              each action.  The second aspect of  this research deals with the existence of
              multiple actions in a  plan, connected together through some relationships, and
              having  some ordering.  To address this, the use of multiple reference  models
              (in a control system) and means to switch between them in  a stable fashion is
              investigated.  By studying these problems, an  integrated view of certain
              elements of planning and control may  be derived, where reference models are
              related to actions,  switching rules to the initiation and termination of
              actions,  switching sequences to the admissible output of plan executors in 
              deliberative systems, etc.  In this manner, the planned work  would complement
              ongoing planning research in AI by providing the  control oriented knowledge
              necessary for robust design.  The  theoretical results developed in this effort
              will be applied to  quadruped locomotion (as an example problem), and a kernel
              of  gait controllers, and the set of admissible rules for gait  switching and
              tuning that guarantee stable locomotion will be  formally derived.
