Title       : CAREER: A Compiler-Assisted Approach to High Performance Memory Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9796313

Award Number: 9796313
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhiyuan Li   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 The widening gap between processor speed and memory latency will  continue to
              be a critical issue to the performance of computer  systems.  The  latency
              problem is even more acute on  multiprocessors that share the same  space, in
              which a main memory  module is typically remote to all or all but one  of the 
              processors.  It is therefore important to reduce unnecessary  remote  memory
              references and unnecessary network activities, and  to achieve high hit  ratio
              at the private, primary caches.    The project explores coherent  designs of
              compilers and  memory architectures to improve the average memory  latency, and
               the network traffic.  The main thrust of this work is to combine  compilers'
              ability to predict program behavior with harrdware's  ability to  record memory
              reference patterns at run time.  The  research focuses on three  major issues: 
              (1) The use of a  compiler-assisted and hardware controlled  coherence
              mechanism on  multiprocessors with private cache memories; (2) The use  of 
              sophisticated interprocedural analysis to support the proposed  coherence 
              mechanism, via array data flow analysis and static task  scheduling; and (3)
              The  effects of program transformations, false  sharing and limited directory 
              pointers on the proposed coherence  mechanism.  This work covers a variety of 
              multiprocessors that  share a common address space, including bus-based
              systems,  the  Non-Uniform Access (NUMA) multiprocessors and the Cache-Only 
              Memory Access  (COMA) multiprocessors.    The main objectives of the PI's
              education plan in this  funding  period are (1) to redesign the compiler and
              language design  course  sequence for the Computer Science Department of
              Minnesota  and to solidify the  interfaces of these sources with other 
              language design sources; (2) to augment  the main compiler and  language design
              sources by seminar courses which address  new  issues regarding the interfaces
              of the compilers with the rest of  the  computer systems, and (3) to achieve
              teaching excellence in  these c ourses so  as to provide students solid
              understanding of  the principles of programming  language design and
              implementation  and compiler techniques which will be  important to their 
              scientific and engineering career.  The PI will conduct two  experiments in
              this funding period. One is to develop a language  design source  to be taught
              after the compiler courses and the  other is to add an operating  system
              implementation course to the  curriculum.    Additional educational  activities
              of the PI include exploration  of new avenues for creating industry  co-op
              programs for students  in the computer systems area and exploration of new 
              avenues or  providing professionals with excellent access to both the basic 
              courses and the seminar courses, e.g. through the university's  Distributed 
              Multimedia Learning Center.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
