Title       : Notochord Differentiation in the Ascidian, Ciona Intestinalis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9796067

Award Number: 9796067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244267             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Levine mlevine@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                The overall goal of the proposed study is to exploit the extensive lineage
              maps and simple embryonic development of the Ascidian, Ciona intestinalis, to
              characterize the regulatory pathway underlying notochord differentiation. Ciona
              is a simple chordate that possesses a small genome (comparable in size to the
              genomes of  C. elegans and Drosophila). This simplicity suggests that common
              features of all chordates, such as the notochord, might be specified by
              `stripped down` pathways that are directly applicable to vertebrate systems. A
              detailed notochord lineage has been characterized; after just nine embryonic
              cleavages the fully differentiated notochord contains only forty cells (about
              10-12 hours after fertilization). Dr. Levine believes that Ciona is well poised
              for molecular analyses, particularly the elucidation of developmental pathways.
              Much of the project's effort will be devoted to the establishment of a
              blastomere disaggregation assay, whereby the embryonic activities of
              potentially interesting  regulatory proteins are defined within the context of
              detailed lineages. This assay will involve the microinjection of early embryos
              with appropriate mRNAs. Individual, defined blastomeres will be cultured after
              disaggregating staged embryos, thereby permitting an assessment of autonomous
              versus nonautonomous regulatory interactions. Special efforts will focus on
              three regulatory proteins that have been implicated in notochord development in
              other systems, including axial/pintallavis, floating head/Xnot, and
              brychyury/T.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
