Title       : Advanced Monitoring System for Long-Span Bridges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9796091

Award Number: 9796091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $361000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming-Liang Wang mlwang@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9622516  Wang  In recent years, various monitoring and diagnosis hardware  have
              been developed for applications to civil  infrastructures.  It is now possible
              to design an automated  and reliable system, which can both continuously
              monitor the  structural performance of a bridge and assess its status of 
              damage or deterioration.    This project conducts a three year research effort
              to  develop an automated monitoring system implements on a long  suspension
              bridge in China, which will make available to the  project personal assistance
              such as technicians and logic  supports required for the field experiments. 
              The effort  will be focused on the design and development of a self 
              displacement measurement device and a wireless data  communication system.  The
              diagnosis techniques include  finite element modeling of the suspension bridge,
              modeling  and measurement of strong wind,earthquakes and traffic  loading,
              analysis of the ambient vibration data through the  use of NExT technique to
              eliminate the use of an exciter, a  global damage diagnosis technique to
              identify the damage,  and selection of sensors and techniques to detect
              localized  damage and defects.  A section model of the suspension  bridge will
              also be constructed and tested in the wind  tunnel at Hong Kong University of
              Science and Technology in  order to determine some of the aerodynamic
              parameters and to  calibrate and optimize the sensor locations.    This
              investigation involves international team of  researchers including industries,
              universities and national  laboratories.  The ultimate goal of the research is
              to  design and develop an advanced system that can be  practically and
              efficiently installed into a long span  bridge to monitor day to day activities
              and to detect the  damage or give a warning when a critical stress has been 
              reached.  Although a suspension bridge will be selected on  line condition
              monitoring in this project, the developed  system is expected to be also
              applicable in other large  structure systems includin g truss bridges and tall
              buildings  under severe loading conditions such as earthquakes and  strong
              winds.  ***
