Title       : A New Stochastic, Context Sensitive, and Intransitive Choice Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1999   
File        : a9796004

Award Number: 9796004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105589             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo gonzalez@oak.cats.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Psychological research has demonstrated that people's preferences are not
              constant and that decision makers often depart from predictions made by so
              called `rational` models.  Most decision making theories, however, either make
              deterministic predictions to address departures from rational principles, or
              handle variability of behavior with stochastic models that cannot account for
              such violations.  This research examines a new, stochastic model of decision
              making, the proportional difference model (PD).  PD is a simple, two-parameter
              model, based on the notion that decision makers trade attribute values in a
              proportional manner and that this trading is a variable process.  A number of
              experiments will be conducted to examine the predictions of the PD model.  The
              first study will test PD by comparing its descriptive ability to that of three
              other models found in the literature; preliminary tests suggest PD is a better
              model.  The second study will focus on PD's predictions of context effects,
              such as effects of maximum attribute values in the choice environment and the
              known reflection effect.  The third study will investigate decision making with
              vague information.  The results of this research will advance the state of
              knowledge of descriptive decision making.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
