Title       : An Experimental/Mathematical Determination of an Effective Heat Transfer
               Coefficient for Continuously Cast Metal During the Cooling Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1996   
File        : a9796017

Award Number: 9796017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34263              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ebrahim Bigzadeh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9312734  Bigzadeh       The main objective of the project is to obtain an
              effective  heat transfer coefficient on a metal strand in the secondary 
              cooling zone during the continuous casting process.  Previous  research
              indicates that many cooling processes in this zone have a  pronounced effect on
              the quality of the cast metal.  Two different  experimental setups will be
              designed and constructed to satisfy the  special requirements of the two phases
              of the experimental study.  During the experiment, spray water and spray (air
              and water)  velocities will be measured.  This will be achieved by the three- 
              dimensional Laser Doppler Anemometer and Particle Dynamic Analyzer  system (3-D
              LDA/PDA).  Thermocouples with an associated HP data  acquisition system will be
              applied to measure the temperature  distribution.  A high resolution photo
              camera will be used to  obtain information during the droplet impinging
              process.  X-ray  diffraction and Auger experiments will be used in order to 
              determine the composition and the structure of the surface scale.   A suitable
              method of curve fitting will be used to develop the  correlation equation for
              determining the heat transfer coefficient  for the metal strand in the
              secondary cooling zone during the  continuous casting process.       Improved
              understanding of the transfer of heat to the castings  may allow higher quality
              continuously cost metals to be produced,  reducing the cost and improving the
              performance of metal sheet  stock.
