Title       : Biochemistry of Fatty Acid Transport in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1997  
File        : a9796006

Award Number: 9796006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul N. Black blackp@mail.amc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albany Medical College
	      47 New Scotland Avenue
	      Albany, NY  122083412    518/445-5582

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9506059  Black  In all organisms, fatty acids (FA) and their derivatives are
              components of membranes, are sources of metabolic energy, and are effector
              molecules that regulate metabolism.  This research is on the transport of
              long-chain fatty acids (C14-C18) into the cell, followed by their enzymatic
              conversion to coenzyme A thioesters prior to metabolism.  These FAs traverse
              the cell envelope of Escherichia coli by a specific, energy-dependent process
              that requires the outer membrane-bound FA binding protein FadL and the inner
              membrane associated acyl CoA synthetase (ACS).  ACS activates FAs concomitant
              with transport and results in net FA accumulation in the cell against a
              concentration gradient.  Processes that govern FadL-mediated long-chain FA
              transport across the outer membrane will be determined by  i  evaluating the
              topology of FadL using limited proteolysis and protein modification and  ii 
              defining the FA binding pocket within FadL using the affinity labeled
              long-chain fatty acid 9-p-azidophenoxy nonanoic acid (3H-APNA).  The
              contribution of acyl CoA synthetase to long-chain FA transport will be
              evaluated by  i  defining the ATP and FA binding domains within ACS using the
              affinity labeled ligands azido- (32P ATP and 3H-APNA, respectively, and  ii 
              mutagenesis of the fadD gene at specific sites involved in CoA and/or FA
              binding. Studies are also being conducted to define protein-protein
              interactions between the membrane-bound (FadL) and soluble protein components
              of this transport system using far Western analyses, and by performing
              experiments with glutathione S-transferase (GST) and histidine fusion proteins.
               Soluble protein components may interact with FadL.  The H+/FA cotransporter in
              the inner cell membrane, and acyl CoA dehydrogenase and acyl CoA binding
              protein in the cell cytosol may bind specifically with ACS.  %%%  In living
              cells from bacteria to man, dietary fats (or fatty acids; FAs) are important
              sources of energy to support growth.  This research project addresses the qu
              estion of how long-chain FAs are transported across the membrane into the cell
              to be used to produce energy.  In the bacterium, Escherichia coli, long-chain
              FAs are taken up by an enzyme system that requires an outer membrane-bound FA
              binding and transport protein (FadL) and an inner membrane associated enzyme
              (CoA synthetase; ACS).  The use of E. coli for these studies is ideal as basic
              questions can be answered concerning transport of long-chain FAs using
              biochemistry, molecular biology and molecular genetics.  Work will define
              regions within FadL that are essential in FA transport, and will thus serve as
              a paradigm in understanding specific interactions between proteins and FAs.  In
              addition, regions within acyl CoA synthetase that bind long-chain FAs and ATP
              will be defined, thus providing information on the role of this enzyme in FA
              transport.  Lastly, studies are being conducted to define protein-protein
              interactions between the membrane-bound (FadL) and soluble protein components
              of the transport system.  These studies will be important in further defining
              the transport system and by identifying specific cytosolic/membraneous protein
              associations that develop with FadL and with ACS for FA transport to occur. 
              ***
