Title       : Cosmogenic Nuclide Chronology of Weathering Zones and Ice Sheet Limits in
               Northern Labrador: A Pilot Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1998       
File        : a9796140

Award Number: 9796140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42322              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Brook brook@vancouver.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                This proposal requests funds for a pilot study applying cosmogenic nuclide
              exposure ages to glacial deposits in the Torngat Mountains, northern Labrador,
              that were deposited by the eastern margin of the Laurentide Ice Sheet.  This
              sequence of moraines and drift represents at least two successively limited
              glaciations of the Torngat Mountains and is a "type area" for study of
              weathering zones in North America.  Despite over a century of study, the
              chronology of this classic sequence of differentially weathered glacial
              deposits is highly uncertain.  Furthermore, the glacial history of this region
              is a key component in reconstructing the past history of the Laurentide Ice
              Sheet, which exerted a major influence on global climate during the last
              glacial period.    Samples for measurement of cosmogenic 10Be and other
              cosmogenic nuclides will be  collected to evaluate the suitability of this
              region for exposure dating studies.  The preliminary 10Be data will be used to
              create an absolute exposure age chronology for the region, and to evaluate the
              correlation of previously mapped and correlated deposits.    Potential results
              of the proposed work and its possible extensions include:     An absolute
              chronology for a largely undated glacial sequence in  an area that is crucial
              for reconstructing the margins of the  Laurentide Ice Sheet at the last glacial
              maximum (LGM).     Age constraints for glacial deposits and ice sheet limits
              related  to pre-LGM Laurentide Ice Sheet advances in Labrador.     Constraints
              on erosion rates and weathering history of rock  surfaces in sub-Arctic/Arctic
              regions.
