Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1996   
File        : a9796047

Award Number: 9796047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44600              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Adams jim.adams@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Two projects will be initiated on this PYI grant: one involves                 
              improving ab-initio tight binding code for electronic structure and            
              the other deals with pre-melting at surfaces.  In the first                    
              project, the proposed code improvements using localized orbitals               
              promise extremely fast calculations of the molecular dynamics of               
              systems with up to 200 atoms.  The method can presently handle s-              
              and p-orbitals, but will be expanded to deal with d-orbitals so                
              that transition element properties can be calculated.  The improved            
              code will be used to study adhesion at polymer-metal interfaces and            
              the structure of nanoscale metallic clusters.  The study of pre-               
              melting of surfaces will focus on lead.  The effective atom method             
              will be used to calculate the Gibbs free energy of the bulk solid              
              and the bulk liquid; the melting point will be obtained from this              
              information.  For a range of temperatures below the melting point              
              molecular dynamics will be used to simulate several lead surfaces.             
              %%%                                                                            
              On this Presidential Young Investigator grant two projects in                  
              theoretical materials science will be initiated.  The first will               
              involve the improvement of a computer code to deal with transition             
              metals which are important in many applications.  This improved                
              code will then be used to study adhesion at polymer-metal                      
              interfaces and the structure of nanoscale metal clusters.  The                 
              study of the pre-melting of lead surfaces will improve our                     
              understanding of why the surfaces of metals often melt prior to the            
              melting of the bulk materials.  This has important ramifications in            
              the processing of metals for a variety of applications.
