Title       : Wide-Angle Symmetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1998  
File        : a9796307

Award Number: 9796307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. Fleck fleck@cs.hmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                This project is developing algorithms to recognize objects in wide-  angle
              images using local symmetries.  A new mathematical model of  imaging geometry,
              based on stereographic projection, provides a  more accurate model of real
              wide-angle lenses than traditional  perspective projection.  It also creates a
              simple mathematical  relationship between local symmetries of round objects and
              their  outlines in 2D images: symmetries project onto symmetries.   Finally,
              projection of small objects is approximately orthographic,  so that existing
              algorithms for detecting skew symmetries  (symmetries of flat 3D objects) can
              be adapted to wide fields of  view. An object recognition system is being
              constructed, using both  skew and non-skew symmetries, a calibrated camera/lens
              system, and  a canonical frame construction.  Faster algorithms are being 
              developed to detect symmetries so they can be used to group edges   in complex
              wide-angle images.  This project is evaluating  techniques for using additional
              views of an object to verify or  disambiguate possible symmetries, such as
              imposing depth  constraints on the initial search for symmetries and confirming
               that the apparent shape of the object changes appropriately between  two
              views.  The frequency of local symmetries in real objects, and  their stability
              across changes in viewpoint, is also being studied.
