Title       : Changes in Sahel Land-Surface Characteristics and Climate Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1997      
File        : a9796216

Award Number: 9796216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yongkang Xue   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9405431  Xue    The climate in the Sahel area of Africa has been dominated by 
              drought since the late 1960's.  A number of studies have shown that  the land
              surface-atmosphere interaction in the sub-Sahara region is  very strong and
              that the land surface feedback may have played a  role in the Sahel drought. 
              However, in most of these studies only  simple surface models were used and the
              results were never verified  against observational data.  Two comprehensive
              surface field  measurements (HAPEX-Sahel and SEBEX)  were conducted in the
              Sahel  during the past five years.  These data sets will be used to  validate a
              simplified version of the Simple Biosphere Model (SSiB)  and to create
              vegetation data sets for GCM boundary conditions.  In  the calibration study,
              special attention will be given to the  realistic simulation of co-existing
              vegetation covers, which is one  of the manifestations of surface
              heterogeneity.  The sensitivity of  the land-surface scheme to vegetation and
              soil parameter values  will be investigated.  This calibration will help us to
              improve the  simulation of the hydrological cycle  and the surface energy 
              budget.   The coupled biosphere-atmosphere model will be used to study the 
              roles of the surface processes and atmospheric dynamics in  determining the
              variation in the climate and hydrology of the  Sahel.  To understand the
              mechanisms of land surface feedback, we  will divide the vegetation and soil
              parameters into several groups.   The effects of each group and their
              combination on the simulated  climate anomaly in the Sahel will be examined.   
              The effect of heterogeneity will also be investigated.  Based on  the results
              of the above proposed studies, two multi-year numerical  integrations will be
              conducted.  The long term integration will  allow more stringent statistical
              significance testing of the  results.  The results from the control run will be
              used to analyze   The simulation of the annual cycle of water and energy
              balances in  the sub-Sahara area.  the anomaly  run, in which the land surface
              in  the Sahel is assigned as a desertification area, will be used to  assess
              the effects of the desertification on the regional and  global climate and
              hydrology during  all seasons.  Since this July  25, 1994 sensitivity study is
              based upon comprehensive  observational  data, its successful completion will
              help us in  realistically assessing the consequences of the desertification in 
              the regional as well as the global climate, in particular the Sahel  drought.
