Title       : Molecular Transport Across Single Nanopores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9796203

Award Number: 9796203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Li Sun   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This work, by Assistant Professor Li Sun of the University of   Minnesota-Twin
              Cities, focuses on single nanopores in metal membranes and   is supported by
              the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program.  The   nanopores are
              ion-conducting and contain a surface modifier which binds   to an analyte ion
              selectively.  The capture of an ion transiting the pore   modulates the pore
              ionic conductivity which is the signal of interest.    This approach has the
              advantage that analyte crossing the pore need not   be capable of producing
              redox or spectrometric signals.  Pore fabrication   will be investigated using
              both electrochemical and self-assembled   monolayer technology to control the
              pore structure.  The nature of   molecular transport through a pore will be
              studied using surface   analytical techniques including surface enhanced Raman
              spectroscopy and   electrochemical methods.  Knowledge gained from these
              fundamental studies   will be used to develop new detectors for chemical
              analysis, particularly   of biochemicals.  A major objective of this work is to
              fabricate structured pores of   approximately small molecule dimensions in
              metal membranes for the   purpose of studying the transport of molecules across
              such a pore.    Fundamental study of the chemistry of ion binding to selective
              sites   within the pore is useful because ion channels are an important and not
                yet fully understood mechanism for control of information flow across  
              biological membranes.  A second major goal of the project is to develop   new
              types of detectors for chemical analysis which also utilize the   ability of
              the active sites in the pore to selectively interact with ions   of interest in
              the pore solution.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
