Title       : Sequence Stratigraphic Backstripping with Application to the Cenozoic of the
               North Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1997      
File        : a9796227

Award Number: 9796227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37823              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle A. Kominz michelle.kominz@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Galloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Kominz  9506572   The projected research will establish a sequence stratigraphic
              backstripping procedure.  Sequence stratigraphic and genetic stratigraphic data
              coupled with well logs and crustal thicknesses will be the input for a
              two-dimensional, flexural, backstripping effects of sediment loading. 
              Separation of the eustatic and tectonic components of accommodation space will
              then be possible, based on the unique temporal and spatial properties of each. 
              Thermally driven subsidence has an exponential form with depth, that will be a
              function crustal and mantle stretching.  In-plane stress has a well-defined
              form with respect to margin distance, but no predictable form in time.  Eustacy
              also has no predictable form in time.  Eustacy, however, is constant in space. 
              The model will be designed to be applied to a thermally subsiding region.   The
              model will be tested on an extensive data set from the Cenozoic of the northern
              North Sea Basin.  Five traverses, including strike and dip sections, will be
              interpreted in detail, using both systems tract sequence stratigraphic and
              genetic sequence stratigraphic concepts.  Recent biostratigraphic data, well
              logs and deep seismic data will also be included in the data base.   
              Application of sequence stratigraphic backstripping will produce a range of
              possible stretching factors, eustatic curves and stress histories for the
              northern North Sea Basin.  Cross sections showing the decompacted sediment
              thicknesses as well as underlying bathymetry will add insight to
              interpretations of sediment sources and basement controls on deposition.
