Title       : The Genetics of Reproductive Isolation: Co-Evolution, Polymorphism and
               Functional Differentiation of Gamete Recognition Loci in Sea Urchins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1996   
File        : a9796045

Award Number: 9796045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65495              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Palumbi spalumbi@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9510407  PALUMBI   Understanding how species originate has been one of the most
              important, yet one of the most difficult, challenges in biology.  One of the
              largest gaps in our understanding of the origin of species concerns the genetic
              changes that accompany reproductive isolation.  This proposal describes new
              experiments in one such emerging model system:  hyper-variable gamete
              attachment genes in recently diverged sea urchins in the genus Echinometra. 
              These species are reproductively isolated by the failure of sperm to fuse with
              eggs of different species.  Our prior work has shown that the sperm attachment
              protein bindin has diverged greatly between Echinometra species, and is
              extensively variable within species.  Because of active work on the molecular
              biology of sea urchin fertilization, we can now also examine the gene for the
              egg receptor, and for the first time study the co-evolution of interacting
              genes involved in reproductive isolation.   We will examine bindin/receptor
              co-evolution by sequencing the egg receptor gene in Enhinometra and comparing
              results to our existing bindin sequences.  cDNA sequences of the 4 Indo-Pacific
              Echinometra species will be used to test for patterns observed in bindin.  The
              results will allow us to understand the co-evolution of proteins that are
              closely involved in the mechanisms that define species boundaries.  Our studies
              are also important for basic research on mechanisms of fertilization, and how
              egg and sperm successfully recognize one another.
