Title       : Proposal for a Model Ethics Center for Engineering & Science on the World Wide
               Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1999   
File        : a9796234

Award Number: 9796234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94909              (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline A. Whitbeck caw9@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The World Wide Web (WWW) and the Internet are the cutting edge communication
              environments for engineering and science, and are fast becoming the environment
              of choice for education innovators in other disciplines as well.  This project
              will construct on the WWW an Ethics Center for Science and Engineering.  The
              center will serve as a model web ethics center, demonstrating the potential of
              the web to bring  together a variety of existing materials and make them
              available to a diverse population of users.  The subject matter will include
              research ethics, professional ethics for engineers and scientists, and policy
              questions that bear on research ethics and professional ethics,   including
              questions of research ethics which arise in medical research.  The WWW Ethics
              Center will serve students, practitioners, researchers, and science and
              engineering instructors, as well as scholars in science and engineering ethics.
               The Center will provide support for developing responses to ethical problems; 
              information and informed reflection on the ethical issues that commonly arise
              in engineering and science; access to educational resources in science and
              engineering ethics; and a forum for educators to disseminate their educational
              innovations.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
