Title       : EROC: Comparative Effects of Elevated Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Within Two
               Multiple Trophic Level Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9796250

Award Number: 9796250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Karowe karowe@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              .  9509089  Karowe  When plants are grown under elevated carbon dioxide, their
              leaves usually contain less nitrogen but may contain more, less, or the same
              amount of defensive chemicals.  This research asks two main questions:  !) Do
              CO2-induced changes in plant quality affect higher trophic levels (e. g.
              caterpillars that consume plants, parasitoid wasps that develop inside and
              consume caterpillars, and hyperparasitoid wasps that develop inside and consume
              parasitoid wasps), and 2) Does association of host plants with nitrogen-fixing
              bacteria buffer all trophic levels against the direct effects of elevated CO2? 
              To answer these questions, the effects of elevated CO2 on plant nutritional
              quality and defensive chemistry, and subsequent effects on herbivores,
              parasitoids, and hyperparasitoids will be compared between a four trophic level
              system based on crucifer (non-nitrogen fixing) host plants and one based on
              legume (nitrogen fixing) host plants.  This research will expand our
              understanding of the ecological consequences of elevated CO2 to include the
              third and fourth trophic levels, and to begin to assess the mechanisms
              responsible for variability among different multiple trophic level systems in
              their susceptibility to the direct effects of elevated CO2.  Because our
              economically important agricultural crops include both legumes and non-legumes,
              and support multiple trophic levels, this information may enhance agricultural
              productivity under the future, i. e., elevated CO2 atmosphere.
