Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Essential Laminations in 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1996  
File        : a9796075

Award Number: 9796075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Brittenham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9400651  Brittenham       Essential laminations generalize two objects important
              to  3-manifold topology: the incompressible surface and the taut  foliation. 
              Both of these more `classical' objects have proved  themselves to be very
              useful in the past (and continue to be so,  today), and essential laminations
              have recently shown similar  power in attacking many of the fundamental
              problems in the theory  of 3-manifolds.  The investigator intends to continue
              his work on  essential laminations, with three main goals in mind: (1) to show 
              that they behave in many situations much like their far more  manageable
              cousin, the incompressible surface, (2) to show that  homotopy equivalent
              3-manifolds, which contain essential  laminations, are homeomorphic, and (3) to
              construct essential  laminations in a wide variety of 3-manifolds, using the
              notion of  Haken normal form for laminations.  In other words, the 
              investigator intends to show that essential laminations (1)  behave nicely, (2)
              tell us interesting things about 3-manifolds,  and (3) can be found in `most'
              3-manifolds.       It is somehow surprising that, in spite of the fact that we 
              live in a 3-dimensional world, and therefore have a great deal of  natural
              intuition about how things `work' in 3 dimensions, our  understanding of
              3-dimensional manifolds, objects modelled on our  3-dimensional space, is far
              from complete.  Many of its basic  problems, such as the celebrated Poincare
              conjecture, remain  unsolved, even though the analogous problems in higher
              dimensions  have been settled.  Many new techniques have been developed, and 
              continue to be developed, to try to unravel this familiar, though  mysterious,
              dimension.  The investigator intends to continue to  delevop a new technique
              for studying 3-dimensional manifolds  which uses (well-understood)
              2-dimensional objects to study these  (not so well-understood) 3-dimensional
              ones.  The idea is that by  thinking of a 3-dimensional object as being made up
              of a  collection of 2-dimensionsal `sheets' , stacked together, we can 
              sometimes use our (even better!) intuition and understanding  about dimension 2
              to `stitch together' a solution to a  3-dimensional problem.  ***
