Title       : Finding Images Intensity Boundaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1998 
File        : a9796311

Award Number: 9796311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. Fleck fleck@cs.hmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                     This is the first year of a three-year continuing CAREER  award.  This
              project is developing computer algorithms that find  object boundaries in CCD
              camera images using cues other than  changes in average grey-scale intensity:
              color, texture, and  stereo. Intensity edge finding is complicated by slopes
              and  boundaries within regions, caused by shading. These effects are  much
              smaller for non-intensity features, particularly color. In the  presence of
              texture, non-intensity features may offer comparable  spatial resolution.
              Techniques are being developed for computing  each feature with low noise and
              at high-spatial resolution. Better  opponent color values can be produced by
              modifying the framegrabber  interface. Several broadly-tuned energy operators
              are being  evaluated for use as texture features. Preattentive stereo 
              information can be computed using a narrow-range matcher or by  meauring the
              degree of fusion with texture energy operators. The  comparative reliability of
              different cues is being assessed.  Finally, boundaries can be extracted using a
              new robust estimation  technique and used as input to existing shape analysis
              and  attentive texture identification algorithms.
