Title       : Heat Kernal Analysis and Analytic Number Theory on Symmetric Spaces, Calabi-Yau
               Varieties and Moduli Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9796336

Award Number: 9796336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay A. Jorgenson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award supports research in the general area of spectral  theory and number
              theory, with particular interest in trace  formulae, explicit formulae and
              prime number theorems, spectral  theory on degenerating Riemannian manifolds,
              and various analytic  and arithmetic aspects of Arakelov theory on Calabi-Yau 
              varieties. Jorgenson is continuing his collaboration with Serge  Lang. They are
              studying the heat kernel on symmetric spaces to  provide further examples of
              their general theory. Specific  examples such as Hilbert modular and Picard
              modular varieties  will be studied deeply. Jorgenson is continuing resarch with
               Andrey Todorov in the study of the spectral theory and arithmetic  of
              Calabi-Yau varieties. The long term goal of this study is the  development of a
              theory of arithmetic of Calabi-Yau varieties  which would be similar to the
              existing theory of arithmetic of  elliptic curves. With Jozek Dodziuk,
              Jorgenson is studying the  spectral theory of degenerating families of finite
              volume  Riemannian manifolds which possess metrics that have constant  negative
              sectional curvatures near the developing singularities.  Jorgenson is
              continuing ongoing research with Jonathon Huntley in  the study of Weyl's laws
              for the counting function of cuspidal  eigenvalues on quotients of symmetric
              spaces of arbitrary rank,  with particular emphasis on the symmetric spaces
              associated to  GL(n,R). In collaboration with Jurg Kramer, Jorgenson is 
              continuing the investigation of the Arakelov theory of Calabi-Yau  varieties. 
              This research falls into the general mathematical  field of Number  Theory.
              Number theory has its historical roots  in the study of the  whole numbers,
              addressing such questions as  those dealing with the  divisibility of one whole
              number by  another. It is among the oldest  branches of mathematics and was 
              pursued for many centuries for purely  aesthetic reasons.  However, within the
              last half century it has become an  indispensable tool in diverse applications
              in areas such as data   tran smission and processing, and communication
              systems.
