Title       : The Evolution of Correlations Among Floral Traits in an Insect-Pollinated Plant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9796183

Award Number: 9796183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey K. Conner conner@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9318388  Conner       The genomes of all organisms are products of evolution.  A
               complete understanding of the genetics of any organism, therefore,  requires
              general knowledge about how genomes evolve.  A crucial  question is how groups
              of traits become genetically integrated into  a single functional unit, for
              example an organ, through evolution.   This study will investigate this
              questions using the flower of wild  radish, Raphanus raphanistrum, as a model
              system.  The flower is an  ideal model organ because it is made up a number of
              easily-measured  parts (petals, pistils, stamens, etc.) that must work together
              as  a functional unit for successfully reproduction.  The results of  this work
              will improve our understanding of how groups of  individual traits become
              functionally integrated into organs and  organ systems.       An additional
              goal of this work is to determine many of the  factors responsible for
              successful reproduction in wild radish.   Wild radish can be a destructive weed
              in small grain crops,and is  closely related to many important crop and weed
              species.  For  example, closely related crops include radish, broccoli,
              cabbage,  cauliflower,and canola.  Therefore, knowledge gained concerning 
              reproduction in wild radish should be applicable to control of  several noxious
              weeds and improved seed production and yield in  several important corps.
