Title       : Genetic Analysis of the Beta1-Subunit of Voltage Dependent Calcium Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9796165

Award Number: 9796165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel K. Hartline                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald G. Gregg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Powers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Calcium channels control the movement of calcium ions into  neuronal cells.  The
              amount of calcium entering a given cell  is critical in determining the
              function of that particular  cell, and how it responds to input from other
              cells.  There  are a large number of different calcium channels that have 
              specific functions and are present in different parts of the  brain. 
              Furthermore, each calcium channel is a complex of  several different proteins,
              all of which are important in  determining the function of any particular
              channel.  New  strategies are required to dissect the role of specific  calcium
              channels in brain function.  This project is  designed to investigate the role
              of one of these proteins in  neuronal cell function, using a novel approach.  A
              mouse  model that lacks the protein of interest is being developed.  This
              animal model will be used to determine the effect of  the absence of one
              particular protein on channel function,  both in the whole animal and in
              isolated cells.  These  studies will provide valuable insight into the role
              that  this particular gene plays on the function of some neuronal  calcium
              channels.  These studies also will provide  information regarding the
              feasibility of using this approach  for the study of other calcium channel
              proteins in the  future.
