Title       : Issues in Design of Lightwave Networks with Sparse Wavelength Conversion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a9796318

Award Number: 9796318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269513             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun K. Somani arun@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Murat Azizoglu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed research is to develop viable solutions for 
              topological connectivity and wavelength conversion in all-optical 
              wavelength-routing networks.  There are two major components to the  proposed
              research. The first is to develop a comprehensive understanding of  the role of
              wavelength converters in topology design, routing, and  performance of
              wavelength-routing networks. In particular, we will  investigate the effects of
              a variable number of converters in a network and  address the problem of
              wavelength converter placement in the network. We  will analyze the behavior of
              the network with a nonuniform traffic demand.  The effect of network topology
              and wavelength conversion on the blocking  performance will be investigated. We
              will also explore issues in supporting  multicast traffic and in network
              interconnection.    The second component of the project is to develop
              wavelength-routing  algorithms with a distributed control paradigm. In the
              resulting network,  each node makes routing decisions dynamically based on a
              precomputed set of  preferred paths and the current occupancy of wavelengths in
              its  neighborhood. We will develop novel network management and control 
              mechanisms in  this environment.    An important issue in the practical
              implementation of a fiber-based wide  area network is its ability to survive
              link failures without serious  disruption. We will address this issue by
              studying the tradeoff between  physical connectivity, wavelength conversion,
              and fault tolerance.
