Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award: Quantum Theoretical Treatment of Chemical
               Dynamics in Condensed Phase Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1997  
File        : a9796167

Award Number: 9796167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210551             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Voth voth@chemistry.chem.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Gregory A. Voth is supported by a Presidential Young                       
              Investigator Grant in the Theoretical and Computational                        
              Chemistry Program to perform theoretical studies of chemical                   
              dynamics in condensed systems.  Voth's research involves the                   
              development of both analytical and computer simulation                         
              techniques with the primary goal of formulating predictive                     
              mathematical theories which characterize chemical dynamical                    
              problems of interest.  One major thrust of the research is to                  
              formulate a general description of activated rate processes                    
              such as chemical reactions in condensed phases that carefully                  
              treat quantum effects as well as the specific microscopic                      
              interactions between reactive subsystems and the condensed                     
              phase enviroment.  A second thurst of the research is to                       
              develop a theory for the ablation of polymer surfaces by laser                 
              radiation.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Research under this Presidential Young Investigator award will                 
              provide important theoretical insights into the molecular level                
              understanding of the factors which affect chemical reactions in                
              solutions.
