Title       : Research in Multithreaded Dataflow and Hybrid Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a9796310

Award Number: 9796310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Yavuz Oruc                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232361             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna M. Kavi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Behrooz A. Shirazi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of the research is the investigation of architectural 
              features for cost-effective, mainstream computing based on multithreading.  In 
              this vein, this research will focus in two directions; investigation of 
              multithreaded dataflow paradigm, and the adaptation of the results to hybrid 
              dataflow-von Neumann architecture.  The dataflow model is ideally suited for 
              multithreaded architecture since it facilitates instruction level context 
              switching and fine-grained parallelism.  A clear understanding of the issues in
               supporting multiple threads in dataflow environment will permit us to adapt
              them  to hybrid dataflow/control flow architectures.  Hybrid systems present
              the most  interesting opportunities in the area of multiprocessing - they
              directly address  problems that will be faced by future superscalar processors,
              such as long memory  latencies, context switching overheads, multiple active
              instruction streams, fast  and efficient support for task synchronization.   
              Initially, this project will investigate the use of cache memories for 
              multihreaded dataflow architecture, and compiler techniques for improving the 
              performance of such machines.  This project will then study architectural
              support  for multithreading including support for thread management, thread
              scheduling,  communication and synchronization among threads.  Simultaneous
              multithreading in  the context of dataflow and hybrid architectures will then
              be investigated.   Finally, this project will explore the suitability of the
              most significant  architectural features for use with convectional RISC
              technology.
