Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Logic and Complexity Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1998      
File        : a9796002

Award Number: 9796002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Toniann Pitassi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               The study of the complexity of proof systems is fundamental to  logic and has a
              broad range of applications in computer science  as well.  First, the
              efficiency of any deduction system is tied  to the speed of logical  reasoning
              (e.g., Prolog, Datalog, and  many inferencing systems in artificial 
              intelligence).  Secondly,  the complexity of propositional proof systems is 
              intimately  connected to the central question in complexity theory of whether 
              NP equal coNP.  Finally, there are links between particular  propositional
              proof  systems, systems of arithmetic, and  complexity classes.  Exploiting
              these  connections, one can apply  a whole new range of tools from logic to
              attack  difficult complexity questions (such as P = NP).   The basic question
              in  propositional logic to be considered is:  How long does a proof of a 
              propositional tautology have to be, as  a function of the size of the
              tautology?  The best upper bound  for all known proof systems is exponential in
              the size of  the  tautology and it is conjectured that a similar lower bound
              holds.  This  question is equivalent to whether or not NP = coNP, and  while it
              has been  studied extensively for the last 25 years, it is still far from
              solved.  Propositional proof systems can be  divided into classes that
              correspond  directly to complexity  classes.  An approach toward proving NP =
              coNP is to  establish  superpolynomial lower bounds for specific proof systems
              of greater  and greater proof strength.  Much of this research is  aimed at
              attacking this  difficult problem.   Another line of research concerns feasible
              arithmetic  (also known  as bounded arithmetic) and its connections to  
              propositional  proofs and complexity theory.  The concept of a feasible   proof
              has been the subject of much research in the last ten years.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
