Title       : RUI: Quantitative Trait Loci in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1997      
File        : a9796023

Award Number: 9796023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald K. Price   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9527994  PRICE   A long-standing controversy in biology concerns multiple
              life-history traits that promote survival and reproduction.  Examples of such
              traits include disease resistance and efficient metabolism of nutrients.  All
              organisms, including humans, face pressures to do as well as possible.  The
              question is how such a trait affects other traits.  One theory posits
              tradeoffs; a life-history trait that increases the fitness of individuals will
              result in other life-history traits that decrease fitness.  A contrasting
              theory posits that a life-history trait can augment other life-history traits. 
              This general question ties together the genetic basis for the physiology of
              organisms with the consequences of how those organisms function.  It relates
              early growth and reproduction to later survival and aging.   To understand
              these traits more detailed knowledge of their genetic basis is required.  This
              project uses a new technique called Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) mapping to
              identify genes for life-history traits and longevity in the fruitfly,
              Drosophila melanogaster.  Its ease of study allows detailed examination of
              general questions such as this one, that would be much harder to study in
              larger organisms.  We will find out whether these genes affect single or
              multiple life-history traits, and whether genes affecting different
              life-history traits are close together on the same chromosome.  The results
              will show whether life-history traits augment or constrain each other, and will
              lead to an understanding of the physiological and biochemical nature of genetic
              correlations.
