Title       : Transaction Costs and Agricultural Contracts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9796276

Award Number: 9796276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean Lueck lueck@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                The purpose of this study is to provide systematic evidence  regarding the
              factors that determine the choice of contracts for  land, buildings, equipment,
              and labor in North American  agriculture. To date, economic analysis of
              contracts has been  largely limited to theoretical inquiries.  Empirical work
              has  been done with aggregate data or small samples of contract data  and has
              been concentrated in developing countries, but little  work has been done using
              large samples of contracts from modern  agriculture.  The theoretical
              literature on contracts has  traditionally been dominated by principal-agent
              models that rely  on risk aversion to generate testable predictions.  More 
              recently, the transaction cost paradigm has emerged as a  theoretical
              alternative.  The proposed study will develop an  important data base and test
              economic theories of contracting,  and bridge the gap between theoretical and
              empirical research.    The study will test hypotheses derived from both
              principal-agent  models and transaction-cost models of contracts applied to
              North  American agriculture.  From principal-agent theory, hypotheses  include:
              1) As crop yield output variability increases it is more  likely that a share
              contract will be chosen over a fixed payment  contract. 2) As crop output
              variability increases the share to  the farmer will decrease. 3) Under
              decreasing absolute risk  aversion share contracts will be less often used by
              wealthy  farmers.  From transaction and monitoring cost theory, hypotheses 
              include: 4) Because highly variable crops have greater monitoring  costs, as
              crop yield output variability increases it is less  likely that a cropshare
              contract will be chosen over a fixed  payment contract. 5) The choice between
              owning and leasing assets  will depend on enforcement costs and contract
              incentives.    To test these hypotheses, a large data base on individual 
              contracts for land, labor, buildings, and equipment in North  American
              agriculture will be assembled.  Data sources will  include: T he 1986 Nebraska
              and South Dakota Leasing Survey, The  1992 British Columbia Farmland Ownership
              Areal Leasing Survey,  1979 British Columbia Farming Lease Survey, and The 1992
               Louisiana Farmland Ownership and Leasing Survey. Once developed  the data will
              include observations on over 4,000 farmland  contracts from over 2,000 farms.
              It is likely to be the most  extensive data set available to study the
              economics of contracts.
