Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Interacting Particle Systems and Queueing Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1998   
File        : a9796187

Award Number: 9796187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maury D. Bramson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Bramson    The investigator's research is in stochastic processes, primarily in
              the areas of interacting particle systems and queueing networks.  Although
              typically appealing to different groups of researchers, both areas deal with
              large systems of objects, such as particles or customers, which are connected
              together by some interaction rule. Interacting particle systems research
              usually deals with lattice-valued random systems which update according to some
              local rule. Such systems model various complex random systems and exhibit a
              wide range of spatial behavior; they frequently occur in the context of
              mathematical physics and mathematical biology.  One is interested in the
              long-time behavior of such systems, such as the behavior of the associated
              equilibria. The investigator intends to work on topics such as the structure of
              multitype particle systems, systems with annihilation and creation, the
              equilibria of certain semi-infinite systems, and interface dynamics.  Queueing
              networks research studies the evolution of queues of individuals under
              different rules for routing and assigned priorities. As time evolves,
              individuals enter the system, move from one queue to the next, and, upon
              completion of service, exit from the system. Depending on specifics, such a
              system may or may not be stable; the goal of much recent research has been to
              analyze such behavior.  A recent important tool for such problems is the use of
              fluid limits, with which problems on stability of networks can be reduced to
              the stability of the associated fluid models.  The investigator intends to
              investigate the properties of some of the main classes of fluid models, and
              apply this analysis to the study of stability questions for networks and to the
              related topic of heavy traffic limits for networks.      The investigator's
              research lies primarily in two areas of probability theory, interacting
              particle systems and queueing networks. The field of interacting particle
              systems typically deals with large random systems.  The compon ents of these
              systems can represent, for example, particles, cells, or various organisms. 
              Such systems model various complex random systems and exhibit a wide range of
              behavior; they frequently occur in the context of mathematical physics and
              mathematical biology.  One is typically interested in the long-time behavior of
              such systems.  The topics the investigator intends to work on include
              biological models for the diversity and stability of different species, and
              physical models for the evolution of chemical reactions.  The field of queueing
              networks studies the behavior of lines of individuals in general settings.
              These individuals can, for example, be customers waiting to be served, or
              components involved in some manufacturing process.  As time evolves,
              individuals enter the system, move from one line to the next, and, upon
              completion of service, exit from the system. A general unsolved problem is to
              find which systems are stable, that is, the lengths of their lines do not tend
              to grow as time increases.  This information can then be used to indicate more
              efficient algorithms for the service of customers, with the goal of saving time
              and materials.  A recent important tool for the analysis of queueing networks
              is the use of fluid models, which are nonrandom simplifications of the original
              networks. The investigator intends to continue his work in the area by studying
              and applying the properties of fluid models.
