Title       : Collaborative Research: Paleoenvironmental Time Series from Postglacial Lake
               Basins on Kola Peninsula, Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1998       
File        : a9796013

Award Number: 9796013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven M. Colman                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220294             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Forman slf@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9600126     Forman, Steven L.    Ohio State University    Title:
              Collaborative Research: Paleoenvironmental Time Series from         
              Postglacial Lake Basins on Kola Peninsula, Russia        It is poorly known how
              dramatic changes in deglacial and Holocene   climates in the North Atlantic
              region propagated into the Eurasian   arctic.  Lacustrine and estuarine records
              from the Kola Peninsula,   adjacent to the North Cape Current, the eastern-most
              limb of the   North Atlantic current, provide archives to assess postglacial
              and   Holocene variations in lakes, vegetation and tree line and   inferred
              changes in atmospheric and oceanic circulation.  Extant   cores from northern
              Kola Peninsula provide estuarine and lacustrine   records spanning at least the
              last 12,000 yrs.  Preliminary   analyses demonstrate that these sediments are
              rich in biologic   remains, ideal for securing a reliable radiocarbon
              chronology and   determining environmental changes.  This PALE/ARCSS award
              supports   lake coring on a transect from the tundra-dominated northern coast  
              to the forested center of Kola Peninsula.  This  research will  utilize an
              array of paleoecological techniques such  as pollen,  diatom, macrofossil and
              sediment analyses, augmented by  recent  advances in stomate, chironomid and
              cellulose stable isotope   analyses.  To strengthen the paleoenvironmental
              interpretations of   the cores, modern sediment samples will be collected from
              lakes to   statistically calibrate pollen, stomate, diatom, and chironomid  
              records with present climatic, edaphic and vegetation conditions.   The
              research will provide new late glacial and Holocene  records  from the western
              Russian arctic, currently a void in global   paleoclimatic time series.  The
              collaborative research is with Dr.  Glen M. MacDonald at the University of
              California, Los Angeles  (ATM-9632926).
