Title       : Early Labor Market Careers of Black, White, and Hispanic Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9796278

Award Number: 9796278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153689             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marta Tienda tienda@opr.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                        This is a study of the early labor market careers of black, white, and
              Hispanic women.  Although the growing volume of research about the
              school-to-work transition based on the experiences of young men has generated
              several new insights and questioned previous conclusions, many of these new
              insights will have to be qualified to account for the experiences of women. 
              The overarching objective of this project is to identify the factors conducive
              to achievement of mature work careers of young women during the 1980s and early
              1990s.  The 1980s are distinctive in U.S. economic history because they
              represent a period of rising inequality and increased returns to skills. 
              Educational attainments of men and women have converged during the past three
              decades and are near parity for many demographic groups.  For young adults,
              gender differences in wages also narrowed.  However, race and ethnic
              differences in education and earnings persisted during the 1980s, and for some
              groups even widened.              This research aims to amplify and re-direct
              an ongoing program of research on employment experiences of minority
              populations from its current focus on males toward the early work careers of
              young women.  The study will analyze 15 years of the National Longitudinal
              Survey of Youth, a nationally representative longitudinal survey which includes
              oversamples of black and Hispanic youth who were aged 14-21 in 1979. 
              Researchers will characterize the early labor force experiences of black,
              Hispanic and white women during the 1980s and early 1990s by addressing three
              general objectives: (1) to document the timing, nature and determinants of
              young women's early labor market activity, and to evaluate the returns to early
              experience on subsequent employment and wages; (2) to assess the influence of
              adolescent employment activity on school continuation decisions of young women;
              and (3) to document the prevalence, nature, and determinants of labor market
              instability, and to assess its influence in the achie vement of stable labor
              market careers during young adulthood.  In developing the requisite empirical
              models, the researchers will pursue a fourth objective that is more
              methodological in character, namely, (4) to assess the direction and magnitude
              of bias due to selective sorting and unobserved heterogeneity on the estimates
              of returns to school and work experience.              Hypotheses to be tested
              suggest that there are moderate to strong linkages between early work careers,
              school continuation decisions, and later adult labor market outcomes. In
              particular, (1) adolescent work experiences may have lasting effects on young
              adult outcomes; (2) under some circumstances (i.e., excessive weekly hours
              during periods of school enrollment), adolescent employment can truncate
              educational attainment even as youth accumulate work experience; (3) extremely
              unstable youth employment experiences that involve frequent visits to jobless
              states (as opposed to merely frequent job changes) slow the rate of entry to
              stable employment; and (4) the character and consequences of employment
              instability differ between men and women.     Given the current high levels of
              women's labor force participation, research on the early careers of women will
              contribute greatly to our understanding of the American labor market.  This
              project is fundamental research in at least three of the social contexts
              identified by the Human Capital Initiative: education, workplace, and
              disadvantage.  Thus it will provide information that can improve policy
              decisions aimed at maximizing the value of the nation's human resources.
