Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1998 
File        : a9796132

Award Number: 9796132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arunava Majumdar majumdar@newton.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A balanced experimental and theoretical research program in                    
              the area of nanometer-scale thermal engineering in electronic                  
              materials is planned. Research will be focused on (1) thermal                  
              properties, heat generation and transport in                                   
              sub-micrometer-scale structures; (measurement of temperature                   
              and thermal properties at nanometer scales; (3) heat transfer                  
              across interfaces. These studies will be carried out on                        
              electronic and opto-electronic materials such as silicon,                      
              III-V semiconductors like gallium arsenide and its alloys, as                  
              well as metals. Typical applications involve high electric                     
              fields, leading to non-equilibrium electron energy                             
              distributions.                                                                 
              Electron-phonon interactions further lead to non-equilibrium                   
              phonon interactions. Theoretical/numerical studies will                        
              involve the development of Monte Carlo simulation packages for                 
              transport of non-equilibrium electrons and phonons.                            
              Experimental studies will involve measurements made with the                   
              scanning tunneling microscope (STM) and the atomic force                       
              microscope (AFM). A technique to use AFM to measure effective                  
              lattice and electron temperatures with nanometer resolution                    
              will be developed. Studies of the thermoelectric effect                        
              associated with heat transport by electron tunneling will also                 
              be studied. The studies are of fundamental importance to                       
              nanoengineering and may also have applications in the                          
              development of nanometer-scale tunneling sensors for                           
              temperature and heat flux.
