Title       : RUI: Radiative Transfer Modeling and Cloud Optical PropertyRetrievals in 3-D
               Cloud Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1997      
File        : a9796202

Award Number: 9796202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald M. Welch welch@nsstc.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The primary thrust of this investigation is the development of                 
              radiative transfer codes for cumulus and stratocumulus cloud fields            
              which simulate realistic 3-D cloudiness.  To date almost all                   
              studies of inhomogeneous cloud fields reported in the literature               
              have assumed cubic clouds arrayed in checkerboard patterns.                    
              However, real cumulus clouds can be approximated as parabolic                  
              ellipsoids in shape with the cloud surfaces approximated with a                
              fractional Brownian (fractal) model.  Furthermore, cloud fields are            
              clustered rather than regularly distributed.  The intent of this               
              investigation is to model cloud field radiative properties with                
              these realistic cloud properties.                                              
                                                                                             
              There are three components to this study:                                      
              1) Cloud will be modeled using realistic cloud 3-D parameters.                 
                                                                                             
              2) Radiative transfer models will be constructed to simulate real              
              cumulus and stratocumulus cloud fields over 30 km x 30 km regions.             
                                                                                             
              3) Cloud optical property retrievals will be made for selected                 
              cumulus and stratocumulus cloud fields using FIRE field                        
              Observations.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The basic premise guiding this research effort is that effective               
              cloud radiative parameterizations can be constructed as we gain a              
              more complete understanding of the impact of brokenness upon the               
              cloud radiative properties.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research is important for a fundamental understanding of                  
              climate and climate feedback processes.
