Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Structure and Rigidity of Graphs with Applications to
               Network Models of Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9796215

Award Number: 9796215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30443              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah S. Franzblau   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Staten Island
	      2800 Victory Boulevard
	      Staten Island, NY  10314    718/982-2254

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9412017  Franzblau       In this project, the principal investigator aims to
              obtain  the following results: (1) an implementation of a practical 
              combinatorial algorithm to compute bounds on degrees of freedom  of a network
              (in 3 or more dimensions), (2) new combinatorial  conditions for rigidity or
              simple formulas for degrees of freedom  in families of graphs, (3) new, easily
              computed measures of  medium-range order in network models of glasses.  The
              methods  employed include those of combinatorial optimization, graph  theory,
              and discrete algorithm design.  Problems on network  models are addressed
              largely through computer experiments, and  make use of algorithms developed and
              implemented by the  investigator.       This project has two related aims, and
              is intended to  contribute new results both to mathematics and materials
              science.  The first aim is to address key open problems in the mathematical 
              theory of rigidity, including computing the degrees of freedom of  a network
              (also called a graph).  This theory has a long history,  which includes the
              work of Maxwell (1864) on determining whether  a "scaffold" made of rigid bars
              and movable joints is itself  rigid. The second aim is to address basic issues
              on network  models of solids; such models (also called ball-and-stick  models),
              in which points represent atoms and connections between  points represent
              chemical bonds, are often studied to better  understand the properties of both
              crystalline solids and glassy  materials.  One focus is to characterize the
              relationship between  the structure of a network model and its rigidity, and
              the other  is to find useful measures which capture this network structure.  
              The work therefore leads to a better understanding of materials  properties.
