Title       : SGER: Isolation of a Photoferrotrophic Bacterium from Iron Enriched Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1992     
File        : a9216638

Award Number: 9216638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly K. Pierson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puget Sound
	      1500 North Warner
	      Tacoma, WA  984160075    253/879-3400

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   A photoferrotrophic bacterium (one that does photosynthesis                
                                                                                            
              and uses ferrous iron as a reductant) will be sought.  This                    
              organism is a hypothetical phototroph that is a missing link in                
              the                                                                            
              evolution of the oxygen-evolving photosystem II reaction center                
              in                                                                             
              cyanobacteria and the distantly related quinone type reaction                  
              centers of the purple bacteria and Chloroflexus.  Large                        
              differences                                                                    
              in the sequences of the reaction center polypeptides and large                 
              gaps                                                                           
              in the reduction potentials and hence the nature of reductants                 
              used                                                                           
              for photosynthesis in these distantly related organisms suggest                
              the                                                                            
              probable existence of one or more organisms that were                          
              evolutionary                                                                   
              intermediates in photosynthesis.  Such an intermediate organism                
              that photochemically oxidized iron would explain the geochemical               
                                                                                             
              appearance of oxidized iron in the Archean eon before the advent               
              of                                                                             
              oxygenic photosynthesis.  Although intermediate organisms may                  
              have                                                                           
              existed in the evolutionary history of the reaction center, they               
                                                                                             
              may be extinct today.  Consequently this research is exploratory               
                                                                                             
              and high risk in nature.                                                       
                   Suitable environments have been identified and will be                    
              carefully analyzed for the presence of microhabitats the could                 
              sustain photoferrrotrophy.  These environments include iron-rich               
                                                                                             
              acid mine drainage areas, iron springs, and the sediments of                   
              shallow iron rich lakes.  The microhabitats will be sought by                  
              using                                                                          
              microelectrodes to find anoxic microzones that are exposed to                  
              light                                                                          
              and that are high in ferrous iron, low in sulfide, and of neutral              
                                                                                             
              or acidic pH.  Once suitable microhabitats have been found,                    
              samples                                                                        
              will be collected for microscopy, pigment content, and culture to              
                                                                                             
              attempt to isolate a photoferrotroph.
