Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Parallel Algorithms for Ordinary Differential Equations-
               Applications in Kidney Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1994       
File        : a9216614

Award Number: 9216614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald P. Tewarson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9183,9215,9216,9218,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9216614  Tewarson       The investigator and his collaborators develop realistic
              and  comprehensive mathematical models, and the necessary  computational
              algorithms, to understand the concentrating  mechanism of the mammalian kidney.
               Their immediate goal is to  find out how the inner part of the kidney (inner
              medulla)  concentrates urine.  The role of loops of varying lengths and  their
              parallel operation are studied.  Presently available  experimental data, as
              well as new data, as it becomes available,  are utilized to calibrate and
              exercise the models.  Current  algorithms for solving the stiff multipoint
              boundary value  differential equations for serial computers are adapted for the
               parallel supercomputers.  New algorithms based on split system  solvers are
              developed for parallel computation.       Mammals maintain the volume and
              composition of their  body fluids within very narrow limits.  A basic mechanism
              for  this purpose is the kidney -- which can produce urine that is  either more
              or less concentrated than plasma or other body  fluids.  The kidney consists of
              a large number of distinct  functional units called nephrons, operating in
              parallel.  The  human kidney contains roughly one million nephrons.  A
              lengthwise  cross-section of the kidney reveals two distinct parts: the  cortex
              and the medulla.  In view of differing physiological  characteristics of the
              tubules, the medulla is subdivided into  the outer and the inner parts.
              Mathematical models have been  responsible for many of the basic ideas leading
              to our  understanding of the urinary concentrating mechanism.  These  models
              --- using experimentally available parameters --- have  established that the
              outer medulla uses the active mode  (metabolic pumps) for concentration but no
              model has been able to  generate any significant concentration in the inner
              medulla.  How  the inner medulla concentrates urine is still one of the major 
              unsolved problems in renal physiology.  Hypotheses continue to be  proposed to
              answer this question.   Mathematical models are  essential in the testing of
              such alternate hypotheses. Realistic  and comprehensive models involve the
              solution of thousands of  equations.  Therefore, it is essential that the
              solution  algorithms for the algebraic equations not only run fast and but 
              also minimize computer storage.  Since the nephrons operate in  parallel,
              algorithms and computers that are able to utilize this  physiological property
              are eminently suitable for kidney  modeling.  The goal of this
              interdisciplinary project is to  develop efficient methods for parallel
              computers to understand  the concentrating mechanism of the mammalian kidney. 
              The use of  these methods in several other important physiological  modeling
              applications will also be investigated.  The project  increases our fundamental
              understanding of basic and essential  physiological functions, develops
              software and algorithms that  can be used in other physiological studies, and
              may have  significant diagnostic implications.  ***
