Title       : Interface Formation with Atoms, Ions, and Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1995   
File        : a9216178

Award Number: 9216178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300500             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Chelikowsky jrc@msi.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The goal of this research is to explore interfacial phenomena             
              associated with the deposition of atoms, ions, and clusters on                 
              semiconductor surfaces.  This work combines scanning tunneling                 
              microscopy with ab initio molecular dynamics simulations to                    
              correlate interfacial structures and properties with the dynamics              
              of condensation ions and small clusters are deposited directly on              
              the substrate using laser-assisted supersonic expansion.  The                  
              experimental studies are unique because the energy, the trajectory,            
              and the number of atoms in the cluster are controlled and because              
              scanning tunneling microscopy is used to image the resultant                   
              surface and overlayer structure.  The theoretical studies are                  
              unique because new computational techniques are implemented for                
              determining the structure and interaction parameters of atoms and              
              clusters on surfaces.  These studies should allow analysis of                  
              growth conditions with quantum interatomic forces and testing of               
              the predictions with surface analysis techniques.                              
                                                                                             
              The proposed studies are important because the focus on properties             
              of complex non-equilibrium systems where chemical and physical                 
              properties at the interface change over microscopic scales.                    
              Interface formation during non-equilibrium vacuum deposition is one            
              of the challenging problems in the present day solid state                     
              sciences.  Because the goal of this research is to correlate                   
              interface properties and interface structure, the successful                   
              realization of the proposed work will have significant impacts on              
              the nano-fabrication of new electronic devices and the                         
              understanding of other surface related processes such as catalysis.
