Title       : Human Performance in the Complex Workplace: Implications for Basic Research in
               Cognitive Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1992       
File        : a9216235

Award Number: 9216235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36076              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie L. Shalin valerie@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 1180,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this workshop is to assist in the development of              
              an integrated perspective on the scope, achievements, and promise              
              of Cognitive Science.  An applications perspective on Cognitive                
              Science furthers this goal in three respects:  First, the ability              
              to address applications problems provides one standard for                     
              recognizing progress and for identifying absent areas of scientific            
              understanding.  Second, applications problems generally require the            
              integration of multiple scientific disciplines, but drive                      
              integration with a common goal and context for interdisciplinary               
              discussion.  Third, complex applications problems may assist in                
              clarifying the boundaries of Cognitive Science, by introducing                 
              research needs that are clearly outside the basic research agenda              
              for the community.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This workshop will assemble twenty-four prominent researchers from             
              the basic Cognitive Science research community; they have been                 
              chosen for their eagerness to generate the mapping between their               
              basic research activities and applications, while strengthening                
              their own understanding of applied problems.  The workshop will be             
              conducted over a two-day period and will center on the theme of                
              Human Performance in the Complex Workplace.  It will include                   
              representatives from the basic research community, NSF, the applied            
              research community, and application-domain specialists from                    
              government and industry.  The morning sessions will consist of                 
              brief presentations by domain specialists.  The afternoon sessions             
              will consist of small working groups, each analyzing a complex                 
              applications problem according to the lines of relevant Cognitive              
              Science research.  The conclusions from each working group will be             
              assembled and preserved in the form of a publishable report.                   
                                                                                             
              The expected outcomes include increased awareness by both the                  
              scientifically- and practically-oriented participants of the                   
              potential relevance of the Cognitive Sciences to applications                  
              concerns.  The workshop is also likely to promote interest in                  
              uninvestigated aspects of Cognitive Science that serve as barriers             
              both to greater scientific understanding as well as to societally              
              useful applications.
