Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Asymmetric Induction in Radical Cyclizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1993     
File        : a9216807

Award Number: 9216807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David Crich dcrich@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                
              in organic synthesis between David Crich of the University of                  
              Illinois at Chicago, and Michelle Bertrand of the University of                
              Aix Marseille III.  The research involves synthetic applications of            
              radical chemistry and focuses on a series of experiments to                    
              probe, understand and apply radical cyclization reactions in                   
              asymmetric synthesis.  The investigators will synthesize a variety             
              of carbon-carbon dienyl acetates and identify their cyclization                
              reactions. Radical cyclizations induced through the addition of                
              sulfonyl to alkenes will also be studied.  The U.S. investigator               
              brings to this collaboration expertise in the design of new free               
              radical chain reactions and their application to the synthesis of              
              complex molecules.  They will continue to work on acyl radicals                
              and their cyclizations reactions and the used of diastereoselection            
              radical reactions in carbohydrate chemistry.  This is                          
              complemented by the French investigators' work on the study of                 
              sulfonyl radical cyclizations.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Radical cyclizations have been extensively studied in recent years             
              and are now employed in organic synthesis.  Macrocyclizations,                 
              which is addressed by the investigators, have not been studied.                
              Results of this research may lead to new techniques that provide               
              the basis for designed synthesis of new materials and natural                  
              products.
