Title       : Nonspecific and Specific Adhesion of Bacterial Cells to Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1992      
File        : a9216258

Award Number: 9216258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42505              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly W. Anderson kanderson@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal is concerned with studying the adhesion of                       
              bacterial cells to membranes which are used in a variety of                    
                                                                                             
              industrial scale separations technologies such as reverse                      
              osmosis and desalination.  The adhesion of a cell to a                         
              membrane surface is a two step process.  First, cells in the                   
              vicinity of the membrane surface are immobilized by both long-                 
                                                                                             
              range colloidal forces such as van der Waals attraction,                       
              electrostatic attraction, and short range interactions such as                 
                                                                                             
              hydrogen bonding.  Once immobilized, the cells begin to                        
              project structures and synthesize extracellular polymeric                      
              molecules which bridge the gap between the cells and the                       
              membrane, and firmly adhere the cell to the surface.                           
                                                                                             
              Experiments will be undertaken in a parallel plate flow                        
              chamber which is mounted onto the stage of a phase contrast                    
                                                                                             
              microscope equipped for videomicroscopy and sensitive light                    
                                                                                             
              intensity measurement via a photomultiplier tube.  The bottom                  
                                                                                             
              plate of the chamber is a glass slide onto which thin                          
              polymeric membranes are cast.  The membranes will be made of                   
              various polymers such as cellulose acetate and polymethyl                      
              methacrylate (PMMA), and these will have different surface                     
              charges (characterized by zeta potential measurements) and                     
              hydrophobicity (characterized by contact angle measurements).                  
                                                                                             
              Two experiments will be undertaken using the cell.  In the                     
              first, a dilute suspension of cells wills be slowly perfused                   
              through the chamber, and the cells will be allowed to absorb                   
              at low density onto the polymeric membrane support.  The                       
              separation distance between the cell and the membrane will be                  
              measured by total internal reflection microscopy.  In this                     
              technique a laser beam, impinging against the glass slide at a                 
                                                                                             
              small angle of incidence, is totally reflected off of the                      
              glass surface and produces an evanescent wave which propagates                 
                                                                                             
              normal to the surface and into the chamber.  The scattering of                 
                                                                                             
              the wave by the cell is detected by the photomultiplier tube,                  
                                                                                             
              and the distance of separation of the cell from the membrane                   
                                                                                             
              can be obtained from this measurement.  The cell separation                    
              distance will be measured as a function of both the polymeric                  
                                                                                             
              membrane surface charge and hydrophobicity, and the charge and                 
                                                                                             
              hydrophobicity of the bacterial cell.  The latter will be                      
              correlated with the growth cycle phase.  In the second set                     
              of experiments, the detachment to attached cells will be                       
              measured as a function of applied shear rate by observing                      
              the fate of attached cells by video microscopy as the flow                     
              rate through the parallel plate chamber is varied.   The                       
              detachment characteristics will then be correlated with the                    
              distance of separation, and ultimately to the hydrophobicity                   
                                                                                             
              and surface charge characteristics of the membrane and cell.
