Title       : Dissertation Research:Exchange and Production in the U. S. Southwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1994     
File        : a9216978

Award Number: 9216978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10280              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Charles Adams ecadams@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie Webster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Charles Adams, MS Laurie Webster will               
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will utilize                   
              archaeological and ethnographic materials as well as historical                
              accounts to reconstruct the prehistoric and early historic Pueblo              
              Indian system of textile production and exchange. She will visit               
              a number of museums which house specimens and study the methods                
              by which they were manufactured. Because of the dry Southwestern               
              U.S. environment many textiles preserve well in archaeological                 
              contexts and therefore it is possible to gain information on                   
              prehistoric textile use. Extensive ethnographic collections also               
              exist and therefore one can trace changes into historic times.                 
                                                                                             
              Textiles played a very important role in Pueblo society. In                    
              addition to their utilitarian function they were widely used for               
              religious and other symbolic purposes. They played a major                     
              economic role and social role. When the Spanish conquered the                  
              Pueblo peoples they reorganized textile production and in some                 
              areas established an industry. Textile manufacture was also                    
              affected in more indirect ways with the introduction of new                    
              materials, such as sheep wool, dyes and weaving implements. Ms.                
              Webster's goal is to trace changes from the pre-Spanish through                
              Spanish period. The ultimate purpose is not to understand                      
              textiles as textiles, but rather to use them to gain insight into              
              the Pueblo economic and social systems and to learn how this                   
              indigenous group adapted to culture change.                                    
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will increase               
              our understanding of the relationship between material culture                 
              and social/economic organization. It will shed new light on the                
              American past and assist in the training of a promising young                  
              scientist.
