Title       : Supercritical Spray Application of Paints and Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9216923

Award Number: 9216923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259732             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc D. Donohue mdd@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9223,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Each year, American industry spray applies more than 500                       
              million gallons of paints and other coatings.  For every                       
              gallon of paint sprayed, an average of four and one half                       
              pounds of solvents are released into the atmosphere.  These                    
              solvents are mixtures of volatile organic compounds (VOCs)                     
              that are chosen for their ability to dissolve the coating's                    
              materials and to reduce their viscosity.                                       
                                                                                             
              A new process has been developed for the spray application of                  
              paints and other coatings.  It was conceived by the PI and is                  
              being commercialized by the Union Carbide Corporation and                      
              other companies.  The process, which improves the quality of                   
              sprayed coatings for automobiles, furniture, and other                         
              commercial products and reduces pollution, is based on the use                 
              of supercritical carbon dioxide as a replacement for organic                   
              solvents in spray-coatings' formulations.  The result is a                     
              more uniform and improved coating and a reduction of the                       
              emissions of VOCs by up to 80%.                                                
                                                                                             
              Though the process is in commercial use, there are problems                    
              that must be overcome before there will be widespread adoption                 
              of this technology, and hence large reductions in VOC                          
              emissions from spray-coating operations in the U.S.  The major                 
              impediment is that each paint must be reformulated before it                   
              can be used in this process.  Since there are hundreds of                      
              different paint formulations, each with dozens of different                    
              components, this will be a major undertaking because                           
              relatively little is known about the phase behavior of                         
              polymer-solvent-supercritical fluid mixtures, particularly                     
              when solid phases can form.  Hence, the reformulation must be                  
              done by trial and error changing many different variables.                     
              Also, the reformulation process will be done separately, and                   
              secretly, by every paint manufacturer.                                         
                                                                                             
              The PI plans to study the thermodynamic and rheological                        
              properties of polymer-solvent-carbon dioxide mixtures.  The                    
              experimental part of the project will involve measurements to                  
              determine phase diagrams and solution viscosities for these                    
              mixtures.  The theoretical portion will involve the                            
              development of models for the effects of hydrogen bonding on                   
              the liquid-liquid phase behavior and on modelling the effects                  
              of solids precipitation on the overall phase diagram.  This                    
              should facilitate the implementation of this technology for a                  
              wider variety of paint formulations and should help eliminate                  
              process shut-downs that result when solids form in these                       
              systems.
