Title       : The Removal of Flux Residues from Printed Wiring Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1994     
File        : a9216850

Award Number: 9216850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275052             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruben G. Carbonell ruben@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine S. Grant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9223,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A key step in the manufacture of printed wire assemblies                       
              (PWAs) is the removal of flux residues from the PWA surfaces.                  
              This cleaning ensures the electrical performance of the PWA                    
              and adhesion of post-assembly coatings, facilitates testing                    
              and inspections of the assembly, and preserves the mechanical                  
              properties of the substrate.  This cleaning is usually done                    
              using blends of chlorinated fluorocarbons, primarily CFC-113,                  
              and light alcohols, such as methanol.  With the advent of the                  
              Montreal Protocol, the use of CFC-113 for mictroelectronics                    
              cleaning is being phased out.                                                  
                                                                                             
              A possible cleaning alternative utilizes solutions of nonionic                 
              surfactants in the lamellar liquid crystal phase conformation                  
              near their phase inversion temperatures.  These solutions                      
              exhibit ultralow interfacial tension against polar, nonpolar,                  
              and mixed contaminants (flux residue may be considered a mix                   
              of polar and nonpolar contaminants).  This low interfacial                     
              tension allows rapid, spontaneous emulsification of the                        
              contaminants to occur when the surfactant and contaminant come                 
              in contact.  The surfactant solutions exhibit low interfacial                  
              tensions against polar and nonpolar materials, hence their                     
              contact angle on PWA substrates will be very low, allowing                     
              rapid penetration beneath components.  The surfactant                          
              solutions offer high solubilization capacity for flux                          
              residues, so that many boards can be cleaned without requiring                 
              regeneration of the cleaning solvent.                                          
                                                                                             
              This research includes both experimental and theoretical work                  
              to investigate the use of lamellar and micellar solutions of                   
              nonionic surfactants as replacements for CFC-113 based                         
              cleaners of PWAs.  The work will focus on the development of                   
              both the theory of contaminant removal from PWA surfaces and                   
              the relationship between the microstructure of surfactant                      
              solutions and the parameters which control contaminant                         
              removal.  The structure and composition of the surfactants,                    
              contaminant, and substrate, as well as the effects of chemical                 
              additives in the cleaning solution, will be related to the                     
              cleaning effectiveness.  Lamellar and micellar surfactant                      
              solutions will be studied and the effects of solution                          
              additives on the fromation of these phases and their cleaning                  
              power will be evaluated.  The controlling step in the removal                  
              of contaminants from PWA surfaces will also be investigated.
