Title       : Zooplankton Photoresponses during Diel Vertical Migration: Modificaiton by
               Chemical Cues from Predators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9216629

Award Number: 9216629
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134737             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Forward   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Rittschof  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most zooplankton undergo diel vertical migration (DVM) at some                 
              stage of development. The common pattern involves an ascent near               
              sunset and descent near sunrise.  The most pervasive functional                
              explanations are that animals rise to feed at night and descend to             
              avoid visually-oriented predators during the day.  Recent studies              
              indicate the presence and absence of planktivores can alter DVM                
              through rapid behavioral changes. Since light is the most important            
              cue for DVM, alterations in migration by cues from predators should            
              involve changes in photoresponses.  Thus, photoresponses can be                
              used as a behavioral assay to direct characterization, purification            
              and identification of the chemical cue(s) from predators.  The                 
              objectives of this project are: (1) to determine whether                       
              photoresponses involved in DVM are altered by the presence or                  
              absence of planktivores that do (fish) and do not (ctenophore and              
              chaetognath) visually sight their prey, (2) to determine whether               
              chemical cues form predators induce alterations in zooplankton                 
              photoresponses that are involved in DVM,  and (3) to characterize              
              the chemical cues form the predators.                                          
                                                                                             
              Larvae of the crab Rhithropanopeus harrisii and of brine shrimp                
              (Artemia sp.) will be studied because both undergo DVM and                     
              preliminary studies suggest their photoresponses are altered by                
              chemical cues from planktivores.  Photoresponses will be monitored             
              with a video system and tested in an apparatus that mimics the                 
              natural underwater angular light distribution.  Preliminary studies            
              indicate the active chemicals from fish are less than 500 Daltons              
              in molecular size and the investigators predict that the                       
              biologically active molecules are odors generated by hydrolysis of             
              molecules found commonly on fish surfaces.  Disaccharides                      
              originating form fish mucus, and small peptides originating from               
              epithelial proteins are likely candidates.
