Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Construction and Evaluation of Accuracy
               Estimators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1993     
File        : a9216784

Award Number: 9216784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Casella   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                
              in statistics and probability between George Casella of Cornell                
              University and Christian Robert of the Laboratory for                          
              Theoretical and Applied Statistics, University of Paris VI.  The               
              research is concerned with statistical inferences from                         
              experiments.  In addressing this problem they proposed to further              
              develop procedures for accuracy estimation.  Post-data statistical             
              inferences are based on all information in an experiment,                      
              including the knowledge of the data.  The proposed research will               
              integrate and evaluate approaches to post-data inferences using                
              decision theory and conditional inferences.  They will investigate             
              fundamental questions on the behavior of estimators under                      
              different loss functions and in loss function robustness and                   
              explore problems of assimilating decision theory with stochastic               
              simulation techniques.                                                         
                                                                                             
              The cooperative research project takes advantage of                            
              complementary interests and expertise. The  U.S. investigator                  
              brings to this collaboration his expertise in decision theory. This            
              is complemented by the French investigator's extensive                         
              experience in computational and algorithmic statistics. Together,              
              their efforts may result in new techniques and methodology of                  
              statistical computing, including, better procedures for post data              
              inferences and efficient methods for computation of accuracy                   
              measures.
