Title       : Clearinghouse for Network Information Discovery Retrieval
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1992  
File        : a9216963

Award Number: 9216963
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Priscilla Jane Huston                   
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1007739            (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Brett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MCNC
	      P.O. Box 12889
	      Research Triangle Park, NC  277092889    919/248-1800

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 4090,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A three-year award in the form of a Cooperative Agreement                      
              betweenthe National Science Foundation and the Microelectronics                
              Center of North Carolina (MCNC)  will establish the Clearinghouse              
              for Networked Information Discovery and Retrieval (CNIDR).  In the             
              past year several user-friendly client-server tools have been                  
              developed for locating and retrieving information contained in                 
              platforms reachable over the Internet.  Among them, Wide Area                  
              Information Server (WAIS), Gopher and Archie have become very                  
              popular, globally, and World-Wide-Web (WWW) is poised for                      
              popularity once suitable client software is developed and                      
              distributed.  WAIS, Archie and Gopher present overviews of where               
              information of interest is lilely to reside, and then they assist              
              the user in locating specific information objects.  WWW permits a              
              user to thread a path through the network by opening up network                
              connections to referenced information by mouse-clicking on ?active!            
              hypertext. While focused on the particulars of WAIS evolution, MCNC            
              will work closely with the developers of other tools toward                    
              providing compatibility and consistency, and, to the extent                    
              possible, convergence of the tools. The WAIS-specific activity will            
              provide a central focus and forum for WAIS evolution and will                  
              minimize the divergence of individual WAIS-based implementations.              
              In addition, the CNIDR will conduct a workshop, under the auspices             
              of the Education and Human Resource (EHR) Applications of Advanced             
              Technology Program.  The purpose of the workshop will be to                    
              evaluate the state of the art in networked information retrieval as            
              applied to the EHR materials development, teacher enhancement,                 
              network testbed, and dissemination projects, and to educate                    
              and support the NSF project investigators in the uses of                       
              networked information retrieval tools.
