Title       : Small Grant for Exploratory Research: A Novel Application of Total Internal
               Reflection Microscopy: Electrokinetic Lift
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9216077

Award Number: 9216077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stacy G. Bike sbike@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Total Internal Reflection Microscopy (TIRM) is a new technique                 
              which allows for the measurement of interaction forces between                 
              a single colloid particle and a flat plate.  In this                           
              technique, a laser beam is reflected off of a glass slide at a                 
              small angle of incidence such that light is not refracted                      
              through the plate, but only reflected.  This total internal                    
              reflection produces an evanescent wave which does propagate                    
              normal to the surface.  A solution containing colloid                          
              particles, enclosed in a chamber, is placed on the glass                       
              slide, and the colloid particles scatter the evanescent wave.                  
              The scattering intensity decays exponentially with the                         
              separation distance of the particle from the wall.  The                        
              scattering intensity is measured by a photomultiplier tube,                    
              and from this measurement, the instantaneous separation                        
              distance of the particle from the wave can be measured.                        
                                                                                             
              The PI has used this technique to measure the effects of                       
              gravity and double layer forces on the equilibrium separation                  
              of a colloid particle from a surface.  The present effort                      
              extends the technique to the measurement of colloid forces                     
              during viscous flow.  Specifically, the PI proposes using this                 
              method to measure colloid particle - plate separation                          
              distances when fluid is flowing across the plate.  Radiation                   
              pressure will be used to immobilize the sphere so that                         
              scattering intensity can be measured, and results will                         
              therefore be obtained for separation distances of a stationary                 
              colloid particle with fluid streaming about the particle.  The                 
              PI has already developed an electrohydrodynamic theory for the                 
              forces exerted on the colloid particle.  These calculations                    
              reveal the existence of a lift force which causes the sphere                   
              to migrate away from the plate wall irrespective of the                        
              surface charge.  In the absence of double layer forces, this                   
              lift force is equal to zero.  With the aid to the TIRM                         
              experiments, the PI hopes to verify the existence of the                       
              electrokinetic lift force.
