Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Modelling, Analysis and Computation in Viscoelasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9216153

Award Number: 9216153
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179514             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Malkus malkus@cms.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9216,9263,AMPP,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Intriguing phenomena have been observed experimentally in                 
              highly elastic and very viscous fluids, such as polymer solutions              
              and melts. Such non-Newtonian materials can be modeled                         
              mathematically as viscoelastic fluids with fading memory, which                
              exhibit behavior intermediate between the nonlinear hyperbolic                 
              response of purely elastic materials and the strongly diffusive,               
              parabolic response of viscous Newtonian fluids. In certain flow                
              regimes, these fluids exhibit instabilities that severely disrupt              
              polymer processing. Laboratory observations have found "spurt "                
              instabilities in pressure-gradient driven flows (Vinogradov et                 
              al., 1972), persistent oscillations in flow at fixed volumetric                
              flow rate (Lim & Schowalter, 1989), and anomalies in step shear                
              strain experiments (Morrison & Larson, 1991). Many researchers                 
              attribute the observations to "slip" or "apparent slip, " i.e.,                
              loss of adhesion of the fluid to the wall. This project involves               
              the investigation of an alternative explanation for these                      
              phenomena. The hypothesis is that all three have a common origin               
              in bulk material properties, rather than adhesive properties.                  
                   To test this hypothesis, the corresponding one-dimensional                
              shear flows pressure-driven and piston-driven flow in a slit die,              
              and Couette flow are modeled. The characteristic feature of the                
              fluid models employed is a non-monotone relation between steady                
              shear stress and strain rate. Analysis and numerical simulations               
              show that the polymer system changes state in a thin layer near                
              the wall, giving the appearance of a slip layer. The structure of              
              solutions of initial/boundary-value problems for non-monotone                  
              models is remarkably rich, and the development of numerical                    
              methods capable of simulating these flow problems has interest in              
              its own right. The same basic system of time-dependent,                        
              quasilinear partial differential equations is used to model all                
              three experiments; different forcing terms, as well as boundary                
              and initial conditions, are used in the three cases. The                       
              governing system is globally well-posed in time, in two senses:                
              with respect to classical solutions arising from smooth initial                
              data, and with respect to "almost classical" solutions,                        
              containing discontinuities in the stress and strain rate.                      
              Calculated solutions are in good qualitative agreement with the                
              experiments, showing spurt in pressure-driven flow, persistent                 
              oscillations in piston-driven flow, and the development of                     
              anomalies in the relaxation modulus after a step strain. In terms              
              of a reduced approximating system, spurt and its related                       
              phenomena in pressure-driven flow can be analyzed by using                     
              phase-plane techniques. The analysis for piston-driven and step                
              strain experiments is more difficult because the system is                     
              infinite-dimensional. For example, numerical simulations strongly              
              suggest that there is a Hopf bifurcation in piston-driven flow,                
              leading to the observed persistent oscillations. In order to                   
              compare predictions to experiment, it is crucial to determine how              
              the amplitude and frequency of the limit cycle depends on                      
              physical parameters. This requires detailed analysis of the                    
              governing equations. This is required in each of the experiments,              
              and that is the central focus of this research. The theme of this              
              project has been and will continue to be the use of numerical                  
              simulation to guide analysis of the governing equations and                    
              approximations to them, in order to identify the time-scales,                  
              amplitudes, and other characteristic features of the predictions               
              of the model.
