Title       : A Synergistic Approach to the Development of Improves and Alternative Methods
               for the Synthesis and Processing of Sulfolanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1996  
File        : a9216834

Award Number: 9216834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. High high@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Corinna L. Czekaj  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              12        Chemistry                               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,9146,9197,9223,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this research is to develop a general strategy                  
              for attacking environmental waste problems in industrial                       
              processes, that include process design and optimization,                       
              application of catalytic and alternative chemistry, reduction                  
              in the use of toxic chemicals, recycling, and recovery to                      
              eliminate waste at its source.  The PIs plan to apply process                  
              design techniques, an improved understanding of process                        
              chemistry, and newly developed synthetic and catalytic                         
              chemistries to improve the energy efficiency and cost                          
              effectiveness of the process to produce sulfolane (as an                       
              example process), while minimizing waste.  The anticipated                     
              benefits include: (1) the development of alternative                           
              processes, chemistries, and approaches that could be used to                   
              attack environmental and energy problems associated with other                 
              industrial processes, and (2) the development of models for                    
              considering environmental costs in process design and                          
              optimization and exposing chemists to the need to consider                     
              energy efficiency, by-product production, and waste generation                 
              and disposal in the design of chemical reactions.                              
                                                                                             
              Sulfolane a colorless, water soluble, non-toxic, bio-                          
              degradable, and highly polar compound, derives its market                      
              value from its exceptional thermal stability, chemical                         
              inertness, and solvent properties.  Eighteen to twenty million                 
              pounds of sulfolane are consumed annually in a variety of                      
              applications including extraction of aromatic hydrocarbons,                    
              delignification of wood, removal of acidic compounds from                      
              natural gas streams, and solutions for polymerization and                      
              fibre spinning, electroplating baths, and batteries.  In the                   
              next several years, regulatory changes and the movement to                     
              "environmentally improve" industrial processes could possibly                  
              increase the market for sulfolanes by 50% or more.  Currently,                 
              sulfolane is produced via the reaction of 1,3-butadiene with                   
              sulfur dioxide to produce 3-sulfolene, which then undergoes                    
              catalytic hydrogenation to yield sulfolane.  These reactions                   
              are carried out in series in two batch stirred tank reactors.                  
              Reaction temperatures are maintained by passing water or steam                 
              through heating jackets around each reactor.  The first step                   
              in the synthesis requires excess sulfur dioxide and is plagued                 
              by polysulfone-producing side reactions that limit process                     
              yield, poison the hydrogenation catalyst, and present waste                    
              disposal problems.  Removal of the excess sulfur dioxide by                    
              evacuating or purging the reactor and oxidation reactions                      
              which produce SOx by-products creates emission problems.  The                  
              development of improved and alternative methods for the                        
              synthesis and processing of sulfolane could eliminate or                       
              minimize these environmental concerns, improve energy                          
              efficiency, and reduce product cost.  Phillips Petroleum, one                  
              of the two domestic producers of sulfolane, will be actively                   
              involved in this research project.
