Title       : "Decision Fusion and Extrapolation for Security Supervisor Control Systems"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1992 
File        : a9216588

Award Number: 9216588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur R. Bergen                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry G. Kwatny   (Principal Investigator current)
              Moshe Kam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Fischl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9105,
Abstract    :
              In recent years there has been a development of a                              
              theory of supervisory control systems based on the                             
              formalism of discrete event systems.  Although this                            
              emergent framework is now limited due to its                                   
              historical roots in specific applications such as the                          
              management of data communications and certain                                  
              classes of manufacturing process, its results are                              
              compelling and suggestive of a much wider range of                             
              applicability.  The key question  is whether the                               
              underlying conceptual framework is  rich enough, or                            
              can be expanded, to accommodate systems and                                    
              operations as complex as power  networks.  There                               
              are two principal issues to address.  The first is                             
              modeling.  The second is the supervisor synthesis                              
              problem, i.e., how should the supervisory controller                           
              -the decision making process-be organized?  Finally,                           
              we propose to evaluate theoretical constructs in the                           
              context of power system security supervision.  In                              
              this instance both the modeling and controller                                 
              synthesis issues are far more complex than in any                              
              other situation to which the supervisor synthesis                              
              formulation has been applied.  It is certain  that the                         
              application will  enunciate previously unaddressed                             
              theoretical questions.  On the other hand, power                               
              system security supervisors have evolved to the                                
              point where decision makers are so overloaded with                             
              analytical tools and data that the most of that                                
              knowledge and power is not useable in real time.  It                           
              is our goal to demonstrate, in a limited formulation,                          
              that the proposed theoretical framework that can                               
              systematically organize both the knowledge base                                
              and the decision making order that these systems                               
              can function when required.
