Title       : Continuous Multicomponent Focusing of Solutes and Particles Using Spatially
               Stabilized pH
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1997     
File        : a9216078

Award Number: 9216078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: ELDRED H CHIMOWITZ                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Burns maburns@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9181,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study proposes using a magnetically stabilized fluidized                  
              bed (MSFB) to separate zwitterionic molecules (i.e., molecules                 
              containing negatively and positively charged moieties) by                      
              virtue of differing isoelectric values (i.e., the pH at which                  
              the molecule is not charged).  The fluidized bed consists of a                 
              tube in which negatively charged resin particles are added                     
              from the top of the tube, and the fluidizing liquid is                         
              distributed from the bottom.  Removal of the particles from                    
              the bottom, and liquid from the top allows for continuous                      
              operation.  A pH gradient is maintained in the bed by                          
              inserting the liquid feed at a high pH and the solid particles                 
              at a low pH.  A mixture containing dissolved solutes (one of                   
              which is targeted for separation) is fed into the liquid                       
              stream somewhere near the bottom, and to one side of the                       
              column.  As the solute moves up the bed by virtue of the                       
              liquid motion, the local pH that the solute is exposed to                      
              decreases.  The reduction in the local pH causes the solutes                   
              to eventually become positively charged (at the positions in                   
              the bed just above the positions where the local pH is equal                   
              to the isoelectric values of the solutes).  Once positively                    
              charged, the solute binds electrostatically to the negatively                  
              charged resin, and is carried with the resin particles down to                 
              the bottom of the column.  As it descends down the column, the                 
              local pH decreases, and this causes the solute to reverse its                  
              charge, remove itself from the resin particle, and become                      
              entrained in the upflowing liquid.  The solute thus becomes                    
              trapped in a narrow zone at a level in the column where the                    
              local pH is equal to the solute's isoelectric point.  Ideally,                 
              the solutes in the mixture will separate out into zones                        
              occupying different levels in the column.  By withdrawing                      
              fluid and solid from these zones, liquid rich in one solute                    
              can be obtained, thereby effecting the separation.  The                        
              proposed research will develop a working prototype, and scope                  
              the effectiveness of the bed to prepare separations of                         
              biological molecules.
