Title       : Gene Flow in the Marine Environment: Paralytic Shellfish Poisoning as a Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1992      
File        : a9216175

Award Number: 9216175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Gerald Plumley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Trans-Kingdom gene flow is defined as the transfer of genetic                  
              information between two organisms whose phylogenetic affinities                
              place them in different kingdoms.  The recent demonstration of                 
              trans-kingdom gene flow involving bacteria and yeast increased                 
              Plumley's awareness of this process - a process which has been well            
              documented in the agrobacterium/plant association.  This project               
              will address the hypothesis that trans-kingdom gene flow has                   
              resulted in the homogenization of genetic information within the               
              marine environment.  Plumley will use paralytic shellfish poisoning            
              as a model system since current data indicate that evolutionarily              
              disparate organisms, i.e., bacteria, dinoflagellates, and                      
              cyanobacteria, all have the unique set of genes required to produce            
              the diverse and complicated array of paralytic shellfish poisoning             
              toxins.  Plumley hypothesizes that the ability to produce paralytic            
              shellfish poisoning toxins evolved only once and that the genes                
              were subsequently transferred to other organisms.  A research goal             
              is to isolate the gene that codes for paralytic shellfish poisoning            
              toxins.  Long range goals of the research are to eradicate                     
              paralytic shellfish poisoning and to understand the mechanisms and             
              extent of trans-kingdom gene transfer in the marine environment.               
              The project represents preliminary research on an untested                     
              hypothesis and attempts to answer a long-standing marine health                
              problem using modern approaches.
