Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Autoionization in Diatomic and Polyatomic
               Molecules: Experiment and Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9216810

Award Number: 9216810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward R. Grant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                  
              in experimental physical chemistry involving Edward R. Grant of                
              Purdue University and Helene Lefebvre-Brion and Christian                      
              Jungen of the University of Paris-Sud.  The objective of this                  
              research is to integrate experiments with interpretive theoretical             
              and computational efforts in laser spectroscopy.  The Purdue                   
              research group will concentrate on experiments for producing                   
              rotational state data on radiationless decay processes in highly               
              excited polyatomic molecules related to autoionization.  The                   
              Paris group has developed the theory which describes the                       
              relevant molecular photoionization processes underlying these                  
              experiments. Preliminary results of this collaboration have                    
              stimulated theoretical activity on the coupling limit of electronic            
              and rotational angular momentum. And initial theoretical results               
              have suggest prototypes for study of cation-electronic scattering              
              dynamics in polyatomic molecules.                                              
                                                                                             
              Dr. Grant brings to this collaboration his expertise as a                      
              spectroscopist and dynamicist.  This is complemented by the                    
              theoretical expertise of the French investigators in modern                    
              molecular spectroscopy, in particular, the Multichannel Quantum                
              Defect Theory which offers a universal framework for                           
              understanding intramolecular dynamics.
