Title       : Small Grants for Exploratory Research: Isolation of Myosin-like Organelle Motor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1992      
File        : a9216634

Award Number: 9216634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Langford george.m.langford@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1134      FUNCTINL ORGANIZATN & DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                 The aim of this SGER proposal is to extend a truly novel                    
              observation of actin-based motility in axoplasmic extracts. The                
              project calls for the histochemical characterization of the                    
              movement system via immunofluorescence and immunogold labelling. S1            
              decoration will be used to determine actin filament polarity in the            
              context of vectoral particle movement. In addition, the project                
              aims toward the biochemical purification of the motor and its                  
              subsequent characterization in terms of its molecular structure,               
              and enzymatic properties in a longer-term aim of establishing its              
              ability to move particles along actin filaments in a totally-                  
              characterized system.                                                          
              %%%                                                                            
                  This project has the potential to alter our perception of                  
              axoplasmic particle movement significantly. During the last decade,            
              a growing literature has developed in favor of a microtubule-based             
              motility system for axoplasmic transport. Unidirectional motors                
              that interact with microtubules and operate in anterograde or                  
              retrograde particle movement have dominated our thinking about the             
              process. Actin-based motility has received far less attention in               
              this process, though microfilaments have long been known to be                 
              present in the axoplasmic extracts that have served as the starting            
              material for the particle movement assays. It is now clear that                
              microfilaments may also serve in particle movement. The clear                  
              demonstration that actin-based motility is vectorial, and dependent            
              on the polarity of the actin filaments under physiologically-                  
              relevant conditions would be a major contribution to our                       
              understanding of cell motility.
