Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Preparation and Characterization of Thin Films
               on Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1993      
File        : a9216905

Award Number: 9216905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Sinclair bobsinc@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Stevenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two-year award supports U.S.-France Cooperative research in               
              electronic materials.  The project involves Robert Sinclair and                
              David Stevenson of Stanford University and Michel Jaouen, Jean                 
              Grilhe and others at the University of Poitiers.  The                          
              investigators propose to prepare diamond carbon and diamond-like               
              carbon films and magnetic layers and then  characterize their                  
              mechanical properties and microstructure.  Using specialized ion-              
              beam deposition techniques developed by the Poitiers research                  
              group, they will make a new type of carbon film.  Testing of wear              
              resistance and friction will be handled at Poitiers, and the                   
              hardness of the films will be determined by a special indentation              
              machine at Stanford.  Characterization of the materials will be                
              carried out by high-resolution electron microscopy at Stanford                 
              and complemented by electron energy loss spectroscopy and                      
              synchrotron x-ray studies at Orsay.                                            
                                                                                             
              It has been shown that hard carbon films, composed of a mixed                  
              diamond and graphite crystal structure, used as coatings, could                
              improve friction and wear.  However, adhesion of the coatings on               
              substrates remains a problem for materials researchers.  The                   
              ultimate goal of this collaboration is to develop new, wear                    
              resistant films with good tribological and adhesion properties.                
              These new materials are important for magnetic layers and disk                 
              memory applications and could lead to improved computer and                    
              information technologies.
