Title       : Acquisition of an Ultramicrotome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1993   
File        : a9216388

Award Number: 9216388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18325              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Rizzolo   (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harish C. Joshi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Winfield S. Sale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              An ultramicrotome is requested to help investigate cellular                    
              polarity and subcompartmentation.  One project uses a                          
              developmental approach to dissect the various mechanisms                       
              that polarize the distribution of membrane proteins in                         
              simple, transporting epithelia.  Another project examines                      
              the ordered arrangement of 3 isoforms of dynein associated                     
              with the microtubules of flagella in Chlamydomonas.  This                      
              arrangement is required for flagellar bending.  Two projects                   
              examine the polarity of the neuron.  The first addresses the                   
              polarized distribution of the 5 -tubulin isotypes presumably                   
              confers different functions to different classes of                            
              microtubules.  The second project examines the polarized                       
              distribution of tyrosine kinases, isoforms of protein kinase                   
              C, and their substrates.  Ultramicrotomy is central to all                     
              of these projects.  Standard transmission electron                             
              microscopy is require to relate the structure of                               
              reconstituted axonemes, or axonemes isolated from mutants                      
              with defective flagella, with their behavior in functional                     
              assays.  In the other projects, proteins of interest will be                   
              localized by immunocytochemistry at the light level (using                     
              immunocluorescence staining of 0.5-1.0 M frozen thin                           
              sections) or at the electron microscopic level ( using                         
              immunogold and immunoperoxidase methods).
