Title       : Soft Decision Decoding For Block Codes Using Artificial Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1994       
File        : a9216686

Award Number: 9216686
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tatsuya Suda                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125291             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Wicker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9216686  Wicker       The revival of interest in artificial neural networks
              (ANN's)  in the early 1980's has spurred research into their application in 
              many engineering fields, including digital signal processing and 
              communications.  The pattern recognition capabilities of ANN's  allows them to
              emulate a variety of functions. This emulation is  enhanced through the use of
              training algorithms, such as  back-propagation, that allow some types of ANN's
              to ""learn"  desired functions.  This research is an investigation into the 
              application of ANN's to the soft decision decoding of block error  control
              codes.  In the past two years, experimental studies have  demonstrated that
              certain ANN's can perform error control decoding  for some block codes.  The
              experimental results have so far shown  that ANN's can perform hard decision
              decoding, but soft decision  decoding results have been extremely limited.  In
              this  investigation, the error control problem is first translated into  the
              terms of functional analysis.  Decoding is viewed as a mapping  from a
              continuous received signal space onto a discrete information  word space. 
              Decoder design is thus translated into a problem of  functional approximation. 
              The next step is to use a highly  promising class of ANN's, feedforward neural
              networks (FFNN's), to  implement the decoding function in an efficient manner. 
              The  operation of FFNN's can be viewed geometrically, with each layer in  the
              network carving up the received signal space into increasingly  lower
              dimensional subspaces, culminating in an output decision  layer that provides
              estimates of the transmitted information bits.   The functional approximation
              approach thus allows for ideal soft  decision decoding, while the FFNN design
              uses the algebro-geometric  redundancy within the block code to reduce the
              decoder complexity.   The performance of these decoders will be further
              enhanced through  the use of ANN training techniques that will match input
              layer  decision metrics to channel conditions w hile the decoder is  operating.
               The result will be a series of efficient soft decision  decoders for a variety
              of block codes in a variety of applications.  ***
