Title       : Accelerated Coalescence in Phase Separation of Partially Miscible Solvents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1994      
File        : a9216133

Award Number: 9216133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reuel Shinnar shinnar@che-mail.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Mauri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In a research effort presently funded by NSF a novel liquid-                   
              liquid extraction processes is being investigated, which                       
              capitalizes on the properties of partially miscible solvents                   
              with a critical point of solubility.  In this process the                      
              critical mixture, together with the solute to be separated, is                 
              first heated above its critical temperature, where it forms a                  
              uniform solution, and then cooled to the thermodynamically                     
              unstable region below the miscibility curve where the solvents                 
              separate into who coexisting phases.  This new process was                     
              shown not only to be feasible, but also to extremely                           
              advantageous, above all when dealing with systems that tend to                 
              emulsify or form stable dispersions.  For example, it can                      
              handle a fermentation broth without using a centrifuge, which                  
              is a technical breakthrough with far-reaching implications in                  
              bioseparation.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The high efficiency of the new separation process is due to a                  
              phenomenon that has never been reported in the literature:                     
              when phases separation after quenching below the coexistence                   
              curve, coalescence is not only greatly accelerated, but it is                  
              much less sensitive to impurities of both solvents and solutes                 
              than during isothermal operations.  The coalescence times of a                 
              fermentation broth can be reduced by three orders of magnitude                 
              by using the new separation technique in place of the                          
              traditional isothermal process, in which cause the formation                   
              of stable dispersions and emulsions.  The proposed research                    
              intends to investigate this phenomenon of accelerated                          
              coalescence in detail, using light-scattering and photographic                 
              techniques, accompanied by an attempt to formulate a                           
              quantitative theoretical explanation.  The results of this                     
              study will be of both scientific and technical interest in                     
              understanding the general phenomenon of hindered coalescence                   
              in solvent extraction and will shed some light on the phase                    
              separation of partially miscible mixtures due to cooling or                    
              heating across the coexistence curve.
