Title       : Stability and Control of Intelligent Vehicle/Highway Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1993     
File        : a9216450

Award Number: 9216450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Stengel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Ramadge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alain L. Kornhauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9105,
Abstract    :
              This proposal addresses one of the most complex                                
              technological problems confronting today's society:                            
              the minimization of congestion on our nation's                                 
              roads and high ways.  It is unlikely that significant                          
              improvements can be made without the application                               
              of the principles of Intelligent Control.  Toward                              
              achieving this goal, we propose to formulate system                            
              models, to analyze vehicle and network modalities,                             
              and to design control, estimation, an d                                        
              identification algorithms for Intelligent                                      
              Vehicle/Highway Systems (IVHS).  We will develop                               
              a theoretical basis for applying intelligent control to                        
              large-scale, complex systems, using IVHS as a                                  
              substantive example.  Our approach is rooted in                                
              optimization and control theory, as well as decisions                          
              analysis an artificial intelligence.  This is a                                
              multidisciplinary problem; hence, principal                                    
              investigators from Princeton's Departments of Civil                            
              Engineering and Operations Research, Electrical                                
              Engineering, and Mechanical and Aerospace                                      
              Engineering will work together to solve it.                                    
              Furthermore, we will collaborate with the Vehicle                              
              Systems Research Department of the General                                     
              Motors Research Laboratories (providing a link to                              
              the TravTek IVHS Program currently underway in                                 
              Orlando, Florida) and the TRANSCOM                                             
              Interagency IVHS Program (Northern New Jersey                                  
              and Metropolitan New York area) to assure that                                 
              this research is not only scientifically meritorious                           
              but relevant to real needs.  The proposed research                             
              separates naturally into three tasks: 1) Modeling                              
              Intelligent Vehicles and Schools of Intelligent                                
              Vehicles, 2) Intelligent Traffic Management and                                
              Information Transfer for Minimizing Congestion, 3)                             
              Graphic Simulation of Intelligent Vehicle/Highway                              
              Systems.  These three tasks will be conducted                                  
              concurrently and jointly by the  principal                                     
              investigators and their students.  Anticipated                                 
              outputs of the proposed research include a new                                 
              discrete-event formalism for analyzing systems of                              
              rule-based controllers and physical plants, a                                  
              hierarchical structure for intelligent management of                           
              large-scale systems, and a flexible graphics tool for                          
              investigating mixed-variable dynamic systems, with                             
              emphasis on IVHS scenarios.
