Title       : ABR: Continuing Studies of the Role of Hydrodynamical and Biological Processes
               During Settlement of Infaunal Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1995   
File        : a9216260

Award Number: 9216260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith P. Grassle jgrassle@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    This  is  an Accomplishment-Based Renewal award to continue              
              research  on the role of hydrodynamical and biological  processes              
              during  settlement of infaunal invertebrates.  The ultimate  goal              
              of   the  research  is  to  determine  the  spatial  scales   and              
              hydrodynamical  and  biological conditions  for  which  substrate              
              selectivity  by  settling  larvae  account  for  observed   adult              
              patterns  of distribution.  The research addresses the  following              
              three  general  questions. 1) Where are competent larvae  located              
              within  the water column and what is their settlement rate  as  a              
              function  of  flow and sediment characteristics?   2)  Do  larvae              
              actively  select  preferred substrates  over  spatial  scales  of              
              meters in the laboratory and of 100's of meters to kilometers  in              
              the field?  3) How is sediment selection accomplished in flow  --              
              that   is,  are  there  specific  larval  behaviors  that  permit              
              exploitation   of  the  physical  regime  to  facilitate   active              
              selection  and are there physical conditions for which  selection              
              is  impossible?   Experiments to address these question  will  be              
              conducted  while  continuing  the  study  of  sediment  selection              
              capabilities of particular infaunal invertebrates as  a  function              
              of  life  history characteristics and habitat affinity of adults.              
              The intent is to iterate on generalizations regarding the role of              
              settlement in explaining mesoscale adult distributions through  a              
              combination  of  laboratory and field studies  on  a  variety  of              
              "types"   of   species   (e.g.,  in   terms   of   life   history              
              characteristics, taxonomic position and adult habitat affinity.
