Title       : Queueing Dynamics and Optimization Issues in Parallel and Distributed Processing
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1996        
File        : a9216034

Award Number: 9216034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Bambos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   In this project parallel and distributed processing systems               
              will be studied from a queueing theoretic point of view, and                   
              related problems of dynamical optimization will be addressed.  A               
              fundamental understanding of how concurrency, coordination and                 
              scheduling issues, emerging at the level of basic operations,                  
              affect the macroscopic dynamics and performance of such systems                
              will be acquired.  General analysis techniques and systematic                  
              design principles will be identified.  The design (synthesis) of               
              efficient operational schemes will be addressed, for the                       
              optimization of parallel and distributed processing systems arising            
              in computing and flexible manufacturing, with respect to criteria              
              concerning throughput, delays buffer occupancies, lead balancing,              
              fault-tolerance etc.  Basic prototypical models, extracted from                
              various practical processing situations in computing and                       
              manufacturing, will be studied in a unified framework, with                    
              emphasis on rigorous mathematical results and provable bounds.  New            
              queueing models will be developed to capture essential features of             
              concurrency and coordination and allowing the systematic analysis              
              of the dynamics and performance of processing protocols.  Real-time            
              scheduling and resource allocation schemes will be studied in a                
              natural stochastic framework.  In cases where the relevant optimal             
              scheduling algorithms are of high complexity, the focus will be on             
              exploring simple (low complexity) scheduling schemes. Other aspects            
              of stochastic, dynamic scheduling will also be examined, if                    
              necessary by simulation.                                                       
                   The research should develop an understanding of the dynamical             
              aspects of parallel and distributed processing in computer systems             
              and flexible manufacturing, at a fundamental mathematical level,               
              and for establishing techniques to optimize performance, based on              
              a solid mathematical methodology.  The applied branch of this                  
              research will study specific practical systems that motivate the               
              general models.
