Title       : SBIR Phase I: Multimedia for Learning Structural Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9561157

Award Number: 9561157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. J. Mackay don@sciencemedia.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ScienceMedia
	      6540 Lusk Blvd. Suite C144
	      San Diego, CA  92121    619/625-9261

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5371,9145,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9561157  Mackay     Highly technical scientific topics can be effectively
              learned through a multimedia experience.  This Small Business Innovation
              Research Phase I project focuses on developing an interactive multimedia
              product that will make more accessible the subtle relationship between
              structure and function in macromolecular biochemical systems.  The integration
              of voice, video, animation and simulation into a virtual reality proposed will
              enable students to interact with sophisticated computer models of molecules and
              interrogate their molecular properties in a state-of-the-art multimedia format
              running on standard personal computers. ScienceMedia will collaborate with
              professors and students from the University of California at San Diego in the
              development of process.  The material to be prepared includes biochemical
              background on proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates and lipids for the novice.
               More importantly, the project will assemble and adapt detailed examples
              illustrating the relationship between molecular and chemical structure and a
              molecule's biological function.  Among these examples are biological motion,
              information storage, nerve impulse propagation, enzymatic catalysis, and
              nutrient transport.  The student will interact with the molecular systems,
              probing their structures, discovering first hand what physical and chemical
              forces give rise to their biological properties.   This project aims to produce
              a multimedia product integrating high end 3D molecular models, hypertext cross
              referencing, and biochemical knowledge base to be marketed to high school and
              college students, thus enabling them to better appreciate the chemical
              processes responsible for life.  The tools and technologies developed along the
              way will provide the foundation for making additional contributions to
              education in other areas of molecular biology and chemistry and to instruction
              and training in the burgeoning biotechnology industry.
