Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Novel High Sensitivity Gas Sensors for Chemical Characterization:
               Intracavity Laser Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9561108

Award Number: 9561108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74693              (Estimated)
Investigator: Esmail Mehdizadeh georgea@innovativelasers.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Innovative Lasers Corp
	      9121 E. Tanque Verde
	      Tuscon, AZ  857498874    520/573-6219

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1938,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will research and
              develop advanced in situ, gas sensors that are simultaneously extremely
              sensitive (parts-per-billion-volume (ppbv) or lower concentrations), and low in
              cost. These laser-based sensors are designed to meet the increasing demands for
              improved chemical characterization and monitoring instrumentation of gaseous
              species (molecules/ atoms/radicals/ions) in chemical and environmental science
              applications. The unique properties of semiconductor diode lasers coupled with
              the high detection sensitivity and operational versatility of a new
              spectroscopic technique, intracavity laser spectroscopy (ILS), provide the
              technology innovation required to successfully address these applications.   In
              comparison to currently available ILS gas sensors based on crystal lasers, the
              new generation of semiconductor diode laser/ILS sensors will have (i)
              substantially lower costs, (ii) simplified operational parameters, and (iii)
              expanded applicability while maintaining high detection sensitivity relative to
              any currently available gas sensors. During Phase I, this firm will utilize its
              established expertise in ILS technology to determine the specifications
              required for  semiconductor diode laser/lLS gas sensors which are optimized for
              characterization of chemically and environmentally important gaseous species
              under realistic processing conditions.       New opportunities to design
              extremely sensitive, low-cost gas sensors that are operationally simple have
              applications in the chemical and environmental sciences. Commercial markets for
              sensors include the semiconductor industry (e.g., microcontamination
              monitoring, real time in situ detection of gaseous species, controlling the
              reactivity in chemical processing), monitoring combustion and plasma reactions
              used in the preparation of high quality deposited materials (e.g., flat panel
              display fabrication), the ultra-high purity gas supply industry, and the 
              fields associated with environmental monitoring and certification of 1egal
              compliance.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
