Title       : SBIR Phase I: Computer Simulation of Science and Technical Laboratory Exercises
               for Physically-Disabled Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9561647

Award Number: 9561647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51477              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter S. Woltosz walt@simulations-plus.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Simulations Plus
	      1220 W. Avenue J.
	      Lancaster, CA  935342902    805/723-7723

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9145,9177,9216,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9561647  Woltosz     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to
              be conducted at Words+, Inc. focuses on enabling physically-disadvantaged
              students to conduct laboratory experiments in the physical sciences.  It is
              designed to test the feasibility of developing efficient computer simulations
              of laboratory experiments based on first principle mathematical models that can
              be run by disabled students on personal computers with an absolute minimum of
              motor input.  It combines: (1) state-of-the-art personal computer technology;
              (2) existing knowledge about dynamic simulations of a variety of mechanical,
              chemical, electrical, magnetic, and optical processes; and (3) existing
              technologies developed by Words+, Inc., that enable persons with severe
              disabilities to operate sophisticated computer software with very little
              motion--as little as the blink of an eye.  The ability to experience firsthand
              the results of simulated experiments and to control the setup and operation of
              those experiments will change the perspective of the physically-disabled person
              in the laboratory from that of a spectator to an active participant.  This new
              capability can serve to motivate more disabled students to seek careers in the
              sciences or careers requiring scientific background, thus empowering  those
              whose brains function well but whose bodies prevent them from working in more
              physical forms of employment in their efforts to realize their potential.  The
              famous theoretical astrophysicist Professor Stephen Hawking of the University
              of Cambridge in England (a Words+ user) is a clear example of a severely
              physically-disabled person who is making major contributions to science.  
              Software that can be run by the physically-disabled can also be run by the
              able-bodied, so the results of this project have the potential to lead to
              software with strong commercial potential.  The final commercial products from
              this effort will be CD-ROM's or other similar media with softwape simulations
              covering a wide range of scienc e and technical disciplines and distributed
              through mass market channels to high school and university students around the
              world.  Accurate, first principle simulation is currently used in some
              industries.  Its use in education is both inevitable and can be expected to
              evolve continuously for the foreseeable future as the knowledge base on which
              mathematical models are derived improves and as affordable computer resources
              continue to increase
