Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Integrated Optics Based on a High-Speed Liquid Crystal/Polymer
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1996  
File        : a9561563

Award Number: 9561563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74881              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Domash ldomash@worldnet.att.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foster-Miller Inc
	      350 Second Avenue
	      Waltham, MA  024511104    781/684-4242

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
              investigate a new material and fabrication approach for the low cost and rapid
              production of both passive and active integrated optic components.  The
              technology is based on a highly efficient holographic photopolymer material,
              DMP-128, from Polaroid Corporation.  Arbitrary patterns can be directly written
              in the photopolymer using argon laser and a specially developed high speed
              laser writer.  Because of the large index changes possible in a DMP
              photopolymer, excellent waveguides, couplers, splitters, filters, and other
              passive components can be fabricated with little difficulty by direct writing
              individual or integrated components directly in the DMP substrate.  In
              addition, it is also possible to create high speed liquid crystal based active
              switch and modulators using the same DMP system.  Since the index changes in
              DMP are due to porosity variations, the material can be infused with liquid
              crystal (LC) creating large index changes in response to an applied voltage. 
              Due to the unique nanometer pore configuration of the DMP, nematic liquid
              crystals switch with microsecond speeds, three orders of magnitude faster than
              in conventional LC cells       Fiber optic telecommunications would benefit
              from integrated optical matrix switches with microsecond speed.  A nationwide
              fiber optic network will require massive numbers of inexpensive passive
              coupling and splitting devices.  New datacom networks are now being planned
              that require wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) and tunable filters.  These
              and other near-future commercial and government related applications are
              expected to open to this new technoloqy.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
