Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Thinking Like a Mediator: Precedent-Based Software for Resolving
               Disputes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1996   
File        : a9561347

Award Number: 9561347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Klein gary@klein.mhs.compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Klein Associates Inc.
	      582 E. Dayton-Yellow Springs Rd.
	      Fairborn, OH  453243987    937/873-8166

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1372,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9561347  Klein         There is substantial public and private interest in
              encouraging mediated settlements and a growing infrastructure to support
              mediation as a means of conflict resolution.  While successful mediators may
              often "think like lawyers," they have different goals and employ different
              methods and reasoning processes.  Despite the centrality of the use of
              precedents in the United States legal system, there is no body of precedents
              from which to work in mediated settlements.  This Small Business Innovation
              Research Phase I project proposes to analyze the cognitive aspects of the
              expertise of mediation professionals who are called upon to resolve tough and
              high-profile disputes in order to design support tools to assist experts and
              novices in "thinking like mediators."  In-depth interviews with expert
              mediators will center on expert-novice differences and mediators' use of
              analogical reasoning from prior cases.  The firm, Klein Associates Inc., will
              develop a prototype to test the feasibility of supporting mediation through the
              use of case-based reasoning.  The prototype will include a small case base of
              conflict resolution precedents which a mediator can retrieve and use.  The next
              phase of the research will focus on more in-depth research into mediation
              expertise and further development of the prototype's ability to retrieve
              similar cases and to present retrieved cases so as to support their application
              to a mediation problem.       Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) is an
              important area in the legal practice community.  Currently there is tremendous
              pressure on attorneys to learn it and use it to avoid costly trials as
              evidenced by the proliferation of ADR courses offered by state bar
              associations..  This timely project aims to make available a computer assisted
              support tool to serve mediators within specific organizations and one providing
              a broader range of knowledge and precedents to be made widely available to any
              paying subscriber.
