Title       : SBIR PHASE I: In-Situ Cleanup of Petroleum Contaminated Soil and Groundwater
               Using Alcohol Flooding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9561796

Award Number: 9561796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74811              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick C. Lucia patl@geosyntec.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GeoSyntec Consultants
	      621 NW 53rd St, Ste 650
	      Boca Raton, FL  33487    714/969-0800

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1440,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              951796  Lucia   This Small Business innovative Research Phase I project
              evaluates the potential application of alcohol flooding for remediation of soil
              and ground water contaminated by lighter-than-water non-aqueous phase liquids
              (LNAPLs).  Alcohol flooding is an innovative technique that offers the
              potential for enhanced levels of cleanup at a lower cost than possible with
              currently available technologies.  Alcohols possess a great ability to
              solubilize petroleum hydrocarbons.  Being more viscous than many
              petroleum-derived LNAPLs such as gasoline and aviation fuels, alcohols can
              mobilize LNAPLs as a pure phase by increasing viscous forces, even if the
              LNAPLs are not fully solubilized into the aqueous phase.  Because alcohols are
              fully soluble with both water and LNAPLs, they partition into each phase,
              thereby altering the bulk liquid properties and reducing interfacial tension
              (IFT).  As a result, viscous forces are increased and IFT is decreased,
              enabling enhanced LNAPL recovery to occur under realistically attainable flow
              velocities and gradients.  Intimate contact between the alcohols and LNAPLs is
              essentially guaranteed under all flow conditions because both compounds are
              more buoyant than water and therefore accumulate in and around the water table
              surface.  Therefore, loss of plume control will not result in the migration of
              contaminants out of the treatment zone.  In fact, this phenomenon can work to
              the advantage of enhanced recovery of floating LNAPL product by injecting
              alcohol onto and below the water table and recovering it using a dual
              injection/extraction pumping scheme.  Furthermore, LNAPL entrapped by capillary
              forces below the water table can be recovered by controlled lowering of the
              water table which has high concentrations of alcohol.  Any residual alcohol
              left in the ground after the remediation effort will enhance the biodegradation
              of any residual LNAPL since alcohols are excellent primary substrate for
              in-situ biodegradation.  Phase I research will confirm the feasibili ty of
              alcohol flooding for remediation of LNAPLs in unconfined aquifer media.  A
              series of 10 laboratory tests in a 1 m by 1 m by 2.5 cm tank filled with fine
              sand will be performed to demonstrate the enhanced recovery of floating LNAPL
              and LNAPL emplaced below the water table using alcohols.  Fluids recovered
              during alcohol floods will be analyzed by gas chromatography to evaluate the
              efficiency of the process.   Remediation of LNAPL-impacted soil and ground
              water is an important problem at oil refineries, aviation terminals, military
              installations, tank farms, and other locations where hydrocarbon fuels are
              stored or dispensed.  As alcohol is an octane enhancer, the alcohol-LNAPL
              mixture recovered from the subsurface has commercial value as a feedstock for
              refineries, thereby offsetting the cost of remediation.  Therefore, this
              application of alcohol flooding has a significant cost savings advantage over
              other available technologies for LNAPL cleanup at potentially greater LNAPL
              recovery efficiencies.
