Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Controlled Release Polymers for Continuous Monitoring of
               Chlorinated Hydrocarbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9561101

Award Number: 9561101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Beth Tabacco   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ariano Tech Inc
	      91 Harvey Street
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/661-6110

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1938,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate an
              innovative approach to detection of chlorinated hydrocarbons for continuous, in
              situ monitoring. Current methods of chemical analysis require that samples of
              contaminated soil or groundwater be collected and transported to a centralized
              laboratory for analysis. In the Phase I effort new solid phase pyridine
              derivatives will be developed which can be incorporated into controlled-release
              polymers for reagent delivery. The chemical basis for this approach is an
              outgrowth of the work of Fujiwara who first demonstrated that basic pyridine,
              when exposed to certain chlorinated hydrocarbons, developed an intense red
              color. Problems encountered with this assay include volatility of the pyridine
              reagent an the difficulty of containing it, consumption of the reagents during
              the reaction with the analyte, and poor long term stability. The proposed
              effort will eliminate many of these problems by developing solid phase reagent
              systems that have excellent long term stability when combined with new
              controlled-release reagent delivery systems, and incorporated into an optical
              fiber probe. Reagent response to TCE and chloroform will be measured
              spectroscopically and verified when incorporated into a controlled-release
              polymer.  There is a significant market opportunity for accurate and reliable
              field deployable analytical instrumentation for in situ, continuous monitoring
              of chlorinated hydrocarbons. The instrumentation developed will have immediate
              commercial application for the measurement of groundwater contaminants,
              monitoring the efficacy of environmental bioremediation efforts, unattended
              monitoring of stack discharges, and assuring workplace air quality.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
