Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Modifying Hard Carbon Coatings for Improved Tribological
               Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1996     
File        : a9561410

Award Number: 9561410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Freedman af@aerodyne.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Qing Dai  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Aerodyne Research Inc
	      45 Manning Road
	      Billerica, MA  018213934    508/663-9500

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1444,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9561410  Dai         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              concerns the chemical modification of hard carbon coatings through reaction
              with radical species in order to improve their tribological performance.  These
              modifications can also lead to the realization of wear resistant solid
              lubricant coatings.  Two complementary approaches will be examined in parallel,
              fluorination and nitridation.  Fluorination of hard carbon surfaces can reduce
              their friction, while reaction of hard carbon with active nitrogen species may
              produce nitrogen-containing carbon films with excellent thermal stability and
              hardness.  This Phase I project will investigate pathways to improving the
              tribological properties (friction, striction and wear) of hard carbon coatings
              through chemical   modifications of the surface region. The goal is to define
              the mechanisms of fluorination and nitridation using novel sources and to
              establish quantitatively the relationship between the surface chemical
              composition, surface morphology and the tribological properties.  X-ray
              photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR)
              spectroscopy will be used in conjunction with Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) to
              characterize the modified films' chemical composition, surface structure,
              morphology and their tribological performances (friction,   striction).  In
              addition, a wear rester will be used to characterize the wear resistance of the
              modified films.       This project is designed for the development of solid
              lubricant coatings in the areas of precision tooling, magnetic recording, space
              technology, etc.  A major market that would be affected would be magnetic disk
              media.  As recording density increases, the distance (fly height) between the
              read/write head and the disk has to be decreased; full contact operation is
              under consideration.  As a result, the tribological properties of the hard
              carbon overcoats directly affect the dualibility of the disk and the read/write
              head.
