Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition Processing of Lanthanum
               Phosphate and Beta-Alumina Fiber Coatings for Mullite Matrix Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9561712

Award Number: 9561712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew T. Hunt mct.exec@ccvd.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CCVD dba MicroCoating Tech
	      5315 Peachtree Industrial Blvd.
	      Chamblee, GA  303412107    678/287-2400

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  9561712  Hunt   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will demonstrate the ability of Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition (CCVD) to
              inexpensively deposit high quality lanthanum phosphate and beta-aluminate thin
              films for use in composite applications. A series of run studies will be
              performed to optimize the process and demonstrate reproducibility. In this
              project, thin films of lanthanum phosphate and beta-alumina will be grown onto
              flat substrates and fibers using CCVD. The composition, morphology,
              microstructure, and mechanical properties of the films will be determined as a
              function of deposition conditions.   Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition
              (CCVD~M) is the only open atmosphere CVD technique for ceramics. The CCVD
              method has been shown to inexpensively and quickly apply dense, adherent,
              epitaxial thin films in a continuous manner. This technology can be used for
              the production of lanthanum phosphate and beta-aluminate coated
              thermostructural composite fibers for stability and toughened behavior in
              mullite matrix composites. The CCVD method is low cost, high quality and
              versatile. It does not require a reaction chamber or furnace, yet the thin
              films produced are comparable in quality to CVD films, and allows fibers to be
              easily passed through a deposition zone for multi-layered, production line
              coatings. This firm has produced CVD quality films of numerous materials using
              CCVD in the open atmosphere. This allows for easy handling of fiber tows which
              is a major problem for other existing coating techniques.   Traditional CVD
              coating of ceramic fibers is slow, difficult and expensive, and requires a
              specially designed furnace. In contrast, the CCVD technology offers the ability
              to coat multiple fibers without specialized equipment or environments. A large
              corporation has expressed interest in this technique for the production of low
              cost, high quality lanthanum phosphate and beta-aluminate films on fibers for
              high temperature protective and structural composites in  mullite matrix
              composites. For these reasons, the CCVD technology is well-positioned to be
              used in the development of composites for fan blades, cylinder inserts, brake
              rotors and related applications.  ***
