Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Large Area Fiber Optic Tapers for X-Ray Detectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1996     
File        : a9561477

Award Number: 9561477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard V. Jeskey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Incom Inc
	      PO Box G
	      Southbridge, MA  01550    508/765-9151

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1108,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     This small business Innovation Research Phase I project is to identify
              and develop the materials required to make Large Area Fiber Optic Tapers for
              detectors needed to do macromolecular x-ray crystallography using rotating
              anode sources.  Large area CCD based fiber optic taper detectors for x-ray
              crystallography have been successfully fabricated and tested using a
              synchrotron x-ray source.  However, when using a rotating anode x-ray source,
              which is not as intense or as collimated as a synchrotron, the resulting images
              are not of the quality desired for optimum results.  The problems encountered
              with these detectors are excessive background noise and low spatial resolution.
               Initial research into the problems indicate that materials presently used for
              Large Area Fiber Optic Tapers are not ideally suited for solving these
              problems.  The objective of the research is to identify and develop the
              materials required to improve the performance of these detectors.   If CCD
              based Large Area Detectors can be successfully developed for use with rotating
              anode x-ray sources a significant step can be made in the field of x-ray
              crystallography.   The speed of acquiring x-ray diffraction images with a CCD
              based detector can be up to 10 times faster with better resolution and data
              quality than is presently available with Image Plate detectors.       This
              project will have a significant impact on the development of a new generation
              of x-ray crystallography detectors to meet the ever increasing demands for
              analyzing complex crystal structure.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
