Title       : SBIR PHASE I: A New Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Material for Direct
               Methanol/Air Fuel Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1996     
File        : a9561682

Award Number: 9561682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Gleason kjg@tda.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TDA Research, Inc
	      12345 West 52nd Avenue
	      Wheat Ridge, CO  800331917    303/940-2301

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
              address the problems associated with polymer electrolyte membranes (PEMs) for
              direct methanol-air fuel cells.  The advantages of fuel cells based on PEMs
              include simplicity of design, light weight, low operating temperature, improved
              catalytic activity, elimination of electrolyte loss from vaporization or
              redistribution within the cell stack, and reduced corrosion of cell materials. 
              The membranes of choice in the majority of PEM fuel cells have been based on
              perfluorosulfonic acid polymers.  When considered for use in direct
              methanol-air fuel cells, the greatest limitations of the perfluorosulfonic acid
              membranes are their cost, the rate of methanol transport across the membrane,
              and the requirement to maintain hydration of the membrane.  The incompatibility
              of perfluorosulfonic acid membranes with methanol leads to a limited lifetime
              of the fuel cell as the membrane dissolves.  Phase I will develop a solid
              polymer electrolyte that is not based on perfluorosulfonic acid polymers like
              Nafion, for application in direct methanol-air fuel cells.  This
              non-perfluorosulfonic acid-based PEM will have high proton transport rates,
              will not transport methanol, will be stable in the presence of methanol, will
              be easy to process, and will operate at higher temperatures where carbon
              monoxide is less of a problem for the catalyst.       This new solid polymer
              electrolyte material is expected to find use in PEM-based, direct methanol-air
              fuel cells, that would power the electric-car Next Generation Vehicle (NGV). 
              Other potential applications include its use in polymer electrolyte batteries,
              electrochemical sensors, polymer-based acid catalysts, and chlor-alkali
              membranes.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
