Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Kidcode: Software for Young Children's Exploration of Symbolic
               Representation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1996     
File        : a9561725

Award Number: 9561725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74958              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Baker michelle.baker@acm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intellinet Inc
	      325 Riverside Drive
	      New York, NY  10025    212/663-7026

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9145,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9561725  Baker     This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will
              conduct a formative evaluation to design and implement prototype software that
              allows children in the age range 5-7 years to explore symbolic representations
              in a variety of domains by developing codes and coded representations of text,
              pictures, and animations.  The software, Kidcode, is intended to supplement the
              National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) curriculum standards by
              focusing on mathematical representation as an act of communication.  Whereas
              the NCTM approach takes concrete experience with real objects as its starting
              point and gradually develops cognitive links to abstract representations, the
              software proposed here would encourage children to manipulate and explore
              symbolic representations for the purposes of communication.  The pedagogical
              objective of the proposed software is to help young children develop an
              understanding of symbolic representation in many of its manifestations through
              experiences creating codes and decoding the communications of their peers. 
              Educators often recommend that phonetics be taught alongside invented spelling
              and other whole language techniques for reading.  Similarly, fostering
              exploration of symbolic representations as part of a mathematics curriculum
              based on the NCTM standards is likely to lead to a deeper understanding of the
              linkages between concrete activities and the symbolic representations used in
              NCTM style exercises.  Such an understanding will allow children to more
              readily develop the capacity for using mathematical languages to model the real
              world.  Moreover, because symbolic representations are the foundation for
              language development in all of its forms, the educational software to be
              develop will offer opportunities for children to practice reading and writing
              skills and so see mathematics as a descriptive language in analogy to spoken or
              written English.   The Kidcode software has the potential to become an
              important additional resource avail able to support the mathematics curriculum
              in elementary and preschools.  Moreover, because use of symbolic
              representations cuts across the language arts and mathematics curricula,  it
              could become an essential element in the software libraries of these schools. 
              In addition, the objective of the project is to design software that is
              intrinsically interesting to children so that they choose to use it on their
              own.  If successful, Intellinet, Inc. will develop the software for the rapidly
              growing market for educational software for the home, thus playing an important
              broad role in the support of mathematical learning of young children.
