Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Microporous Alumina Microchannel Plates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9561706

Award Number: 9561706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74762              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles P. Beetz cbeetz@nanosciences.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NanoSystems
	      115 Hurley Road
	      Oxford, CT  064781037    203/881-2827

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9134,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     Microchannel plates (MCP) are essential for high gain imaging and
              detection applications in science, medicine, and industry. They have superior
              temporal resolution for incident charged and UV/x-ray particles, operate in
              high magnetic fields, and are essential for many particle detection
              applications in scientific instrumentation, such as scintillating fiber
              particle trackers. However, most existing MCP are fabricated from activated
              glass and suffer from a gain that falls rapidly with the cumulative charge per
              area collected from the MCP. Furthermore, MCP are expensive, available in
              limited areas, have significant spatial non-uniformities, and radiation damage
              readily.  We propose to overcome many of these difficulties by using anodized
              aluminum plates as the basis of an MCP. When formed under controlled
              anodization, amorphous alumina contains open, densely packed, straight
              micropores, oriented perpendicular to the surface, with a length to diameter
              ratio appropriate for microchannel gain. Pure alumina has a sufficient
              secondary emission gain so that the pores can serve as gain channels, without
              activation, or contaminating materials. We anticipate that this ceramic
              material will have superior stability and lifetime properties to those of glass
              MCP, at very low cost, with the potential of large MCP areas. The microporous
              MCP matrix could result in much better spatial resolution and spatial
              uniformity than existing MCP, with high radiation resistance. The gain
              stability and long life will enable the fast, compact MCP technology to be used
              much more widely in a large variety of vacuum electronics amplification
              applications.  In Phase I, we propose to fabricate prototype amorphous alumina
              MCP's by anodization, and measure gain, gain stability and spatial properties. 
                   If successful, micro/nanochannel plates (M/NCP) with a much longer
              operational life compared with current MCP would result, and could enable
              ultrafast, gated, compact, high magnetic field, radiation-hard MCP
              photomultipliers (PMT); (2) long lived image intensifiers/ converters with
              sub-micron spatial resolution; (3) flat panel vacuum phospher displays; (4)
              imaging charged particle/x-ray detectors with high gain and sub-micron spatial
              resolution.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
