Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Application of Advanced Molybdate Conversion Coatings to Aluminum
               Alloys and Anodized Aluminum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1996      
File        : a9561134

Award Number: 9561134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: King-Tsai Jeng lynntech@myriad.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech, Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 202
	      College Station, TX  778404024    409/693-0017

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1771,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
              feasibility of using a new approach to apply molybdate (hexavalent molybdenum)
              conversion coatings to aluminum alloys and anodized aluminum for aircraft
              applications. Chemical conversion coatings, particularly chromate conversion
              coatings, have found widespread commercial and military applications. Of
              particular interest is the use of chemical conversion coatings on aircraft
              aluminum alloys, because of their excellent corrosion resistance and their
              ability to serve as an effective base for paint. Conventional baths used to
              develop this coating contain chromates (hexavalent chromium), and it is the
              residual chromates in the coating that are largely responsible for the high
              degree of corrosion inhibition observed. However, chromates are highly toxic
              and their presence in wastewater effluents is severely restricted. Thus, it is
              highly desirable to develop a coating for aluminum alloys and anodized aluminum
              utilizing non-toxic chemicals that could serve as an alternative to the
              conventional chromate coating process. The key to the proposed project is the
              use of `Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs)` to promote the oxidation of low
              valence molybdenum to hexavalent molybdenum in a post-treatment stage and,
              hence, enhance the formation of protective oxide films on aluminum alloys. The
              proposed procedure is simple, environmentally benign, and can be applied by
              brushing or spraying.   This project should produce a viable alternative to the
              polluting conventional chromate conversion process used for a multitude of
              commercial and military end items. The molybdate (hexavalent molybdenum)
              process could eventually replace conventional chromate conversion coatings for
              commercial applications. Developed technology will also be beneficial with
              respect to the environment and human health.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
