Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Utilization of Deep Ocean Water for Water Desalination: The
               Hurricane Tower
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9561408

Award Number: 9561408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick K. Sullivan psullivan@oceanit.com                   WEB ADD:  http://www.oceanit.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victoria Garshnek  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oceanit Laboratories
	      1001 Bishop Street
	      Honolulu, HI  96813    808/531-3017

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1417,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  95-61408  Garshnek     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will develop a simple, portable and efficient water desalination device
              that takes full advantage of abundant natural resources of cold deep ocean
              water, solar energy, and the unique aspect of utilizing the dynamics of
              generated secondary vortices of the type commonly encountered when stirring a
              cup of tea or, on a larger scale, within a hurricane. In nature, a hurricane is
              actually a "solar still" whose efficiency is greatly enhanced by secondary
              vortices which rapidly transport moisture-laden air to the cooler upper
              atmosphere where it precipitates as rain. The proposed device is a smaller
              version of a contained hurricane whose efficiency is increased by
              rotor-generated vortices. Phase I research will focus on the fabrication of a
              half-scale Hurricane Tower desalination plant pilot system, generation of a
              secondary vortex in a closed system, and engineering/feasibility tests of the
              system distillation efficiency utilizing deep ocean water (4-6 C) as the
              coolant to condense rapidly rising vapor and solar-heated ocean salt water (for
              desalination). Phase II will develop an operational full-scale demonstration
              unit that could lead to the commercial development of a low-cost, low energy,
              desalination plant capable of operating on floating barges, in fixed locations,
              or mobile platforms to service geographic areas where water desalination is
              needed and where deep ocean water is available.   Commercial applications of
              the Hurricane Tower device include desalination plants for military
              applications, oil rigs, coastal regions, and island and inter-island water
              supply; emergency water supply during disasters, water contamination, or
              drought; and reliable water supply for atolls, island states, and Third World
              nations. Hurricane Tower water desalination systems could also replace aged and
              expensive fixed water desalination plants in use today_providing an economical
              source of fresh water supply for everyday use or emergen cies situations.
