Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Position Sensing to Improve the Interface forAdvice Giving
               Wearable Computers Used as Cognitive Prosthetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1996  
File        : a9561143

Award Number: 9561143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark B. Friedman mbf@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AugmenTech
	      5001 Baum Boulevard
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15213    412/687-3409

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0522300   Man-Machine Communication               
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 6845,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9561143  Friedman         This Small Business Innovations Research Phase I
              project focuses on research to develop a new and more powerful user interface
              for advice giving and is built on 10 years experience designing and testing the
              use of custom wearable talking computers for assisting people with cognitive
              impairments. Based on an existing wearable computer, a position sensing system
              will be developed that can be cost effectively installed in schools and
              potential job sites.  The research is to actively sense user location and gross
              motor activity to give goal oriented advice based on task and user activity
              models.  Use of these models should enable giving advice verbally either after
              a user request or when there is sensed user difficulty. In our domain of gross
              motion, we will be able to determine whether or not computer originated advice
              is heeded. By actively sensing task progress, we will be able to offer
              encouragement when advice is heeded and provide more detailed guidance when
              initial cues are insufficient. Finally, we will be able to automatically radio
              for human supervision if we sense dangerous activities or an inability to
              follow computer generated guidance. This interface avoids the natural language
              understanding problems inherent in other active advice giving systems that
              engage in dialog with their users. It will explore the domain of understanding
              user needs from task related gross motor activities.       The application to
              enable cognitively impaired users to independently hold jobs rather than remain
              in custodial care is important to society. If affordable wearable computer
              technology and minor modifications to a worksite can enable a person to change
              from being a dissatisfied net consumer of public funding in custodial care to a
              more satisfied wage earner in competitive employment, it is obviously a
              win-win-win situation. Society wins by decreasing net care costs to cognitively
              impaired citizens, the citizens are more satisfied with their lives, and our
              company has a new, pro prietary product.
