Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Cloning and Automated Screening of Genes Encoding Cold-Adapted
               Lipases From Bacteria Inhabiting Lipid-Rich Whale Skeletons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1996  
File        : a9561829

Award Number: 9561829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Stein jstein@diversa.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Diversa Corporation
	      10665 Sorrento Valley Road
	      San Diego, CA  921211623    619/453-7032

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9561829  Stein         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will determine the feasibility of using a novel cloning and automated screening
              approach to assemble a library of genes encoding cold-adapted lipase.  The
              approach is based on the construction of "environmental libraries" which
              represent the collective genomes of naturally occurring prokaryotes archived in
              cloning vectors that can be propagated in E. coli or other suitable host. 
              Because the cloned DNA is initially extracted directly from environmental
              samples, the libraries are not limited to the small fraction of prokaryotes
              that can be grown in pure culture nor are they biased towards a few rapidly
              growing species.  These libraries are then screened using fluor-linked
              substrates and high throughput robotics to identify clones expressing the
              activity of interest.  In addition, specialized cloning vectors will be
              employed that allow the rapid identification of cloned DNA fragments containing
              signal sequences which target the gene product for export.  Such signals
              frequently precede genes encoding hydrolytic enzymes such as lipases.  These
              approaches will be used to screen environmental libraries constructed from DNA
              extracted from a unique environment: the bacterial mats encrusting lipid-rich
              whale skeletons in deep sea basins.  Preliminary work suggests that these sites
              harbor a diverse bacterial community that subsist on the copious amounts of
              complex lipids that exude from the whale bones over a period of many years.  By
              coupling the environmental library approach to high throughput automated
              screening, hundreds of thousands of recombinant clones from the whale bone
              bacteria will be screened for lipase activity.         Candidate genes encoding
              lipases that display high activity at low temperatures yet remain stable at
              moderate temperatures will be overexpressed for evaluation as detergent
              additives.  In addition, other unique lipases found will be evaluated for use
              in other industrial processes which include thos e in food and beverage,
              pharmaceutical, waste systems, chemical and medical industries.
