Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Multilayer Electrochromic Films for Enhanced Optical Modulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1996   
File        : a9561597

Award Number: 9561597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart F. Cogan scogan@eiclabs.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : EIC Laboratories Inc
	      111 Downey Street
	      Norwood, MA  020622664    617/769-9450

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will prepare bilayers
              and trilayers of thin film electrochromic metal oxides and analyze their
              spectroelectrochemical properties. In particular, the feasibility of achieving
              a flat gray scale electrochromic modulation and a three color electrochromic
              element will be explored. These materials will be incorporated into
              electrochromic window and display configurations currently under development.
              Successful completion will lead to at least two novel electrochromic products:
              1) a high readability information display with two or more color capability,
              and 2) a neutral gray scale light transmission modulation coating for windows
              and other glass products.  Electrochromic materials change their optical
              spectrum reversibly when electrochemically cycled between oxidized and reduced
              forms. We propose here a new concept in electrochromic material design in which
              the selection of light attenuation wavelength range is much broader than is
              presently possible. The innovation is based on using bilayer and multilayer
              contiguous thin films of electrochromic inorganic oxides. It is anticipated
              that the multilayers will be in thermodynamic equilibrium, so that the total
              spectrum will be determined by the electrochemical potential of the assembly
              and the thicknesses of the contiguous layers. These considerations result in
              the possibility for design of electrochromic color and achievement of several
              colors depending on the applied potential.  The major commercial applications
              of electrochromic technology include: information displays; filters for optics,
              photography and electronic imaging; military low observable applications;
              ophthalmic eyewear and sunglasses; automobile mirrors, sunroofs, and glass;
              atria glass; and architectural glass for all kinds of buildings from passive
              solar dwellings to large office complexes.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
