Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Monolothic Capillary Optics for Protein Crystallography with
               Laboratory X-Ray Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9561205

Award Number: 9561205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74596              (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes B. Ullrich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : X-Ray Optical
	      90 Fuller Road
	      Albany, NY  12205    518/442-5250

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1108,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9561205  Ullrich         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will demonstrate the feasibility of developing significantly improved
              laboratory-based protein crystallography instrumentation by incorporating
              multichannel capillary x-ray optics.  Crystallography is an important tool in
              molecular biology for determining the structure of proteins.  Currently
              available systems require large and relatively perfect crystals.  The
              collection of high resolution data sometimes necessitates the use of
              synchrotron sources.  Monolithic multichannel capillary x-ray optics can
              efficiently collect a large solid angle from a laboratory x-ray source and
              focus the x-rays into a suitable, intense, well collimated x-ray beam for use
              in protein crystallography.  The Phase I project will include design,
              manufacture and characterization of a prototype capillary x-ray optic;
              evaluation of suitable x-ray sources; and modeling of the benefits to protein
              crystallography.  Phase II will involve incorporation of an optimized optic
              into a prototype protein crystallography system and comparison of protein
              measurements with measurements from current state-of-the-art systems.  If
              successful, the system will have an improvement of more than an order of
              magnitude in collimated x-ray beam intensity.  This will make possible in the
              laboratory many protein crystallography measurements previously only possible
              at synchrotrons, or previously possible using laboratory sources by sacrificing
              resolution and requiring very resource intensive sample preparation.  The new
              capability will greatly expand the use of protein crystallography, accelerate
              research, and reduce the cost of these measurements.  The researchers involved
              are the world experts in developing and commercializing multichannel capillary
              x-ray optics and experts in protein crystallography.       Crystallography has
              proven to be a reliable tool for investigating the three dimensional structure
              of important large biological molecules.  Even with the limitation s inherent
              in the current systems due to limited x-ray beam intensity, protein
              crystallography systems are in wide use.  All pharmaceutical companies have
              crystallographers working on problems aimed at structure based design of drugs.
               The x-ray optics resulting from a successful project would be able to be
              retrofitted into existing systems, and designed into optimized systems.  Once
              demonstrated, the capability to form intense, small-diameter, collimated x-ray
              beams from laboratory x-ray sources would have applications in a wide variety
              of systems.
