Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Stable Dehydrogenases: Reagents for Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1996  
File        : a9561842

Award Number: 9561842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry N. Allen lnallen@thermogen.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ThermoGen Inc
	      2201 W Campbell Park Drive
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/226-6500

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1938,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will identify new
              enzymes from thermophilic organisms suitable as stable off the shelf reagents
              for selectively and mildly installing chiral centers from corresponding
              carbonyl groups. There is great need in the chemical industry to develop
              catalytic methods capable of efficiently converting molecules to products
              without generating excessive waste streams or emissions. Molecular conservation
              methods based on biocatalyst reagents, such as dehydrogenase enzymes, offer
              opportunities to solve the challenges associated in industrial scale synthesis.
              Current dehydrogenase based technology is limited by the few available enzymes
              that have narrow substrate specificities, stabilities or yield a single type of
              stereocenter for application on large scale. New dehydrogenase enzymes need to
              be developed in order to increase the chemo- and stereoselectivity of different
              substrates from that which is currently available. Preliminary results indicate
              that dehydrogenases may be present in a number of extreme thermophiles that
              will be further investigated.   Dehydrogenases have been identified as useful
              biocatalysts for chemical synthesis applications, particularly in the reduction
              of carbonyl groups to alcohols. They allow simplification of reactions that are
              difficult by traditional synthetic methodology. The highly stable biocatalysts
              that the firm proposes to develop will add a variety of new dehydrogenase
              specificities to the synthetic chemist's toolbox.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
