Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Novel Pest Control Using Immunocontraceptive Vaccines Produced in
               Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9561761

Award Number: 9561761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith L. Wycoff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew C. Hiatt  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Panorama Res
	      2462 Wyandotte Street
	      Mountain View, CA  94043    415/694-4996

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1145,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
              biological method for control of mammalian pests that attack agricultural
              crops.  Annual economic losses in excess of $5 billion result from nuisance
              mammalian pests (USDA estimates).  An ideal method to control these pests
              would: (a) specifically target and depress the population in a nonlethal,
              reversible manner; (b) use a safe biological method that is environmentally
              friendly; (c) be inexpensive and easy to use.  This project will attempt to
              develop a biological control method that meets all of these criteria.  An
              immunocontraceptive product, using a rodent specific zona pellucida antigen
              previously shown to immunize mice will be developed.  The antigen will be
              expressed in alfalfa linked to the immunoadjuvant protein cholera toxin. 
              Preliminary studies demonstrate that mice fed spinach infected with tobacco
              mosaic virus carrying the ZP3 antigen fused to the TMV coat protein developed
              ZP3 specific antibodies and became infertile.  Because the conceptual basis of
              this idea has been reduced to practice and a patent has been submitted, the
              next step and the primary objective of this proposal is to develop a
              commercially viable means to deliver the immunocontraceptive vaccine.  The
              overall objective of phase I is to demonstrate that transgenic alfalfa plants
              expressing ZP3 epitopes are immunogenic in mice and that these mice have
              reduced fecundity.  To this end a plant expression vector will be constructed
              comprised of the cholera toxin A and B chains with a selected ZP3 epitope fused
              to the cholera A chain and a selectable marker between the CTA and CTB chains. 
              The expression of the CTB chain will be augmented by fusion of a KDEL sequence
              to the C terminus.  Transgenic alfalfa plants will be generated and antigen
              expression demonstrated.  Mice will be immunized with transgenic alfalfa to
              demonstrate immunogenicity of the fusion protein and feeding experiments to
              demonstrate oral vaccination will be initiated.  The goal is to demonstrate
              feasibility of using transgenic alfalfa as a means to deliver contraceptive
              epitopes for oral immunization as a means of pest control and preliminary work
              suggests that the probability of success is high.       This work will result
              in the generation of a novel, safe and effective means to control nuisance
              pests.  Nuisance pests cost billions of dollars worth of economic loss and
              endanger human lives.  An effective means of control will generate a
              commercially viable business opportunity in excess of $100 million annually.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
