Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Fatigue Performance and Failure Modelling for High Speed Composite
               Flywheels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9561605

Award Number: 9561605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74616              (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Hanks   (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Gorman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SatCon Technology Corp
	      161 First Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021421221    617/349-0861

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1441,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9561605  Gorman         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will conduct fundamental research into the failure mechanics and fatigue
              performance of composite materials applied to the high stress rotating
              environment of energy storage flywheels.  Implicit in the work is the premise
              that manufacturing and/or service induced defects in composite fly wheels are
              inevitable, and that commercial success requires a comprehensive understanding
              of the type and extent of defects which may be safely accommodated.  A combined
              program of operational and micromechanical analysis and testing iswill be
              carried out, leading to both manufacturing quality acceptance standards and
              methodologies for predicting composite flywheel service life.  Unique features
              of  this work are the incorporation of inhomogeneous composite material models
              into the evaluation of flow criticality and growth, as well as explicit
              consideration of local loading increments due to flaw growth.  Phase I will
              encompass initial conceptualization of the analysis plus coupon testing.  Phase
              II will continue analytical development including spin test to destruction of
              several composite flywheels.  Phase III will apply the developed methodology to
              a particular UPS composite flywheel product.  The end result of this project
              will be a database of nominal and intentionally flawed coupon strength and
              rotor spin tests as well as a computer-based composite flywheel reliability
              design tool.  These data and analyses will be formulated so as to assist
              designers in choosing among the diverse composite flywheel architectures
              showing commercial promise.  The design tool will also guide choices as to
              design safety factors, estimated service lives, and operational diagnostic and
              servicing procedures.         This research will redress current deficiencies
              in the understanding of composite flywheel reliability and service life, which
              demand either very large design safety factors or exceedingly restrictive
              standards of fabrication and inspectio n.  The results are expensive in either
              case, diminishing delivered performalce on the one hand, and dramatically
              increasing scrap rates (and costs) on the other.  The development of rational
              defect acceptance standards and service life predictions will remove one of the
              most significant barriers to composite flywheel energy storage applications
              currently pending in the automotive and fixed-base UPS markets.
