Title       : SBIR Phase I: Marker Gene Directed Substrates for Cell Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9561199

Award Number: 9561199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74175              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Naleway jnaleway@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marker Gene Technologies
	      1850 Millrace Drive
	      Eugene, OR  974031927    541/344-1624

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1402,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9561199  Naleway   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims
              to investigate the feasibility of developing new compounds capable of utilizing
              common marker gene expression in transformed cells to control the growth and
              character of cells in living tissue.  If successful, the research will provide
              breakthroughs needed to advance the promising commercial uses of recombinant
              genes.  Marker Gene Technologies will establish the feasibility of the
              technology by preparing new galactoside and Cephalosporin conjugates of common
              growth regulators, drugs and enzyme inhibitors, for administration to a variety
              of animal cells or bacteria that contain either the B-galactosidase (lac Z) or
              ampicillin resistance (B-lactamase, amp) genes as gene fusion markers.  These
              new conjugates will provide innovative methods of detecting gene fusion's and
              utilizing these fusion systems in transformed cells to control selected
              biological properties of the cells.  The new conjugates will be assayed in
              tissue culture and in vivo for their ability to cause specific and localized
              inhibition or improvement of cell growth in culture and to deliver these
              conjugates in a cell- or tissue-specific manner. This work will provide the
              foundation for the next phase of the project in which the conjugates will be
              tested in a variety of commercial applications.  Marker Gene Technologies
              brings 12 years of experience in the area of marker gene research to this
              project.  The company sells a variety of market gene-directed conjugates,
              molecular biology kits, and inhibitors to the worldwide scientific community.  
              The success of this project opens up significant commercial possibilities in
              the fields of plant and crop production, medical intervention in genetic
              diseases, immunoadjuvant therapy for cancer treatment, and biotechnological
              production of new proteins and drugs in cell-culture systems.  In addition, it
              contributes new information and techniques for basic cell-biology research.
