Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Integrating Ecosystem and Hydrometeorologic Models: An
               Object-Oriented Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9561269

Award Number: 9561269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall R. Taylor rpamrt@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Resources Plan Assocs Inc
	      95 Brown Road, Suite 231
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/257-4305

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will examine the
              feasibility of developing an improved set of research and education modeling
              tools which can be used by ecologists, water resource engineers, biologists,
              foresters, and others in related disciplines.  These tools will help in the
              examination of issues such as: biological responses to climate change; carbon
              balance in tropical forests; agricultural productivity; water runoff, yield and
              quality analyses; and development of sustainable land use and forest management
              policies.  The conceptual models which will guide the development of these new
              tools are extensions of developments during the last decade in several fields,
              including: energetics-based ecological modeling and gradient analysis,
              geographic information systems applications to spatially distributed
              hydrometeorologic modeling, object-oriented programming methodologies, and
              complex data visualization.  The research objectives provide for the
              application of recent Object-Oriented techniques to the redesign of an
              integrated ecosystem model.  Successful completion of this research will
              produce a software design document which will then be used to improve existing
              models, and to determine the feasibility of generalizing the software tools for
              other applications.       Improved ecological modeling tools are needed by
              researchers, engineers, and planners.  Success of this research, followed by
              development of the newly designed tools, will result in a product which will
              find a global market among government agencies, universities, private
              engineering and planning firms, and ecology-oriented foundations.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
