Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Development of a Solid State, Liquid Crystal Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1996     
File        : a9561748

Award Number: 9561748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74395              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Noto noto@sci-sol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Scientific Solutions Inc
	      22 High Street, Suite 4
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/395-2344

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,4202,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I proposal utilizes two
              emerging technologies to produce a high resolution, tunable spectrometer with
              no moving parts. A small, solid state high resolution spectrometer with the
              unique imaging capabilities provided by a CID is a perfect solution to many
              problems ranging from process spectroscopy, where a spectroscopic analyzer is
              used on a production line to `remote sense` an industrial process. To the
              problems facing the space sciences, in particular NASA's initiatives to develop
              lower budget spacecraft capable of answering unresolved questions while
              fiscally and educationally benefiting the greatest number of Americans. As well
              as uses in ground-based optical aeronomy, where smaller budgets are forcing new
              instrumentation. Instruments with expanded capabilities that are fully
              automated and capable of surviving in harsh environments. The LC-FPS design
              capitalizes on the technology of a major liquid crystal vendor to grow
              precision nematic crystals onto the surface of traditional etalon plates and to
              control etalon resonant wavelength by application of a controllable electric
              field. The innovative spectrometer proposed features the highest spectral
              resolution and throughput of any instrument in its class, permitting not only
              abundance measurements but also dynamically measurements. so important to
              ongoing research in planetary and cometary atmospheres.       The LC-FPS is an
              ideal tool for problems ranging from:  1) The remote sensing of regulated
              environmental pollutants  2) Augmenting current aeronomical instrumentation at
              major national facilities.  3.) A replacement for current laboratory FTIR
              spectroscopy systems commonly used in molecular biology and biochemistry.  4.)
              An essential tool in any field that utilizes spectroscopic remote sensing or
              process spectroscopy.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
