Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Novel Electron Correlation Methods: Multiconfigurational Density
               Functional Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9561833

Award Number: 9561833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Murco N. Ringnalda murco@schrodinger.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Schrodinger Inc
	      121 SW Morrison Street
	      Portland, OR  972015881    503/299-1150

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1938,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 This SBIR  Phase I project will result in a multiconfigurational density
              functional approach to electronic structure problems that combines ab initio
              generalized valence bond (GVB) or restricted configuration interaction (RCI)
              techniques with density functional theory (DFT) methods. The GVB DFT and GVB
              RCI DFT software will use the pseudospectral techniques of  this firm's PS GVB
              software to allow rapid calculations without loss of accuracy.   In Phase I,
              this firm will write the software necessary to implement the proposed GVB DFT
              and GVB RCI DFT methods in PS GVB's pseudospectral framework, examine results
              from various functionals and hybrid parameters, and use the methods to perform
              some preliminary calculations of molecular properties to illustrate its
              feasibility, speed, and accuracy. Extensions of Becke's half half and three
              parameter methods that employ densities from GVB and GVB RCI wave functions in
              the density functional evaluation of the correlation energy will be examined,
              and various parameters for the three parameter methods will be tested.
              Calculations of various properties of large molecules will be performed using
              medium and large basis sets, including optimized molecular structures, bond
              dissociation energies, ionization potentials, proton affinities, solvation
              energies, multipole moments, polarizabilities, and hyperpolarizabilities. These
              results will be compared to experiment or to timing and accuracy obtained using
              less rapid or less accurate ab initio and DFT methods.   An extensive market
              already exists for electronic structure codes, with researchers performing ab
              initio and DFT studies for chemical, biological, pharmaceutical, and materials
              applications. The extension of PS GVB's correlation methods to GVB DFT, GVB RCI
              DFT, and GVB RCI MP2 DFT techniques with the same efficient scaling already
              present for other pseudospectral methods would permit rapid calculation of
              chemically accurate dissociation energies, reaction barriers, conformational
              energy differences, force fields, and multiple other molecular properties.
              Consequently, this work will enhance the market for PS GVB significantly.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
