Title       : SBIR Phase I: Planning Genetic Engineering Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1996 
File        : a9561624

Award Number: 9561624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis WC. Liu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Videodiscovery
	      1700 Westlake Ave N
	      Seattle, WA  981093012    206/285-5400

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9145,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9561624  Liu   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project involves
              development of an interactive multimedia educational program in a burgeoning
              area "Planning Genetic Engineering Experiments".  The program will be stored
              and distributed on CD-ROM.  The overall project aim is to create an interactive
              learning resource for college students in which the student is the
              experimenter, working through a complex problem that requires integration of
              the student's knowledge of recombinant DNA techniques and the scientific
              process.  The software will be designed to give intelligent feedback to the
              user during experimentation.  Background information resources (graphics,
              animations, photos, video clips, and simulations) will be available to fully
              explain each technique whenever the user needs this information.  Different
              skill levels from introductory to advanced undergraduate will be accommodated
              in this multimedia format.  Sufficient understanding of recombinant DNA
              techniques and the ability to integrate knowledge for use in problem-solving is
              difficult to obtain from textbooks, lectures, and from standard laboratory
              exercises.  The interactive design of this CD allows students to go through
              many problems at minimal cost, make their own mistakes, receive some guidance,
              and gain a deeper understanding of the technique and its application.  During
              Phase I the Videodiscovery, Inc. team of experienced educators and software
              engineers will develop scenarios involving molecular markers, RFLPs
              (restriction fragment length polymorphisms).  A problem scenario is presented
              and once the student has devised a general approach to the question, he or she
              can enter the interactive laboratory.  In the virtual lab, the appropriate "hot
              buttons" are selected to activate a technique.  To carry out the procedure,
              specific program generated questions that require a conceptual understanding of
              the technique must be answered.  If students are unfamiliar with a technique,
              or have trouble carrying out a technique, t hey can exit the laboratory field
              and go to a background description of the technique.  The prototype will be
              thoroughly tested in phase I and then expanded during the next phase of the
              project to include problems applicable to the content in several college
              courses.  The expanded CD-ROM will be marketed during the third phase of the
              project following more testing and revision.   Because recombinant DNA
              technology is pervasive in biological research today, experiments using these
              techniques are described in many biology courses from introductory to
              specialized upper level courses.  In the context of recombinant DNA in which
              "real labs" are impractical, the use of "virtual labs can make a significant
              contribution to student understanding. This type of resource has substantial
              commercial potential for use throughout the biology curriculum.  It is
              anticipated that students will acquire this low cost CD-ROM as a supplement to
              their textbooks.
