Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Phase Transition Gel Absorbents for Low Energy Separation of
               Azeotropes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9561441

Award Number: 9561441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lev E. Bromberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gel Sciences
	      213 Burlington Road
	      Bedford, MA  01730    617/276-1700

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1417,9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
                DMI-9561441  Bromberg     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project has the potential to substantially reduce the energy consumed in
              distillation processes, particularly for separating azeotropes and other
              close-boiling mixtures. It also has the potential to improve product purity,
              reduce environmental pollution and reduce equipment costs. The project proposes
              a novel process in which azeotropic distillation is augmented with reversible
              gel absorption requiring approximately half the energy of conventional
              azeotropic distillation, as components in a mixture can be selectively absorbed
              and recovered without undergoing a phase change. Whereas conventional hybrid
              processes are generally limited to aqueous azeotropes, the gel system is
              expected to be useful for a broad range of commercially important aqueous and
              non-aqueous mixtures. The objective of the Phase I investigation is to
              synthesize and characterize a gel suitable for at least one commercially
              important azeotropic system. The project will build on recent work in which
              polyethylene-based gels were found to absorb components selectively from
              mixtures of close-boiling liquids. Information on gel selectivity and the phase
              transition process will be obtained and used to estimate energy costs for the
              new process. Further enhancement of gel performance is planned for Phase II,
              including a study of absorption kinetics and a pilot-scale demonstration.   If
              successful, the gel-absorption hybrid distillation process will be of use in
              the organic chemical and petroleum industries. It is of particular interest for
              distillation and purification of ethanol-water and will enable economical reuse
              and recycling of solvents in the specialty chemical, pharmaceutical and medical
              industries, where the addition of an entrainer compromises product purity. The
              process promises to save $100-300 million per year in energy costs,
              substantially increase azeotropic distillation capacity at small capital cost,
              and create a new $5-50 million market for se paration gels.
