Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Enhanced Subsurface Injection of Chlorinated Solvent Degrading
               Microorganisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9561788

Award Number: 9561788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary F. DeFlaun 74024.3076@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Envirogen, Inc.
	      4100 Quakerbridge Road
	      Lawrenceville, NJ  086484702    609/936-9300

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1182,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will explore ways
              to treat chlorinated solvent contamination in subsurface environments such as
              aquifers.  Chlorinated solvents, like trichloroethylene (TCE), are particularly
              prevalent aquifer contaminants.  Depending on the degree of contamination,
              their physical properties may cause them to occur as DNAPLs and sorb to aquifer
              sediments, which make them difficult to remediate by pump-and-treat methods. 
              For these cometabolic contaminants, biodegradation by indigenous bacterial
              populations may be limited by the lack of a suitable indigenous population or
              inducing cosubstrates for degradative activity.  For many sites, especially
              aquifer contamination, remediation will require bioaugmentation or the
              introduction of degradative bacteria into the subsurface.  ENVIROGEN has
              developed bacteria specifically for the in situ remediation of chlorinated
              solvents.  These strains are adhesion-deficient for enhanced transport; they
              express TCE-degrading enzymes constitutively, eliminating the need for inducing
              cosubstrates; and they can be grown with large amounts of energy storage
              polymers for prolonged degradation.  The application of these strains, however,
              may be limited at sites that have extensive DNAPL contamination.  Free product
              chlorinated solvents are toxic to these bacteria.  To broaden the applications
              for these highly specialized organisms, we propose to combine these organisms
              with a foam technology which will act to disperse the microorganisms as well as
              the DNAPLs, thereby reducing their toxicity. This foam technology may also
              provide a mechanism for providing nutrients and oxygen to extend the
              degradative activity of the introduced strains.       The successful
              demonstration of the proposed work will result in an in situ bioaugmentation
              technology for treating even the most highly contaminated aquifers.  This
              technology is broadly applicable; chlorinated solvents are common groundwater
              contaminants at both government and private sites.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
