Title       : SBIR PHASE I: New Sensors for Chemical Characterization of Combustion and
               Process Gas Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1997      
File        : a9561471

Award Number: 9561471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pei-Lin Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynne Owens  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : T/J Technologies, Inc
	      PO Box 2150
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481062150    313/213-1637

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                 This SBIR Phase I project will develop new sensor materials for chemical
              characterization of mutlicomponent gas streams. There is a growing need for
              chemical sensors for the continuous, on line monitoring of gaseous process and
              emission streams. Micron sized devices that are sensitive, operate under the
              adverse conditions frequently required for many energy related applications,
              and can discriminate species in multicomponent mixtures are currently
              unavailable. The objective of the proposed work is to develop robust chemical
              sensing devices which will quantify the gas composition based on changes in the
              electrical conductivity of the transducer produced by adsorption of the target
              gas(es) and identify the species based on the temperature at which they desorb
              from the transducer surface as the transducer is heated linearly. This firm has
              identified conductive ceramics which hold great promise for use as sensor
              materials because they are refractory, possess high electrical conductivities,
              reversibly adsorb/desorb a number of gases of interest and can be produced in
              the form of high surface area films. This firm will show that sensor
              transducers based on these materials will be amenable to miniaturization,
              highly selective, operable at extreme temperatures and inexpensive. The Phase I
              research will demonstrate the feasibility of these materials by fabricating
              high surface area transducer films and evaluating their ability to detect and
              discriminate H2 and NO, common process gases. Changes in the electrical
              conductivity on adsorption of H2 and NO will be evaluated using the four point
              probe method and the ability to discriminate these gases will be determined
              using temperature programmed desorption techniques. The thermal and chemical
              stabilities will be evaluated in H2 and NO at temperatures up to 1000 ÝC.  
              This project will lead to a new class of materials for on line sensing of
              gaseous streams. These sensors will be based on materials which are ideal for
              operation in high temperature and corrosive environments. Process control and
              continuous emissions monitoring represent two broad areas of potential
              commercial application. Combustion based processes would benefit in both
              respects. For example, emissions feedback to engine control computers can both
              improve energy efficiency and reduce emissions.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
