Title       : SBIR Phase I: Illustrated, Interactive, American Sign Language/Science Videodisk
               Dictionary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1996     
File        : a9561203

Award Number: 9561203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurel A. McLagan techint@ix.netcom.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tech Int'l Inc of VA
	      429 W Airline Highway, Suite S
	      La Place, LA  700683817    504/652-1127

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0522300   Man-Machine Communication               
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5371,9145,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9561203  McLagan     Children with hearing disabilities are often unable to
              express themselves or to communicate specific concepts in brief words using
              text or sign language, especially scientific and mathematical concepts, due to
              limitations in  technical English vocabulary or unfamiliarity with the
              appropriate sign.  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              focuses on developing and demonstrating the feasibility of providing an
              illustrated, interactive American Sign Language (ASL)/Science dictionary for
              children with hearing disabilities using interactive videodisk (IVD)
              technology.  The dictionary will use text, graphics, video, animation, and ASL
              signs to define new words for elementary school level.  The child can call
              words via keyboard, touch screen, IVD controls, or other input devices and
              display the word definition in both English and ASL or can input a definition
              via selection of ASL signs or English words to identify representative words. 
              The first phase of the research entails producing a prototype of a first
              dictionary (about 1,500 words) appropriate for middle school on a
              microprocessor, using an authoring workstation.  Each frame will display a
              word, a video of the ASL representation of the word and definition of the word,
               and a graphical illustration of what the word represents (this illustration
              can be still graphics, video image, or animated graphics or cartoons).  The
              prototype dictionary will be alpha tested, and evaluated by
              subject-matter-experts prior to introduction to other student's display media,
              and by users.  Means to reduce the cost for use in schools and at home will be
              sought for eventual implementation on an IVD system.   This project will create
              a dictionary that can be directly used by children with hearing disabilities. 
              The tools developed offer an unlimited opportunity to present persons with
              hearing impairments with almost all voice and text material available to the
              majority of our nation's population.  The technique involved in its creat ion
              can be applied to a vast array of educational materials serving a broad range
              of demographic groups.  These applications include illustrated dictionaries for
              adults, games,  entertainment and training products.
