Title       : SBIR Phase I: Screening Users of Virtual Reality Systems for After-effects Such
               as Motion Sickness and Balance Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9561266

Award Number: 9561266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74794              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Kennedy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Essex Corporation
	      1040 Woodcock Road Suite 227
	      Orlando, FL  328033510    407/894-5090

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9561266  Kennedy   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
              concerned with developing a set of test procedures to evaluate aftereffects in
              connection with exposure of humans to virtual reality systems.  Virtual reality
              (VR) technology is currently being designed for broad availability in many
              segments of society.  There can be a downside to the compellingly realistic
              presence and self-motion afforded from VR systems.  Aftereffects resembling
              symptoms of motion sickness can occur, some of which indicate disorientation
              and unsteadiness.  Users of virtual reality systems are at risk of illness and
              injury both during exposure to virtual environments, and afterwards due to the
              occasional presence of long-term effects such as flashbacks, oculomotor
              disturbances, drowsiness and disturbed motor control.  An R&D program is
              proposed to develop a battery of methods, tests, and procedures in order to
              identify:  (a) VR systems expected to cause sickness in users, (b) specific
              equipment and usage characteristics that may be improved or modified, and (c)
              users who may be at particular risk of injury and/or sustained illness
              following exposure to a virtual environment.  The proposed battery is intended
              for use primarily as a dependent variable, that is, to register the effects of
              exposure to simulated environments.  Three tasks will be carried out in Phase
              I.  The first effort will be to determine which tests should be included in the
              battery and how the various configurations can accommodate the individual
              tasks.  The second task will be to determine the sensitivity and psychometric
              characteristics of the tests in the battery in order to obtain insights into
              difficulties to be encountered and overcome.  The third will be to repeatedly
              administer a representative set of tests to individuals to determine the
              stability of the tests.  This work will provide the foundation for the next
              phase of the research which will entail further validation of  these tests and
              development of the algorithms whic h will make them saleable to VR system
              developers.    A need exists for a methodological battery of tests which can be
              used by manufacturers of virtual environment systems to ensure that minimal
              risk is associated with use of virtual reality systems.  The availability of
              such a battery of tests which could be employed to certify that particular
              virtual environment systems produce no ill effects to humans would be extremely
              valuable to manufacturers and users of such equipment either for research or
              commercial usage.
