Title       : SBIR PHASE I: MultiFACET - An Approach for Solving Large Scale Planning and
               Scheduling Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1996  
File        : a9561853

Award Number: 9561853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74069              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Miller miller@combination.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adv Process Combinatorics
	      P.O. Box 2324
	      West Lafayette, IN  479060324    218/724-5416

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1465,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9561853  Miller         This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
              I develops new software for solving planning, and scheduling problems in
              flexible manufacturing facilities.  The software design is directed to
              solutions for large-scale industrial planning and scheduling.  @enefits are
              expected in increased production capacity, reduced waste, lower operating
              costs, reduced inventories, and shorter response time to customer orders.  The
              approach is a rigorous mathematical formulation of planning and scheduling
              problems and relies on a novel problem decomposition methodology.  The
              decomposition scheme uses a sliding time window containing a detailed model,
              coupled to a coarse-grained planning model for the remainder of the time
              horizon.  The heart of the method is an automated mechanism for propagating a
              detailed window along the time axis in an iterative fashion, much like
              numerical integration.  The time axis is decomposed into fine and coarse
              grained sections.  In the fine grained section, the scheduling problem will be
              modeled and solved as a mixed-integer linear program.  The length of the
              fine-grained time window is chosen so that the scheduling subproblem may be
              solved using a customized algorythm.  The remainder of the time horizon
              (outside the fine grained window) will be modeled using aggregate constraints
              and solved by relaxing integrality conditions.  This allows such macroscopic
              features as plant capacity and anticipated product demand to be propagated into
              each detailed scheduling subproblem.       If successful, this research will
              provide a new engine for scheduling tools useful in process industries. 
              Available software is difficult and expensive to install and maintain and does
              not provide high quality solutions.  The new software is expected to reduce
              customization and installation time and yet provide high quality results.
