Title       : SBIR Phase I: New Thin N+ Contacts for Germanium Detectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1996   
File        : a9561798

Award Number: 9561798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kanai S. Shah kshah@rmdinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Radiation Mon Devices Inc
	      44 Hunt Street
	      Watertown, MA  024724699    617/926-1167

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will perform an in-depth
              investigation of the phosphorus implantation and the pulsed excimer laser
              annealing steps in order to make this approach a commercially viable process
              for producing thin n+ contacts on large HPGe detectors. High purity germanium
              (HPGe) detectors are the most widely used devices for high resolution X-ray and
              y-ray spectroscopy, and these detectors are currently used in diverse
              applications such as nuclear physics, environmental monitoring, high energy
              physics experimentation, materials science studies, geophysical exploration,
              and y-ray astronomy.  One of the long standing problems in the germanium
              technology is the lack of a thin n+-type contact, which prevents fabrication of
              detectors with high detection efficiency for low energy X-rays from p-type
              germanium crystals. It is important to solve this problem because p-type
              material is generally cheaper than n-type material and is more readily
              available in larger volumes. Also, p-type detectors have better charge
              collection properties in close end coaxial structures than n-type detectors.
              Recently, this firm has successfully produced thin n+-type contact on HPGe
              detectors  by implanting phosphorus in germanium, and then using pulsed laser
              annealing to remove implantation damage.  Successful fabrication of the
              proposed contacts would increase the energy range over which p-type germanium
              detectors can be used and would also allow fabrication of complex detector
              designs such as monolithic arrays. Thus the HPGe detectors with our new n+
              contacts can be used in nuclear physics, astronomy, environmental monitoring,
              synchrotron studies, nuclear safeguards and verification, and geophysical
              exploration.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
