Title       : SBIR Phase I: Light Element X-Ray Flourescence Using Capillary X-Ray Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9561042

Award Number: 9561042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72356              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qi-Fan Xiao qxiao@xos.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : X-Ray Optical Systems, Inc
	      30 Corporate Circle
	      Albany, NY  12203    518/464-3334

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1493,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
              investigate the use of polycapillary optics for the determination of low atomic
              number (Z) elements (Z<14) on silicon (Si) semiconductor substrates using X-ray
              fluorescence (XRF).  Light element contamination is a significant problem in
              semiconductor production resulting in reduced device yields, increased
              production costs, and impaired industrial competitiveness.  No satisfactory
              analytical technique is available that is both nondestructive and has the
              necessary detection limits as set by the Semiconductor Industry Association
              (SIA) National Technology Road Map for Semiconductors (NTRMS).  It is predicted
              that the technology of polycapillary X-ray optics can effectively collect a
              large solid angle of X-rays and preferentially transmit photons below the Si
              absorption edge.  The transmitted beam can be focused upon the targeted area of
              a Si semiconductor with high intensity.  The performance characteristics of
              several polycapillary fibers will be studied for transmission of low energy
              X-rays in different geometric configurations.  These results will be used to
              design a novel polycapillary optical system for low energy XRF and improve the
              signal-to-noise ratio for light element analysis.       Applications of the
              research are expected to extend the capability of the XRF technique to a
              greater range of light elements and will be particularly useful in the
              semiconductor industry.  These applications will include materials synthesis
              and processing, electronic and photonic device fabrication, and
              microfabrication.  Improved semiconductor device yields and more competitive
              analytical instrumentation are expected.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
