Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Nonlinear Modeling and Control of Terfenol-D Actuators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1996     
File        : a9561773

Award Number: 9561773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74733              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Dozer dozor@satc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SatCon Technology Corp
	      161 First Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021421221    617/349-0861

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1445,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project concerns
              nonlinear modeling and control of Terfenol-D based actuators.  Nonlinear models
              will be developed which will allow the design of control systems that extend
              the linear operating region of these materials.  Although Terfenol-D is noted
              for large force and power densities, high stiffness, and the largest peak
              strain of all piezoelastic materials, the application of this material is
              limited by its inherent. nonlinear behavior.  The nonlinearities result in
              higher harmonics when dynamic inputs are applied. These harmonics increase
              unwanted vibration and tracking error.  Models will be derived using nonlinear
              magnetoelastic equations and lumped parameter modeling methods for magnetic,
              electrical, and mechanical subsystems.  Hysteresis and saturation will be
              included in the nonlinear magnetoelastic equations.  The resulting non linear
              dynamic model will be validated experimentally through open and closed loop
              control experiments.  By extending the linear operating region, it is expected
              that harmonic content, and hence vibration and tracking error, will be reduced.
              Also a substantially higher force density will be achieved. This will result in
              the ability to design smaller, lighter, less expensive actuators for use in
              applications which demand precise positioning and/or extremely high force to
              weight ratios; such as, vibration and noise cancellation, high pressure pumps,
              and micropositioners.       Development of the nonlinear controllers will allow
              up to a 50% increase in performance for dynamic applications, thus reducing
              size, mass and cost.  As evidenced by the growing piezoelastic material market,
              commercial applications are increasing for these types of actuators.  With
              twice the peak strain and an energy density of up to 15 times that of lead
              zirconate titanate (PZT), nonlinear control will allow these features to be
              used in a variety of dynamic applications.  It is expected that Terfenol-D will
              replace other piezoelectric materials in rapid micropositioning, of large
              objects and vibration isolation.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
