Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Genetic Engineering of Regulated Seedlessness in Seed Propagated
               Crops
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9561560

Award Number: 9561560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71913              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal Gutterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DNA Plant Technologies
	      6701 San Pablo Avenue
	      Oakland, CA  94608    510/547-2395

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is directed
              toward the development of a method for producing seedless fruit from a hybrid
              variety while retaining seeded fruit production from the parental inbreds.  The
              strategy is to allow fertilization but to block seed development soon
              thereafter through the seed coat-specific expression of a cell lethal function,
              the ribonuclease barnase.  Barnase expression has been shown to block cell
              growth and development in specific plant tissues.  A normally monomeric enzyme,
              barnase will be synthesized as two partial peptides encoded by separate
              synthetic genes, each of which will be present in one parental inbred.  In this
              way, the commercial fruit product is seedless, yet commercial seed production
              of a seed-propagated crop would not be impaired.  For the purpose of the
              initial test, tomato plants will be transformed separately with each chimeric
              gene, using different selectable markers for each gene.  To determine whether
              cell viability is disrupted when the two chimeric genes are expressed together,
              one chimeric gene will be introduced through biollistics into leaf tissue
              already transformed with the other chimeric gene.  Later, a pair of lines, each
              expressing one partial barnase gene will be crossed to each other to confirm
              that no progeny are obtained in which both genes are expressed, based on
              resistance to the linked markers.  The overall project goal is to apply this
              method to watermelon to create diploid hybrid varieties producing seedless
              fruits.  To ensure that this can be achieved, the ability to transform
              watermelon, based on published methods, will be evaluated during Phase I
              research.       The use of fertile but seedless diploids should reduce costs of
              production since triploid seedless watermelon production requires that a
              portion of yield be sacrificed to a pollen source due to the pollen-deficiency
              of triploid varieties.  In addition, the time and cost to develop new seedless
              watermelon varieties would be reduced by eliminating the need to produce a
              tetraploid parent.  Finally, this method for creating seedless varieties will
              have value in other seed-propagated crops, such as cherry and papaya, and it
              may be extended to vegetatively-propagated crops such as grape.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
