Title       : SBIR Phase I: MHz Strip-Line Transformer for Switching Power Supplies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1996  
File        : a9561627

Award Number: 9561627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74779              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse A. Castaneda   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Phraxos Rsch and Dev Inc
	      2716 Ocean Park Blvd
	      Santa Monica, CA  904055208    213/450-4459

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1452,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9561627  Castaneda         This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
              I project develops coreless transformers in switching power supplies for Mhz
              and greater frequencies.  The miniaturization of integrated circuits has not
              been accompanied by a similar reduction in the size of their power supplies. 
              Although high-frequency operation has always been associated with smaller
              energy storage components, smaller power transformers are limited by increasing
              core and ohmic losses and by parasitic effects at higher frequencies.  A new
              concept is a transformer without ferrite core and consisting of a cascade of
              printed striplines on multilayer structures.  The idea is to store and transfer
              energy by electromagnetic waves through waveguiding structures (transmission
              lines).  Important features of these transformer structures are stripline
              lengths on the order of the guide wavelength and a turns-ratio determined by
              the stripline characteristic impedance.       Phase constants and line
              impedance of the striplines, as a function of various parameters, will be
              determined by Computer Aided Design (CAD) methods.  Practical design issues
              will be addressed including maximum possible voltage ratio obtainable with the
              constraint of the device's dimensions, possible low-loss materials with high
              permitivity or permeability for wavelength reduction, a bandwidth enhancement
              method, and the geometrical shape of the stripline for the best use of the
              planar surface.  Other design issues will include power handling and heat
              dissipation capabilities.  Transformers are important in power processing
              circuits, which are required in all common electric appliances, cellular
              phones, television sets, VCRs, computers, etc.  Size and weight reduction and
              speed enhancements require new power converters with switching frequencies in
              the Mhz and greater range.  An absence of satisfactory electronics power
              transformers in this range may be worthwhile commercially.
