Title       : SBIR PHASE I: The Mathematical Theory and Implementation ofh-p Adaptive Meshless
               Analysis for Interdisciplinary Applications and High-Performance Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1996     
File        : a9561365

Award Number: 9561365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tadeusz J. Liszka tad@comco.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Computational Mechanics Co
	      7800 Shoal Creek Blvd, Ste 290E
	      Austin, TX  787571024    512/467-0618

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1266,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  9561365  Liszka         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will develop, formalize, and extend the mathematical theory and
              computational algorithms for the h-p adaptive meshless analysis method.  The
              feasibility of the method for removing all need for a computational mesh to
              solve discrete forms of mathematical models of interdisciplinary physical
              systems will be determined.  Asymptotically correct error estimation techniques
              and combined refinement and higher-order adaptivity will be developed.  The
              combination of error estimation and adaptivity within the context of a meshless
              environment will eliminate the need for the analyst (scientist/engineer) to
              determine numerical accuracy of computational simulations.  The method's
              mathematical properties include full polynomial reproducibility, local
              interpolation, high-order (spectral) accuracy, and C-infinity basis functions;
              moreover, the spatial (and potentially temporal) discretization is represented
              by a simple open covering of the physical domain, and thus can be full
              automated.  Completion of this research effort will result in a major advance
              in the area of computational simulation, with the potential for replacing
              existing software using finite element and finite difference techniques. 
              Solution of difficult problems involving moving/deforming domains will be
              enabled by the new technology due to its meshless properties.  Commercial
              benefit to the US economy is enormous due to the removal of the
              manpower-intensive mesh generation process, and the ability to quantify and
              minimize the error in computational simulations.  Emerging concepts such as
              Virtual Testing and Virtual Prototyping will be enabled by the proposed
              research.       The proposed research and development effort will result in new
              mathematical theory, computational algorithms, and prototype implementations of
              an object-oriented problem-solving environment implementing the method for
              emerging high-performance computer architectures.  Commercial applicatio ns of
              the technology will include a suite of object-oriented, interdisciplinary,
              scientific and engineering analysis software systems for structural analysis,
              computational fluid dynamics, computational electromagnetics,
              multi-disciplinary optimization, environmental sciences, climate modeling, and
              semi-conductor simulation.  All computational simulation being performed using
              traditional techniques can potentially benefit from the proposed research.  ***
