Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Metal Cluster and Combined Flourescent/Gold Labels for Peptide
               Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1996  
File        : a9561345

Award Number: 9561345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Powell rpowell@nanoprobes.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nanoprobes Incorporated
	      95 Horse Block Road
	      Yaphank, NY  119809710    631/205-9490

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1132,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9561345  Powell         In this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project, Undecagold, 1.4 nm "Nanogold" cluster complexes, combined fluorescent
              and gold cluster labels, and platinum cluster complexes 1.8 to 3.6 nm in
              diameter will be covalently conjugated to protected amino acids suitable for
              supported peptide synthesis.  Analogs of L-cysteine, L-lysine and glycine will
              be prepared, in addition to labeling reagents functionalized to append the
              cluster labels to the N-terminal and C-terminal, and will be used to insert the
              labels at programmed positions in synthetic peptides during automated peptide
              synthesis.  Chirality of the natural amino acids will be preserved to retain
              maximum peptide bioactivity.  The labels will be synthetically modified for
              maximum solubility and stability towards synthesis and deprotection conditions
              by systematic variations of their coordinated ligands.  Labeled peptide analogs
              of the C-terminal region of histone H1 protein, HMG-D and HMG-Z proteins will
              be prepared and microinjected into living cells.  Their distribution, function
              and macromolecular localization within the cell nucleus will be studied by
              fluorescence confocal and electron microscopy.  Labels will also be
              incorporated into synthetic analogs of the hormone peptide leuteinizing hormone
              releasing hormone (LHRH), then their sensitivity and specificity as immunoassay
              probes will be studied in membrane blot and microtiter plate tests.       The
              reagents will be widely used by electron microscopists, cell and molecular
              biologists to prepare probes with the highest possible resolution, retention of
              bioactivity and sensitivity.  The strategy for preparing labeled and unlabeled
              peptides simultaneously will reduce probe preparation time and cost.  Rapidly
              growing applications exist in the selective labeling of combinatorial peptides.
               These reagents may also be used to prepare novel hybrid materials in which the
              unique electronic and catalytic properties of metal nanoparticles are
              programmed site-specif ically into new biomaterials to yield new macromolecular
              devices.
