Title       : SBIR Phase I: Photoresist Polymer Masks Formed From an Aqueous Phase by
               Polymerization in a Two Dimensional Surfactant Template
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9561049

Award Number: 9561049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce L. Roberts blrobert@mailhost.ecnuoknor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Surfactant Assoc Inc
	      PO Box 2705
	      Norman, OK  730702705    405/366-7767

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1414,9146,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                    95-61049  Roberts     Recent needs and developments in information
              technology have spurred efforts to fabricate ever smaller features on silicon
              wafers. To do this, many lithographic techniques are being explored for their
              ability to provide high resolution photoresist masks capable of producing such
              submicron features. Needs for chip features down to 0.18 microns are predicted
              by the year 2002, with need for smaller 0.125 micron features soon after. Over
              the last decade, Langmuir-Blogett (LB) films, a surfactant based process, has
              been recognized as a viable candidate masking technique. The LB process has
              demonstrated ultrathin, pin-hole free masks down to resolutions of 0.010
              microns (i.e. 10 nm); however, the LB process is limited to using only those
              few surface active monomers capable of both substrate adsorption and
              polymerization. In contrast, an alternative surfactant based process, developed
              in Surfactant Associates' laboratory, allows ultrathin film formation by
              practically any organic monomer capable of serving as a photoresist polymer.
              The process relies on electrostatically adsorbed bilayer surfactant aggregates
              (admicelles) in an aqueous environment into which a resist monomer is
              solubilized and polymerized to form polymerized thin films physically adsorbed
              to the metal oxide surface. The thin film mask is removed from the surface by
              changing the net surface charge by a pH change or imposing an electrical
              potential on the surface. Thin films formed by using admicelles have already
              found industrial use for modifying surfaces ranging from metal oxides used in
              thermoset polymer composites to drug delivery systems. It is proposed that this
              technique offers a variety of choices in fabricating ultrathin masks. Such
              masks offer a range of etching sensitivity for the lithographer while at the
              same time eliminating the need for volatile organic solvents used in standard
              lithographic processes. This process is aqueous based, environmentally
              acceptable, offers versatility, and resolution s equal to--if not greater--than
              LB films.   The development of the ultrathin masks proposed here may allow
              integrated circuit fabricators to manufacture integrated circuits with much
              finer detail than is possible by the industry today--thus allowing the United
              States semiconductor industry to maintain its world wide technological lead.
              The dominance of the United States in semiconductor technology and the military
              and economic implications of that status are significant not only because of
              employment aspects but also national security concerns.
