Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Electrocatalytic Oxidation of Methanol on Microparticles in
               Polypyrrole
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9561662

Award Number: 9561662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Krzysztof Franaszczuk   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 105
	      College Station, TX  778404023    409/693-0017

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1417,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
              explore the synthesis of polymer-based catalysts for methanol electro-oxidation
              to carbon dioxide.  A novel in situ electrochemical nuclear magnetic resonance
              (NMR) method will be used for characterization of the catalyst.  The research
              will address molecular principles of reactivity enhancement in heterogeneous
              oxidative electrocatalysis with bimetal platinum/ruthenium (Pt/Ru) electrodes
              and with the electrodes supplemented by ternary components.  The objectives
              will be to synthesize polypyrrole-embedded Pt/Ru nanoparticles to produce an
              efficient catalysis and to characterize the catalyst and how it works.  The
              research will drawn upon recent progress in electrocatalysis, such as: (i) the
              demonstration of promising carbon monoxide poison-tolerant properties of
              polymer-embedded metal particles in methanol electro-oxidation; (ii) an ability
              to form micro- and nano-scale particles of platinum metals reproducibly in
              conducting polymers; and (iii) progress in solid-state NMR and
              electro-analytical methodology in electrochemical surface science.  Phase I
              will study the particle size effect on the methanol oxidative electrocatalysis,
              as well as the particle composition in terms of the Pt/Ru ratio, and the
              addition of ternary copper and rhodium.  Polypyrrole-embedded Pt/Ru
              nanoparticles will be used, supported on a gold substrate.  The principal
              methods will be voltammetry, chrono-amperometry, and electrochemical NMR.  High
              reactivity is expected to be obtained as well as insights into the fuel cell
              electrode process and oxidative heterogeneous electrocatalysis.       This
              research will provide a base for new alloy- and chemically-modified electrode
              materials in conducting polymeric matrices for poison-free current generation
              in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs).  Mobil electric power uses of DMFCs may
              be used in the electric-car Next Generation Vehicle (NGV).  Phase II of this
              project would provide scale-up of selected catalysts for commercialization.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
