Title       : SBIR Phase I: Effectiveness of Peptidyl Membrane Interactive Molecules (Peptidyl
               MIMs) in Preventing Disease Caused by Perkinsus Marinus in Crassostrea
               Virginica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9561368

Award Number: 9561368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly Anne Weeks-Perkins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Demeter BioTech Ltd
	      905 West Main Street Suite 19-D
	      Durham, NC  27701    919/515-8113

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 5371,5418,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9561368  Weeks-Perkins         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project is designed to determine if a specific Demeter Peptidyl MIM can be used
              to control Perkinsus marinus in Eastern Oysters, crassostrea virginica.  This
              pathogen is the primary cause of oyster mortalities along the mid-Atlantic
              coast of the United States.  From Massachusetts to Florida the average harvest
              is about 10% of what it was prior to the 1960's.  As a result the Gulf of
              Mexico has become the main source for oysters in the Eastern United States. 
              However, in those waters there has been an ongoing problem with the bacterium
              Vibrio fulnificus, which is carried by oysters. Immunocompromised consumers
              have become ill from eating raw oysters and each year there are some deaths. 
              For this reason many oyster processors in the mid-Atlantic region now refuse to
              buy from the Gulf and are forced to buy Pacific oysters (C. gigas) from the
              West Coast for the "raw bar" trade. It has been demonstrated that certain
              proprietary compounds and technologies are effective in vitro against an array
              of procaryotic and eucaryotic microbial pathogens at levels which are non-toxic
              to healthy cells. The Principal Investigator has demonstrated this
              effectiveness against Perkinsus marinus in vitro without killing C. virginica
              hemocytes.  The objective of Phase I is to establish which Demeter Peptidyl
              MIMs  (Membrane Interactive Molecules) are most effective against Perkinsus
              marinus in live oysters.  In an oyster culture facility specifically set up for
              this purpose, oysters will be exposed both to the pathogens and three
              prescreened Peptidyl MlMs at different intervals and doses to find out how
              effective is the killing of the pathogen, how long the organism remains
              unaffected by the pathogen when exposed to the Peptidyl MIMs , and how toxic
              the Peptidyl MIMs are to the oysters.       When P. marinus can be controlled,
              locally grown Eastern oysters may again dominate this multi-million dollar
              market. A joint venture with other organiz ations will be attempted for
              commercialization purposes. Income will be in the form of profit sharing. 
              Further, any topical anti-protozoal technologies developed as a result of this
              project may be spun off for other aquacultural applications internationally.
