Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of a Low Cost Production Process for Low Carbon
               Content, Submicron Scale High Temperature Superconductors (HTSC) Powders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1996      
File        : a9561257

Award Number: 9561257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Bool   (Principal Investigator current)
              Shin G. Kang  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Physical Sciences Inc
	      20 New England Business Center
	      Andover, MA  018101077    508/689-0003

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1775,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                        This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will develop a
              low cost process for producing low carbon content, submicron scale HTSC
              powders. The work is based on proposed modifications to a patented PSIT process
              for producing nanophase ceramic powders, a process which allows chemical
              flexibility, chemical purity, and high yield. In Phase I, efforts will be
              exerted to the production of bismuth-based BiSrCaCuO family of superconductors
              (BSCCO).  The discovery of high temperature superconductors (HTSC) produced
              from mixed metal oxides has opened new possibilities for improving the
              efficiency of power generation and transmission and developing energy-efficient
              transportation devices as well as sensitive and accurate instrumentation.
              Extensive commercial application of HTSC components, however, depends on
              maintaining acceptable production costs along with the appropriate physical
              properties.  In the proposed Phase I effort, a mixture of appropriate HTSC
              precursor inorganic compounds with organic carrier liquid will be sprayed into
              a combustion system that includes a gas flame and an externally heated furnace.
              Oxidation of the organic carrier liquid in the mixture droplets will allow the
              decomposition of the chemical precursors, followed by vaporization and/or
              diffusion into the gas phase. Subsequent condensation of submicron particulate
              will lead to the formation of HTSC powders. Because of the expected submicron
              size of the HTSC powder, fabrication into thin HTSC wire using the powder in
              tube technique is expected to be straightforward.  The development of a low
              cost process for the production of low carbon content, submicron high
              temperature superconducting powders has potentially broad applications:
              superconducting wires for power transmission, motors, generators, magnets for
              commercial and industrial use such as medical diagnostic and radiofrequency
              devices. Other applications include high speed magnetic levitation trains and
              advanced ship drive systems, infrared sensors, etc.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
