Title       : SBIR PHASE I: A Blackboard-Based Collaboration Environment for Human Problem
               Solving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9561023

Award Number: 9561023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74422              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel D. Corkill corkill@bbtech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Blackboard Technol Group
	      401 Main Street
	      Amherst, MA  010022364    413/256-8990

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6856,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses
              weaknesses in currently available groupware, conferencing, and workflow
              software. These software systems are changing the way organizations function in
              the l990s, by providing environments for conveniently entering and retrieving
              information, communicating it among users, and, in the case of workflow
              software, tracking its flow through business processes.     Lacking in these
              software systems are integral mechanisms for dynamically controlling the
              collaborative processes they support and for informing users of where and when
              their contributions are needed. Instead, such control must be collectively
              supplied by the individual users or be pre-specified in workflow procedures.
              There is a need for `high-end` collaboration software tools which will have
              capabilities that are very distinct from today's `mass-market` tools. These
              high-end tools will provide technologies for handling more complex information
              exchanges, more opportunistic interactions among participants, and more
              intelligent control and monitoring of collaborative activities.       To
              address the limitations of current collaboration software systems, It is
              proposed to apply to human collaboration, the problem-solving approach that was
              developed to support opportunistic collaboration among software modules. The
              approach provides a robust core technology for collaboration software -- one
              that explicitly deals with control separate from the individual problem-solving
              contributors. This project will demonstrate the effectiveness of applying such
              an approach for integrating software `experts` in an environment for
              computer-assisted human collaboration.       Controlling the collaboration
              process will become an increasing burden on users as the use of collaboration
              tools becomes pervasive. The proposed research addresses this problem head on,
              by investigating the use of a core technology with explicit control
              capabilities.  As a result, collaboration will become more effective (due to
              opportunistic control) and less burdensome (due to the reduced control required
              from individual participants). Given the cross-industry use of collaboration
              tools, the results of this project have wide commercial applicability.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
