Title       : SBIR PHASE I: A Detailed Model of Turbulent Mixing and Reaction for Non-Premixed
               Reacting Flow Computations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9561346

Award Number: 9561346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc A. Cremer cremer@reaction-eng.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reaction Engineering Intl
	      77 West 200 South, Suite 210
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84101    801/364-6925

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1266,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  9561346  Cremer         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project investigates the implementation of a detailed model of turbulent mixing
              and reaction into a comprehensive reacting flow code.  The overall objective
              involves demonstration of the feasibility of coupling the Linear Eddy Model
              (LEM) of scalar transport in turbulent flows with a model for momentum
              transport based on the Reynolds averaged Navier Stokes equations.  The LEM has
              been shown to provide a physically realistic representation of turbulent mixing
              in a number of geometries involving reactive and nonreactive flows. 
              Finite-rate kinetics will be implemented using an approach based on the
              intrinsic low-dimensional manifold method or a reduced mechanism.  Feasibility
              of the overall methodology will be based on a comparison of model predictions
              of species concentrations, temperature distribution, and effects of changes in
              mixing parameters to existing experimental data for a jet diffusion flame.     
               Reaction Engineering International (REI) currently markets three software
              products for the computer simulation of turbulent reacting flows.  REI
              continuously develops and applies these tools to aid in the design and
              manufacture of advanced combustion systems.  Incorporating a turbulent mixing
              model into the firm's reacting flow codes will provide more accurate
              predictions of trace pollutant species generated in a combustion process.  This
              improved capability will increase the applicability of these tools and the
              potential to attract outside investment to further develop our modelling tools.
               The improved tools will be accessible to industry via product sales and
              consulting services provided by REI.  These tools will be particularly useful
              in the development of new low emission burner systems for process heaters used
              in the chemical process industry.  ***
