Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Powder Lubricated Bearing Development for Flywheels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9561809

Award Number: 9561809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74022              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hooshang Heshmat hheshmat@miti.cc  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mohawk Inn
	      1037 Watervliet-Shaker Road
	      Albany, NY  12205-203    518/862-4290

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1444,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9561809  Heshmat         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will provide the necessary foundation for the design, manufacture and
              integration of a truly unique self-contained powder-lubricated
              quasi-hydrodynamic (PLQH) backup bearing into flywheel energy storage (FES)
              systems that use magnetic bearings.  Advances in lightweight high strength
              composites, high speed brushless motors, magnetic bearings and solid state
              electronics, coupled with improvements in the achievable energy density, output
              power levels, rapid energy withdrawal and recovery, and cost have made
              compact/efficient FES systems for vehicular applications feasible.  While the
              major components that make the FES concept feasible are now in place, there
              exists a critical need for a reliable and durable backup to the magnetic
              bearings.  This backup bearing must be capable of repeated and intermittent
              operation in the vacuum environment, even in the presence of repetitive high
              speed transient impacts.  Finally, the backup bearing subsystem must itself be
              lightweight, compact, simple (i.e., no external lubrication system) and low in
              cost.  This project for a self-contained PLQH bearing will attempt to meet
              these needs.  Over the past eight years, under the sustained sponsorship of
              DOD, NASA and DOE, the fundamental aspects of this powder lubrication
              technology have been brought from its embryonic state to fruition in a
              practical machinery application.  In this project MiTi will attempt to 
              transition this technology to a product that will support the development of
              durable FES systems for vehicular applications.  Toward that end, this Phase I
              program will update an existing two dimensional powder lubrication design
              analysis to include axial flows and pressure distributions and will validate
              the design analysis through component testing.  In a self-contained bearing,
              where the available lubricant is limited, optimizing the bearing geometry so as
              to avoid extreme starvation is crucial to successful operation.  The outc ome
              of this Phase I effort will therefore be the guidance and tool needed to
              optimize the self-contained PLQH bearing geometry.       FES systems, if
              successfully developed for commercial vehicular applications, would initially
              represent approximately 100,000 to 200,000 units per year.  Additionally, Army
              hybrid electric heavy combat vehicles which would require between 3 to 7 FES
              modules would represent up to an additional 100,000 units.  Aircraft gas
              turbine engines also using magnetic bearings and requiring backup bearings
              represent an additional market.  Developing this key fundamental element, may
              also impact other fields where precise control of the wear process is used in
              machining operations (e.g., finishing operations for ceramic balls).
