Title       : SBIR PHASE I: New Architectures and Applications of Multiwavelength Optical
               Networks Using Waveguide Grating Router
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9561825

Award Number: 9561825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Feiling Jia jia@optivision.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Optivision Incorporated
	      3450 Hillview Avenue
	      Palo Alto, CA  94304    415/855-0200

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 4090,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate
              the system architectures that can efficiently utilize the unique multi-fiber
              multiwavelength routing capability of Waveguide Grating Router (WGR) in a
              variety of application environments. Wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) has
              been demonstrated as a feasible technology to more fully utilize the vast
              optical bandwidth in the point-to-point communications. The extension of WDM
              technology into a switched networking environment based on wavelength routing
              concept reveals a new set of challenging issues. In addition to device
              technology and algorithms on network topology, a critical issue here is the
              development of efficient and cost-effective systems or subsystems that use
              wavelength routing for performance enhancement. Combining wavelength
              multiplexers/demultiplexers with optical switches provides maximum flexibility,
              but the number of switch crosspoints generally increases linearly with the
              number of wavelengths used. The high cost, fabrication complexity, and large
              insertion loss make acoustooptic tunable filters unattractive for commercial
              application in the foreseeable future. An innovative approach is required which
              combines Waveguide Grating Router (WGR) with simple active devices. The Phase I
              effort of this SBIR will design a system architecture that can exploit the
              unique wavelength routing capability of WGR device in a wide range of
              application environments. Results of our initial investigation are also
              presented.       Wavelength routing has enormous potential applications in
              high-speed computer networking or telecommunication infrastructure. By
              utilizing the unique feature of WGR devices, results from this research effort
              should greatly benefit the nation in the cost-effective realization of
              wavelength routing for performance enhancement in a variety of applications.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
