Title       : SBIR Phase I: High Pressure, High Temperature Thin Film Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1996  
File        : a9561075

Award Number: 9561075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. S. Sudarshan sudarshan@matmod.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials Modification Inc
	      2721-D Merrilee Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220310113    703/560-1371

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1468,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
              demonstrate the fabrication of a high temperature, high pressure sensor for
              measuring contact stresses between moving surfaces.  Wear due to friction and
              high contact stresses is a major factor in the design and analysis of
              mechanical components such as gears and bearings.  Due to the uncertain nature
              of the real area of contact between surfaces, there is no recourse but to use
              models to predict these contact stresses.  Numerous analytical models are used
              to predict surface stresses occurring at various locations.  However, actual
              verification of these models is difficult due to a lack of accurate
              experimental data since there are no sensors capable of withstanding
              temperatures as high as 900oK and pressures on the order of many GPa. 
              Furthermore, these sensors must be capable of making a point contact without
              interfering with the contact motions.  Although many types of sensors are
              available on the market, none of these can measure the required parameters in
              situ.  Phase I will develop a novel non-invasive sensor capable of withstanding
              these temperature and pressure extremes while delivering accurate real-time
              data.  Phase II would concentrate on the optimization of
              structure-property-performance of this sensor and fabrication of a production
              prototype that can be used in a wide variety of applications.       Stress and
              strain sensors have a multitude of commercial applications.  Some of them
              include use in automobile and industrial gears, monitoring cutting forces in
              cutting and machine tools, smart sensors for aircraft engines and power
              generator turbines, smart sensors for in-situ monitoring of lubrication needs
              to extend life of automotive engines and associated components, and in
              analytical instrumentation in research laboratories.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
