Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Electronic Beam Steering for Ground Probing Radar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9561190

Award Number: 9561190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: GEORG JOHNSON                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ChT Engineering Systems
	      HC89-69, PO Box 228
	      Hermosa, SD  577440228    605/394-2458

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1057,1448,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9561190  Thompson         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will attempt to substantially improve ground probing radar (GPR) by
              providing beam steering capability to existing GPR systems.  Ground-probing
              radar is a proven technology for the investigation of structures and targets in
              the subsurface.  Existing GPR systems utilize a method (referred to as linear
              profiling) of dragging the transmitter along a surveillance path and gathering
              reflection time data to detect dielectric interfaces in the subsurface.  The
              system to be developed in this project will sequentially trigger a linear array
              of transmitter antenna elements to form a single imaging beam from coherent
              superpositions of the element transmissions to provide beam steering for wider
              transmitter coverage, greater depth penetration at high frequencies (100 to 500
              MHz), and higher probing resolution.  These improvements are also expected to
              permit ground probing from a mobile platform which will greatly reduce costs of
              gathering areal data.  Due to low antenna cost (of those designed by TWS
              engineers), the system can be permanently affixed to areas requiring periodic
              monitoring to detect potentially hazardous movements in the earth's surface
              (such as underground mines) at a greatly reduced cost.  Preliminary development
              of each task will be performed simultaneously by the principal and co-principal
              investigators during the first 3 months of the proposed project.  The results
              of each task will then be evaluated to develop a single unit for testing during
              the second half of the project.  Testing of the GPR system will be performed in
              the field using the natural laboratory of the Black Hills of South Dakota to
              determine beam steering accuracy of the improved system.  The transmission
              field will be measured directly after it has interacted with earth materials. 
              Receiving antennas will be placed to determine the resultant field from the
              transmitting antennas.  During beam steering, it is anticipated that sensors
              placed i n target locations will receive strong signals as the imaging beam is
              aimed in their directions while those in areas outside the steered beam will
              receive weak signals.  The results of Phase I will be used to develop and test
              a commercially marketable GPR system during the Phase II effort.       This GPR
              system represents an innovative approach that will improve and broaden the
              application of GPR to near-surface earth exploration.  Applications of this
              technology include location of underground utilities, static monitoring of key
              underground structures to predict failure, subsurface fluid-front migration
              that may be associated with environmental concerns, multiphase groundwater flow
              and contaminant transport in geomaterials, soil structure interaction, and
              location of hazardous waste containers - particularly those constructed of
              dielectric materials for which an abundance of data is necessary for detection
              and identification.  When employed as a mobile platform, the system would
              greatly reduce the cost of data acquisition for areal targets while enhancing
              data quality.  The system will be designed to enhance to existing commercial
              GPR systems.  Its low-cost fixed antennas will add to its market potential
              because they can be thought of as "consumables."
