Title       : SBIR Phase I: Proton-Conducting Zeolite Membranes for Low-Temperature Fuel Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1996     
File        : a9561236

Award Number: 9561236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna M. Choudhary   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polywood, Inc
	      207 North Huntington Street
	      Syracuse, IN  46567    317/870-5611

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1417,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     The operating temperature range of low-temperature proton-exchange
              membrane (PEM) fuel cells can be increased by using proton-conducting inorganic
              membranes instead of polymeric PEM electrolytes.  This Small Business
              Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop proton-conducting,
              membrane-like zeolites for use in low-temperature fuel cells.  Prototype fuel
              cells will also be developed and tested.  Low-temperature ionic conductivity in
              zeolites will be induced by incorporating proton-conducting hydrous salt ions
              as cations in the zeolite lattice.  The cations in zeolites, along with
              protons, reside in the microscopic channels, cages, and cavities of the zeolite
              framework.  The structure and chemistry of cations in proton-conducting
              zeolites will be investigated by spectroscopic techniques: extended
              X-ray-absorption fine structure (EXAFS), X-ray-absorption near edge structure
              (XANES), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and nuclear magnetic resonance
              (NMR) spectroscopy.  Ionic conductivity will be determined by AC impedance and
              DC conductivity measurements.  The structural and chemical information, to be
              obtained by spectroscopic studies, will be used to optimize the chemical
              composition and crystal structure of proton-conducting zeolites.  In Phase I,
              proton-conducting mordenite and ZSM-5 zeolite thin films on conductive porous
              substrates will be synthesized.  The zeolite films will be prepared by
              hydrothermal crystallization from aluminosilicate gels followed by ion-exchange
              treatments and heat-treatments for drying and calcination.       These
              low-temperature fuel cells with proton-conducting zeolite electrolytes are
              expected to work in a temperature range of about 90-125o Centigrade.  With
              inorganic electrolytes they will generate power using methanol or hydrogen fuel
              and serve potentially as the power supply for the electric-car Next Generation
              Vehicle (NGV).  In addition to zero-emission automotive applications, they may
              have commercial application in submarines and other watercraft.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
