Title       : Quantum Operator Approaches to Multidimensional Reaction Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1995   
File        : a9312443

Award Number: 9312443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Schwartz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva U Albert Einstein
	      500 West 185th Street
	      Bronx, NY  104587809    /   -

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Steven Schwartz is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to perform theoretical research in the   application of
              evolution operators to condensed phase systems consisting   of a few quantum
              degrees of freedom in contact with a solvent bath.  This   model is useful for
              theoretical treatments of chemical reactions in the   presence of solvent. 
              Schwartz has developed a propagator expansion   resummation technique which
              shows significant promise in terms of   improved accuracy and range of
              applicability for treating many   dimensional chemical reactions.  He plans to
              apply this theory to the   elucidation of the mechanism of rate processes in
              multiple pulse ligand   photolysis experiments on hemoglobin.    A great deal
              of progress has been made in the theoretical treatment of   gas phase chemical
              reactions of systems consisting of relatively few   atoms.  Using
              state-of-the-art theoretical methods, it is now possible to   explain a great
              deal of the experimental detail for such systems.    However, the large
              majority of reactions which are of interest to   chemists occur in condensed
              phase systems in the presence of solvent.    The theoretical models for
              treating such complex systems are in a much   earlier stage of development. 
              Schwartz is developing new theoretical   approaches for dealing with solvated
              chemical systems undergoing chemical   reactions where quantum effects may be
              important.
