Title       : Democratic Values and the National Forum on Science and Technology Goals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1993 
File        : a9312150

Award Number: 9312150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Chapman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cptr Profess for Scl Res
	      P.O. Box 717
	      Palo Alto, CA  943020717    650/322-3778

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9312150  Chapman  Supplemented by complementary work funded by Rockefeller
              Family  Associates, this planning project will begin to develop a process 
              whereby a wide variety of public organizations can participate in  a democratic
              dialogue about the aims of publicly funded scientific  and engineering research
              and development and the establishment of  a new National Forum on Science and
              Technology Goals.  The idea for  a Forum grew out of a recent proposal from an
              expert panel under  the auspices of the Carnegie Commission on Science,
              Technology, and  Government.  The National Academy of Sciences is now pursuing
              this  idea.  This project will contribute to these efforts, by focusing  on the
              question of how to optimize democratic values such as  diversity,
              representation, equity, access, and reasoned dissent  within an institution
              such as the National Forum.  This project  involves representatives from a
              number of public organizations that  are concerned about participation in
              science and technology policy  making, in planning for broad-based meetings and
              related efforts to  initiate that dialogue.  In this planning period, the
              sponsoring  organization and representatives from several others will assemble 
              a diverse group of people interested in the National Forum.  These  people will
              meet in fall, 1993, to plan a larger, follow-on meeting  and a process through
              which diverse constitutencies can be heard on  the character, charter, and
              configuration of the National Forum.   The planning meeting will identify
              persons and organizations to  invite to the larger meeting and develop the
              content and structure  for it.  The planning group will consider and select
              case studies  of successful public participation in deliberations about and 
              resolution of science and technology issues to use at the larger  meeting.  The
              final plan will be presented in a report to the  Ethics and Values Studies
              program of the National Science  Foundation, and in proposals to public and
              private funding sources.  ***
