Title       : Producer Services Linkages Among New York State Manufacturers: An Assessment of
               Technological and Commercial Impact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1994      
File        : a9312630

Award Number: 9312630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90585              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. MacPherson geoadm@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9149,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9312630  MACPHERSON       The purpose of this project is to assess the role of 
              specialized producer services in the innovation and market  performance of
              industrial firms using New York state as a  case study. While considerable
              research has been directed at  producer services and towards manufacturing, a
              significant  gap exists in our knowledge of how manufacturers develop 
              connections with and use producer services. The expectation  is that those
              firms which are better able to tap into  appropriate producer services will
              perform better and be  more innovative. This project tests several hypotheses 
              regarding factors that influence the ability of  manufacturing firms to connect
              with and benefit from  producer services. A major hypothesis is that those 
              industrial firms which are more peripherally located are  less likely to have
              well developed relationships with  producer service firms and to perform at
              lower levels. Other  factors expected to influence the intensity of producer 
              service-manufacturing firm interaction include whether or  not firms are part
              of a larger organization, the firm's  position in the product life cycle, and
              size of firm. A  large mail survey will be conducted for firms in upstate and 
              downstate New York, followed by in-depth interviews with a  small number of
              representative firms.       This research will contribute important new
              insights  into the relationship between manufacturing firm  productivity,
              efficiency, and competitiveness and the  factors affecting the degree and type
              of producer service  interactions. As such, the project will make substantial 
              contributions to theories related to industrial and producer  service location,
              organization, and performance as well as  to issues of intense interest to
              regional and economic  development policy.
