Title       : SGER: Internet Gophers as Biodiversity Data Servers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1993      
File        : a9312743

Award Number: 9312743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49983              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Beach   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              This support will enable installation and implementation of a                  
              prototype distributed system to network and provide virtual access             
              to biodiversity databases associated with 6 fish collections:                  
              Harvard's Museum of Comparative Zoology, the California Academy of             
              Sciences, Academy of Natural Sciences (Philadelphia), University of            
              Michigan Museum of Zoology, University of Alabama, and the Field               
              Museum of Natural History (Chicago).  The system will utilize                  
              Gopher software technology running via a client-server architecture            
              over the Internet.  At each institution the awardee will (a)                   
              install a Sun workstation on Ethernet and configure it with the Sun            
              operating system and Gopher server software; (b) reformat the                  
              database text file (using custom UNIX and Perl scripts) for the                
              Gopher server; (c) train local staff in UNIX system and Gopher                 
              software management and provide system management over the Internet            
              for one year.  Access to the database files over Gopher will be                
              read only, for security reasons, and each institution will choose              
              the accessible content of the database.  This prototype project                
              will demonstrate to the national collections community the ease,               
              security and affordability of sharing biodiversity data bound up in            
              museum and herbarium collections as well as associated authority               
              files. The need for and potential impact of such a demonstration               
              project was stressed at the US Government-sponsored International              
              Workshop on Biodiversity Inventory, Survey and Data Management in              
              January, 1993.  Gopher has become the de facto standard for                    
              networked research and academic computing worldwide because it is              
              platform independent, operates on TCP/IP networks, incorporates                
              public domain WAIS software for creating full text indices, and                
              uses simple, powerful client-server architecture.  It is                       
              opportunistic and cost-effective now to marry this current                     
              technology to information management needs in museums and herbaria.            
              Successful networking of collection databases can achieve great                
              economies of scale in capturing collection data in the same                    
              discipline at different institutions, in using authority files to              
              standardize the data dictionary, and in providing biodiversity data            
              sets for research, conservation and educational endeavors.                     
              %%%                                                                            
              This support will enable installation and implementation of a                  
              prototype system to network and provide access to biodiversity                 
              databases associated with 6 fish collections at Harvard's Museum of            
              Comparative Zoology, the California Academy of Sciences, Academy of            
              Natural Sciences (Philadelphia), University of Michigan Museum of              
              Zoology, University of Alabama, and the Field Museum of Natural                
              History (Chicago).  Access to the database files will be read only,            
              for security reasons, and each institution will choose the                     
              accessible content of the database.  This prototype project will               
              demonstrate to the national collections community the ease,                    
              security and affordability of sharing biodiversity data bound up in            
              museum and herbarium collections as well as associated authority               
              files. The need for and potential impact of such a demonstration               
              project was stressed at the US Government-sponsored International              
              Workshop on  Biodiversity Inventory, Survey and Data Management in             
              January, 1993.  It is opportunistic and cost-effective now to                  
              utilize current technology for information management needs in                 
              museums and herbaria.  Successful networking of collection                     
              databases will achieve great economies of scale in capturing                   
              collection data in the same discipline at different institutions,              
              in using authority files to standardize the data dictionary, and in            
              providing biodiversity data sets for research, conservation and                
              educational endeavors.
