Title       : Nitrate - Ammonium Interactions and Nitrate Supply in the Regulation of Arabian
               Sea Regional New Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9312383

Award Number: 9312383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  1994   
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161167             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Garside   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9312383  Garside         Quantitative elucidation of the processes that
              regulate  biological production in the sea is fundamental to an  understanding
              of the role the oceans play in the earth's  climate system.  Temporal and
              spatial variability in the  processes that govern the upward rate of nutrient
              flux from  the deep-sea, and the drift of currents in the upper ocean, 
              determine the distribution of marine plankton  and set  limits for their
              production.  Pursuit of JGOFS objective  requires investigation into these
              physical-biological  linkages.  They influence the global rates of carbon 
              sequestration and release by the sea.  How balance between  these processes was
              regulated in the past, and how it is  regulated today is an important research
              component of US  national and international endeavors to understand and 
              predict responses to global change.         The monsoonal system of the Arabian
              Sea affords unique  opportunity for the pursuit of these studies.  Its intense 
              seasonal cycle in air-sea interaction allows for the  development and testing
              of models relating to the physical  climate-driven process linkages to
              biological responses and  consequent feedback via air-sea exchange of gases. 
              In  addition to the intensity of these processes, and hence  their strong
              seasonal signal in the Arabian Sea, the record  in marine fossil assemblages
              and isotopes in ocean  sediments, is valuable in the development and testing of
               time varying models treating coupled physical and biological  aspects of the
              ocean climate system.         This study relates to one particular link in the 
              system: the regulation of primary planktonic production by  the supply rate of
              the limiting nutrient, nitrogen.  The  coarse seasonal pattern in Arabian Sea
              production is one of  the most intense, production being associated with the 
              summer SW monsoon.  Upwelling delivers a pulse of nutrients  to surface waters,
              which in turn stimulates a plankton  remain generally higher than those typical
              of oceanic waters  elsewher e.  In this study the availability of nitrogen,
              both  in the upwelled form of nitrate and in the recycled form of  ammonium,
              will be assessed regionally during the low  production NE winter monsoon and
              the two inter-monsoon  transition periods.  The interplay between dependence on
              the  "new" and "regenerated" forms of nitrogen determine what  fraction of
              total primary production is at any time  available for export to the deep-sea. 
                     The techniques applied will permit the quantification  of new production
              and its regulation throughout the low  nutrient portion of the year.  Nutrient
              analyses sensitive  in the nanomolar range will be employed for quantifying the
               abundance, and with 15N labeled substrates, the rates of  supply and
              utilization of nitrite, nitrate and ammonium in  the upper ocean.  This study
              will be conducted in  collaboration with investigators who are addressing other
               aspects of the nitrogen cycle and biological  production.  New understanding
              resulting from these complementary  projects will contribute to the formulation
              and testing of  regional models that use remotely sensed information on 
              biological and physical features and processes to better  predict how
              production processes in the Arabian Sea will  respond to future climate change.
