Title       : Computer Modeling of Free-Surface and Pressurized Flows, Support of Participants
               from South Asia and the Middle East in a NATO Advanced Study Institute in
               Pullman, WA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1993      
File        : a9312378

Award Number: 9312378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18400              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. H. Chaudhry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 5919,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project supports participation by six                       
              scientists from South Asia and the Middle East in a NATO Advanced              
              Study Institute on "Computer Modeling of Free-Surface and                      
              Pressurized Flows".  The Institute is to be held at Washington                 
              State University in Pullman, WA, from June 28th to July 9th,                   
              1993.  Topics to be covered include: governing equations of free-              
              surface flows, and use of finite difference methods, turbulence                
              models, modeling of three dimensional flows, modeling of flows                 
              with undular bores, modeling of sediment transport, flood routing              
              models, urban drainage models, governing equations of pressurized              
              flows and steady-flow in pipe networks, modeling of two-component              
              flows, modeling of water quality in pipe networks, modeling of                 
              slow transients and of rapid transients, and modeling of cooling               
              water systems.  Fourteen well-known authorities in the field will              
              present state-of-the-art lectures to be followed by discussions                
              with the participants.  Most of the participants will have                     
              postgraduate degrees, and many could be considered as established              
              specialists.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Scope:  The NATO Advanced Study Institute provides a well-planned              
              forum for presentation of recent advances in research and for                  
              interaction between the lecturers and the participants during a                
              two-week period in a small university town setting.  This will                 
              provide excellent opportunities for exchange of information and                
              for developing contacts for future cooperative research.  This                 
              project to support the participation of six scientists from                    
              countries outside NATO is in line with INT's objective of                      
              increasing interaction between U.S. scientists and those from                  
              developing countries, who have limited access to similar                       
              scientific meetings in the U.S.
