Title       : DNA Fingerprinting: Law and Science in Criminal Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9312183

Award Number: 9312183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila S. Jasanoff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9123,
Abstract    :
              9312183  Jasanoff  Scientific evidence, reports, and testimony play an
              increasing role  in decisionmaking, ranging from the actions of individuals and
               private organizations, to those of the courts and other public  authorities.  
              This study investigates different aspects of a  controversy that has developed
              in recent years over the use of DNA  fingerprinting evidence in U.S. criminal
              trials.  The objective is  to describe and explain how the legal setting frames
              a controversy  over the design and dissemination of a scientific technique. 
              The  study will examine how claims about scientific facts, consensus,  expert
              authority, and technical reliability are presented and  evaluated in different
              research contexts, in the courts and in the  science press.  To place the
              current controversy in a legal and  historical context, the study will examine
              the history of relevant  legal decisions and legislation, and will compare DNA 
              fingerprinting with the cases of (non-DNA) fingerprinting and  polygraph
              analysis.      The study will combine ethnographic interviews, analyses of
              texts  and court testimony, and legal and historical scholarship.  The 
              interviews will explore the understandings of the techniques and  controversies
              from the points of view of different participants,  including: population
              geneticists and other university scientists;  staff scientists, case examiners
              and administrators at the FBI  laboratories; and research staff and managers at
              a private  forensics firm.  Records of court cases and transcripts of 
              testimony will be analyzed to show how expertise, consensus, and  technical
              reliability are represented in the legal setting.   Preliminary evidence
              indicates that researchers from different  disciplines and in different
              contexts design the "same" molecular  biological techniques in very different
              ways, and find them more or  less reliable under different organizational
              circumstances.  These  differences, and others related to the social
              construction of  authority, may influence discrep ant assessments about the 
              techniques made by judges and juries, when scientists appear as  expert
              witnesses in trials.      Few studies of scientific and technological
              controversies have  explored questions on how the legal setting constructs
              scientific  controversy, by providing a forum in which expert testimony is 
              solicited in adversary disputes about the reliability of  techniques.  Besides
              contributing information about how parties in  these controversies construe the
              legitimate and ethical use of  expert authority, as well as the cultural
              commitments with which  the divergent positions are infused, the present study
              will reveal  substantive implications and differences in the development of 
              scientific and social consensus, and in the negotiations over  boundaries in
              science and the law, and over what constitutes  expertise.  ***
