Title       : "Advanced Control Strategies for Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1994  
File        : a9312406

Award Number: 9312406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399994             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Greve dg07@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce H. Krogh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,9162,
Abstract    :
              9312406  Greve  The objective of this project is to demonstrate the use of new 
              sensor technology and multivariable control strategies to improve  the
              performance of critical processes for the manufacture of  integrated circuits
              (ICs).  In current practice, unit processes  for IC manufacturing are
              controlled by independent regulators of  macroscopic variables such as
              temperature, pressure, and gas flow  rates.  Setpoint values for these
              variables are determined by  off-line studies and applied without adjustment
              during the  processing of a given batch of wafers.  Although setpoint tuning 
              may be performed from batch-to-batch using techniques such as  statistical
              process control (SPC), the use of real-time feedback  to adjust the process
              setpoints in real time has not been  possible until recently because of absence
              of in situ  measurements of process variables more directly related to the 
              actual process performance variables.  The particular process to be studied is
              plasma enhanced chemical  vapor deposition (PECVD) which exhibits many features
              common to  several IC unit processes.  A differentially-pumped quadrupole  mass
              spectrometer will be used to sample species directly  incident on the wafer
              platform during the processing.  Using  physical models and experiments to
              characterize the response  curves for the process and the dynamic responses of
              the species  concentrations with respect to the regulated variables, 
              multivariable control strategies will be implemented to enable  the direct
              regulation of the species concentrations.  Process  recipes will then be
              developed in terms of these measured process  variables to more directly
              influence the process outcome as  measured by several performance variables
              including breakdown  voltage, flat band shift, thickness, and index of
              refraction.   Two general approaches to multivariable control (robust 
              multivariable regulation and model predictive control) will be  implemented and
              compared leading to new insights into the  practical advantages and l
              imitations of alternative multivariable  control methodologies.  New models of
              the PECVD process will also  be identified in the course of this research
              leading to  improvements in the process performance based on new recipes 
              defined in terms of the measured process variables.  Many of  these results
              will be useful for other critical IC processes such  as plasma etching.  ***
