Title       : Low-dimensional Invariant Coordinate Systems for Dynamic Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1995       
File        : a9312092

Award Number: 9312092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174924             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Kirby Kirby@Math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rick Miranda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9312092  Kirby  This proposal presents a new  analytic tool for extracting a 
              reduced description of general  dynamical systems.  It details how  systems
              with dynamics which lie on  low-dimensional invariant manifolds  or attractors
              can be reformulated  into systems of low dimensionality.   In the study of such
              systems one is  typically confronted with complex  models wither in the form of
               partial differential equations, or  large systems of ordinary  differential or
              difference  equations.  This "high-  dimensionality" contradicts the 
              conjectured idea that the model of  the system should be governable by  a small
              number of equations.  This  project addresses the issue of how  to objectively
              proceed from an  overly detailed and redundant  description based on modeling 
              considerations to a reduced model  which accurately reflects the true 
              dimensionality of the system.  A  technique is presented which allows  the
              reformulation of the model to  its optimally reduced form and it  is shown how
              this can be used to  facilitate the study of dynamical  systems with chaotic or
              turbulent  solutions.  The basis of the  approach is the reduction of the 
              model, wither a partial  differential equation or system of  ordinary
              differential equations, to  the simplest possible form.  This  is carried out
              using a neural  network architecture which  resembles and bottleneck.  The 
              neural network constructs a  nonlinear vector function  approximation in
              several variables.   The values of the nodes in the  bottleneck correspond to
              the  dynamical information optimally  compressed onto a manifold of  lowest
              possible dimension.   Consequently, the model equations  can be formulated in
              terms of the  variables on the bottleneck  manifold.  This can be viewed as a 
              nonlinear compression of the phase  space of the bottleneck manifold.   This
              can be viewed as a nonlinear  compression of the phase space of  the dynamical
              system and is  mathematically equivalent to a  projection of the flow onto a
              non-  orthogonal basis.  ***
