Title       : Biologically Inspired Advanced Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1996      
File        : a9312635

Award Number: 9312635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dotsevi Y. Sogah dys2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9135,9136,9138,9162,9179,9181,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9312635  Sogah    The synthesis and characterization of polypeptide-based hybrid
               polymers of controlled architecture will be explored.  The long-  term
              objective of this program is to find ways to induce higher-  order
              conformationally defined structures into synthetic polymers  by combining
              biochemical concepts, organic chemistry and polymer  chemistry, and lay the
              ground work for predictable control of  polymer chain folding.  Methods will be
              sought to control the  sequence, topology and surface functionality of
              synthetic polymers.    There are three parts to the project:  The first one
              involves  design, synthesis and characterization of repetitive oligopeptides 
              of controlled sequence and high propensity to form reverse-turns  (beta-turns),
              pleated beta-sheets and alpha-helices.  The second  part concerns the design
              and synthesis of novel organic, non-  peptidic beta-turn mimics that are
              convergent and rigid for  controlling chain folding and topology of advanced
              materials.  Two  broad classes of organic motifs will be targeted: (i) flat
              U-shaped  motifs, designed specifically to induce sheets, and (ii) non-planar 
              symmetric motifs for initiation of helical and twisted ribbon-like  structures.
               The final part involves linking the oligopeptides and  the turn mimics to give
              oligomeric telechelic building blocks  containing either diamino or dicarboxyl
              end groups.   Polycondensation with diisocyanates, diacid chlorides, diamines 
              and/or diols, will be carried out to give novel hybrid polymers.   For
              materials of controlled sequence and topology, Alpha-Beta-type  oligomeric
              building blocks containing alpha-amino, omega-activated  carboxyl groups will
              be synthesized.  Polymerization of these will  give the expected polymers of
              controlled sequence, predetermined  chain folding and judiciously placed 
              functional groups.  Physical  properties, such as thermal and elastic behavior,
              modulus, tensile  and compressive strengths will be measured.    The capability
              to predictably control chain folding of  synthetic  polymers is expected to
              lead to novel polymers of predetermined  modulus and controlled
              crystallization.  Potential applications are  anticipated in preparation of
              chiral catalysts, chromatographic  packing materials for chiral separations,
              biocompatible polymers  and in electronics.  It is anticipated that the
              polymers will  degrade into environmentally benign by-products.  ***
