Title       : Best Achievable Control System Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9312489

Award Number: 9312489
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vasilios I. Manousiouthakis vasilios@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abtract - Manousiouthakis - 9312489    In recent years, the lack of major
              capital investments in the process industries has made the implementation of
              control projects one mode to increased plant profitability.  These economic
              benefits are typically associated with the improved dynamic performance offered
              by advanced controls.  In a regulatory control context, a quality variable is
              desired to stay within control limits and is not allowed to exceed
              specification limits.  If one control strategy can achieve tighter control
              limits than another, then the setpoint of this quality variable may be changed
              so as to enhance process economics.      Dynamic performance is not one
              criterion in selecting a control system.  Uncertainty, complexity and
              reliability are also critical issues.  Chemical process models are often
              empirical, neglect complex physicochemical phenomena or lack information on
              process parameters.  Consequently, high levels of uncertainty are associated
              with these models.  Chemical processes are also large scale interconnected
              systems in which a large number of variables are measured and/or manipulated. 
              The geographical location of these interconnected unit operations would
              necessitate the installation of a complex communication network for the purpose
              of transferring information from the measurements to a central location and
              then to the manipulations.  The installation and maintenance costs and the
              complexity of such a network often prevent the implementation of such a
              centralized control system.  Instead, control system simplicity is attained by:
              1) the use of a decentralized control system in which measurements and
              manipulations are classified into subsets and information is exchanged only
              between corresponding subsets, and 20 the use of simple low order control
              strategies with which human operators are familiar.  Reliability is another
              criterion in control system design.  Failures of control system elements such
              as sensors/actuators often lead to the manual operation of control loops .  It
              is desirable that the control system be such that it can be readily
              reconfigured so as to maintain plant operation albeit with degraded dynamic
              performance characteristics.    The objective of this research project is the
              development of a methodology that addresses the question: What is the best
              achievable dynamic performance that a decentralized and/or low order
              simultaneously stabilizing and/or reliable feedback control system can deliver
              in the presence of external disturbances.  The formulation of these control
              problems leads to quadratically constrained, infinite dimensional optimization
              problems.  The investigation of computational techniques for the global
              solution of such problems is one of the main issues that will be addressed. 
              Branch and bound, decomposition, interval arithmetic techniques and
              combinations thereof and computational implementations will be sought.
