Title       : Accurate Quantum Dynamics of Rare-Gas Heteroclusters and Hydrogen-Bonded Dimers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9312312

Award Number: 9312312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zlatko Bacic zlatko.bacic@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is supported by the NSF theoretical and computational   chemistry
              program.  Rigorous quantum mechanical calculations will be   carried out to
              study the internal dynamics of weakly bound systems,   particularly, rare gas
              heteroclusters and hydrogen-bonded dimers.  The   project has three main
              components.  (1) Quantum Monte Carlo methods will   be applied to clusters
              consisting of a hydrogen halide molecule with   several argon atoms to study
              the effects of solvent-solute interaction on   energetics, structure, and the
              vibrational spectrum.  (2) Improved   computational methods will be developed
              for treating rovibrational states   of four-atom clusters with one covalent
              bond.  Large amplitude   distortions of all five weak bonds will be treated
              explicitly.  (3)   Accurate quantum calculations will be carried out for
              mode-specific   vibrational predissociation dynamics of hydrogen halide dimers
              to obtain   theoretical predictions of predissociation lifetimes and rotational
              state   distributions of the resulting monomer fragments.      Advances during
              the past decade in molecular beam technology and laser   spectroscopy have made
              it possible today to carry out detailed and highly   precise measurements of
              the relative energies of vibrational and   rotational states of very small
              molecular clusters in the gas phase.    These experiments are potential sources
              of important, highly accurate,   and detailed information about weak
              interatomic forces, but further   theoretical work is required to fully extract
              this information.   The   present project  is a theoretical study of three
              particular classes of   clusters ranging in size from 4 to 17 atoms.   The
              significant difference   between these clusters and typical stable molecules
              with the same number   of atoms are their extreme floppiness.    Well developed
              mathematicals   methods already exist for solving the quantum mechanical
              equations of   motion for the small amplitude vibrations of typical molecules. 
              The   theory of the more compli cated, large amplitude, motion in weakly bound 
               clusters is an active area of current research.   This work is motivated,  
              aside from inherent scientific curiosity, by the need for quantitative  
              information about weak intermolecular forces to be used in subsequent  
              computer simulations of molecular motion in large molecular systems, e.g.   
              molecules of biological interest and molecules in liquid solution.
