Title       : Enantioselective Heterogeneous Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1996     
File        : a9312533

Award Number: 9312533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Augustine augustro@lanmail.shu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Seton Hall University
	      400 South Orange Avenue
	      South Orange, NJ  070792646    973/275-2974

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9312533  Augustine    This effort examines an approach to the design of
              enantioselective heterogeneous catalysts that combines fundamental principles
              of catalyst systems and surface chemistry with synthetic organic chemistry.  It
              uses a working hypothesis developed from previous work on chiral hydrogenation
              of pyruvate esters catalyzed by platinum modified with cinchona alkaloids.  In
              this hypothesis, the substrate must be adsorbed on a corner site with the
              modifier adsorbed on adjacent sites; the distance of the chiral center from the
              surface is a key factor in determining the enantiomeric selectivity.  Chiral
              modifiers with various spacing between the chiral center and the electron-rich
              site (which can adsorb to a metal surface) are synthesized and tested in the
              platinum-catalyzed hydrogenation of pyruvate. Cinchona-induced chirality in the
              palladium-catalyzed allylation of malates is also studied.    Chiral
              selectivity or enantioselectivity (the production of on "optical " isomer to
              the exclusion to its mirror image) is of critical importance when producing
              chemicals intended to produce a biological response such as drugs, pesticides,
              and perfumes.  It is of thus of great value to the pharmaceutical,
              agrichemical, and fine chemical industries.  Although biocatalysts (enzymes)
              are more often enantioselective that not, they are so substrate-discriminating
              as to be of limited value in the production of chemicals not occurring
              naturally.  Homogeneous chiral catalysts, on the other hand, are less selective
              chemically (but more selective chirally) and harder (read more expensive) to
              use than heterogeneous catalysts.  This work will elaborate principles that can
              be used to improve enantioselectivity in heterogeneous catalysts.
