Title       : Estimation and Closed-Loop Control for Rapid Thermal Processing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1995      
File        : a9312451

Award Number: 9312451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219746             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Friedland bf@njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter F. Kosonocky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,9162,
Abstract    :
              9312451                                          Friedland  A technique of rapid
              thermal processing (RTP) has recently been  developed which promises to break a
              bottleneck in semiconductor  manafacturing.  This new technique involves the
              use of high power  tungsten-halogen lamps to raise the temperature of a 
              semiconductor wafer rapidly to the desired curing temperature.   By use of
              multivariable feedback control it is possible to  maintain the wafer
              temperature within an acceptable tolerance  band.  Until recently, the only
              accurate method of performing the  required temperature mearsurments was to
              imbed thermocouples in  the wafer.  This technique, however, is not practical
              for use in  production.  A potential breakthrough in performing the required 
              measurement is based on the use of a multi-wavelength infrared  imaging
              pyrometer recently developed by NJIT's Electronic Imaging  Laboratory in
              conjunction with the David Sarnoff Research Center.   This sensor, in
              principle, is capable of measuring the  temperature of the wafer through a
              sapphire window with the  required accuracy.    Extraction of temperature data
              will entail sophisticated data  processing, owing to the requirement of
              estimating both  emissivity and temperature at the different wavelengths.  
              Extended Kalman filtering (EKF) is the preferred algorithm.  Use  of the EKF
              algorithm, however, impacts on how the control problem  is formulated.  In
              particular, it is necessary to use a nonlinear  dynamic model of the process in
              order to capture the correct  temperature dependence for estimation of
              emissivity.  Hence,  designing a closed loop controller necessitates dealing
              with a  nonlinear control and estimation problem.  The proposed  investigation
              will address this problem and the theoretical  issues it raises.  ***
