Title       : Investigations into the Photochemistry of Antarctic Waters in Response to
               Changing Ultraviolet Radiation Fluxes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1995       
File        : a9312767

Award Number: 9312767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293825             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Kieber djkieber@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,1318,1577,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Decreases in stratospheric ozone over the Antarctic result in an               
              increase in the ultraviolet radiation flux in the euphotic zone                
              of the ocean.  This increase may lead to cellular damage in                    
              aquatic organisms resulting in photo-inhibition and decreased                  
              productivity.  Cellular damage can occur either intracellularly,               
              or externally at the cell surface from biomolecular reactions                  
              with externally-generated reactive transient species.                          
              Extracellular damage will depend to a large degree on the                      
              photochemistry of the seawater surrounding the cell.  To date,                 
              little is known about the photochemistry of the unique Antarctic               
              waters.  This project integrates a field and laboratory approach               
              to obtain baseline information regarding the marine                            
              photochemistry of the euphotic zone in Antarctica waters as                    
              related to changes in ultraviolet radiation levels.  In situ                   
              photochemical production rates and steady state concentrations of              
              a suite of reactive species and dissolved organic matter                       
              degradation products as well as downwelling ultraviolet radiation              
              will be measured.  Additionally, flux by in situ chemical                      
              actinometry, action spectra for photochemical production of various            
              reactive species and dissolved organic matter degradation products,            
              and fluorescence and absorbance properties of dissolved organic                
              matter will be determined.  This information will serve as a                   
              basis for understanding and predicting the effects of ultraviolet              
              radiation-induced marine photochemical processes on the                        
              productivity and ecology in the euphotic zone of the Antarctic                 
              Ocean.
