Title       : U.S.-Indonesia Cooperative Research: Hidden Power in Gender Relations Among
               Indonesians: A Case Study in Javanese Villages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9312149

Award Number: 9312149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22183              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann R. Tickamyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0511603   Societal Aspects                        
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,5927,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9312149  Tickamyer    This project supports dissertation research of Ms. Siti 
              Kusujiarti under the direction of Dr. Ann R. Tickamyer,  Department of
              Sociology, University of Kentucky, and subsequent  collaborative research on
              hidden power in gender relations among  Indonesians, for a period of 24 months.
               Gender relations and  power negotiations in daily relations in 48 couples in
              two  villages in Java, Indonesia, will be investigated by intensive 
              interviewing and observation.  This study will focus on 5  household
              activities: household chores, reproduction, production,  financial matters, and
              social activities analyzing who has power,  how it is negotiated, and the
              "hidden transcripts" which hide  latent conflict.    This research has both
              theoretical and practical social  significance.  Theoretically, it provides a
              comparative view of  how power is conceptualized and manifested in gender
              relations  among the Javanese people.  Gender ideology plays a central role  as
              the foundation of women's government programs and in defining  the
              characteristics of women's involvement in these programs.   Thus, this research
              has great practical significance for the  course of Indonesian development and
              for understanding how the  development process benefits women.  The PI is a
              highly respected  researcher in the field of this proposal.  She is fortunate
              in  having as a graduate student and, later, as a postdoctoral  collaborator an
              Indonesian woman with a thorough knowledge of the  culture and acceptability,
              as an insider, to those whose  relations will be studied.  This project is
              relevant to the  objectives of the East Asia and Pacific Program which seeks to
               increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and  engineers and
              their counterparts in the Asia-Pacific region  through the exchange of
              scientific information, ideas, skills,  and techniques and through
              collaboration on problems of mutual  benefit.  ***
