Title       : RUI: Studies in Social Trust
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1993    
File        : a9312426

Award Number: 9312426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49871              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy C. Earle timearle@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George T. Cvetkovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              9312426  Earle  Social science research about risk has provided valuable 
              information on the factors which influence risk perception and  communication. 
              This project consists of a set of studies designed  to further our
              understanding of factors that influence the  development of social trust and
              effective risk communication.  The  research proceeds by categorizing risk
              communications under two  modes of thought, paradigmatic (logical-scientific)
              and narrative  (value-bearing stories.)  The discourse of some technical
              experts  uses the former.  Narrative thought is characteristic of general 
              public discourse.  These different discourse styles influence  social trust and
              risk communication.  Another factor that affects  social trust and risk
              communication is the set of cultural values  expressed in a message.  Value
              similarity between individual and  institution leads to social trust and
              successful risk  communication.  Communications express cultural values; those
              with  similar discourse styles and values and compatible narratives lead  to
              the same positive results.  The main objective of this project  is to test this
              hypothesis.  Stage one will develop scales that  will identify and
              differentiate the forms of social relations  individuals favor in the context
              of a risk management problem.   Stage two consists of two studies.  The first
              will use archival  data to determine the extent to which risk communication
              discourse  is organized into narrative, paradigmatic or mixed forms, and to 
              associate the form with certain characteristics of individuals such  as
              institutional affiliation.  The second explores associations  between forms of
              discourse and social and cultural preferences.   Subjects from various groups
              involved in risk controversies and  risk management will construct individual
              and consensus  explanations for a variety of cases.  Results will help to test
              the  hypothesis that discourse barriers are the key barriers to risk 
              communication as well as guides to its improvement.  The final   phase involves
              two studies also.  One tests what meanings  individuals with different
              preferences about social relations  construct for paradigmatically oriented
              messages.  One tests  whether using compound narrative forms is an efficacious
              way to  bridge communication gaps between individuals with these different 
              preferences.  This project, by generating insight into the ways  people think
              about risk management issues, will provide guidance  for the improvement of
              risk communication programs and for the  resolution of policy disputes.  ***
