Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1993   
File        : a9312465

Award Number: 9312465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31827              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hongming Ding DINGH@SLUVCA  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Hongming will continue his study of noncommutative harmonic               
              analysis.  This will include an investigation of generalized                   
              hypergeometric functions on matrix spaces, domains of positivity,              
              and Hermitian symmetric spaces, concentrating on developing the                
              operator-valued theory, extending the context to include Siegel                
              domain of type II, deriving Mellin-Barnes representations, and                 
              exploring applications to infinite-dimensional representation                  
              theory.                                                                        
                   The mathematical bedrock of Hongming's research is the                    
              theory of Lie groups.  Named in honor of the Norwegian                         
              mathematician Sophus Lie, these groups have been one the major                 
              themes in twentieth century mathematics.  As the mathematical                  
              vehicle for exploiting the symmetries inherent in a system, the                
              representation theory of Lie groups has had a profound impact                  
              upon mathematics itself, particularly in analysis and number                   
              theory, and upon theoretical physics, especially quantum                       
              mechanics and elementary particle physics.DMS-9200774 Hongming.                
                   Hongming will investigate the natural Dirichlet form                      
              operator over loop spaces associated to Brownian bridge measure.               
              The particular interest is in proving existence and uniqueness of              
              ground states of the associated Schroedinger operators over                    
              homotopy classes.  This is a continuation of Hongming's recent                 
              work on logarithmic Sobolev inequalities on loop groups which has              
              many implications for the representation theory of Lie groups.                 
                   The theory of Lie groups, named in honor of the Norwegian                 
              mathematician Sophus Lie, has been one of the major themes in                  
              twentieth century mathematics.  As the mathematical vehicle for                
              exploiting the symmetries inherent in a system, the                            
              representation theory of Lie groups has had a profound impact                  
              upon mathematics itself and theoretical physics, especially                    
              quantum mechanics and elementary particle physics.
