Title       : Collaborative Research: Tests of Terror Management Hypotheses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9312546

Award Number: 9312546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Greenberg jeff@email.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  Terror management theory attempts to explain the                          
              psychological functions of self-esteem and cultural worldviews.                
              According to the theory, the individual is protected from anxiety              
              by a dual component cultural anxiety buffer, consisting of (a) a               
              cultural worldview, which includes one's conception of reality,                
              standards of value, and hope of immortality, and (b) self-esteem,              
              or the belief that one is living up to the standards of value                  
              prescribed by the cultural worldview. From this perspective,                   
              one's beliefs about oneself and the world in which one lives                   
              serve the essential defensive function of protecting one from                  
              anxiety. The equanimity-providing concepts are consensually                    
              validated when others share our beliefs and threatened when                    
              others disagree with our beliefs. Because the cultural anxiety-                
              buffer requires continual consensual validation for effective                  
              protection from anxiety, much social behavior is directed toward               
              the validation of its two components.                                          
                                                                                             
                   Research has shown that: (a) reminding people of their                    
              mortality increases the positivity of their reactions to people                
              and ideas that support their worldviews and the negativity of                  
              their reactions to people and ideas that threaten their                        
              worldviews, (b) high levels of self-esteem decrease both anxiety               
              in response to threatening stimuli and defensive distortions that              
              presumably function to reduce one's anxiety, and (c) threats to                
              the cultural worldview increase susceptibility to anxiety in                   
              response to subtle reminders of one's mortality. The goals of                  
              this research are threefold: (1) to investigate the centrality of              
              death concerns to the processes posited by the theory, (2) to add              
              to the evidentiary base for the theory by further assessing both               
              the effects of mortality salience on behavior focused on                       
              bolstering self-esteem and the worldview and the roles of self-                
              esteem and the worldview in allaying death concerns, and (3) to                
              assess the role of affective responses to and awareness of                     
              threatening material in the production of the effects posited by               
              the theory. This research will increase our understanding of why               
              self-esteem is so important and so beneficial for the individual.
