Title       : Stability and Change in Support for the European Court of Justice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1995 
File        : a9312689

Award Number: 9312689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6615               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Caldeira caldeira.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9312689  CALDEIRA  This project addresses questions of stability and change in
              mass  support for the European Court of Justice.  It is important for  social
              stability in democracies to know how legal institutions  sustain themselves. 
              Most courts have no access to the powerful  legitimizing process of elections,
              while at the same time they are  often charged with making decisions contrary
              to the preferences of  (sometimes impassioned) majorities.  Why do citizens
              comply with  unpopular decisions of courts?  In the absence of stores of 
              institutional legitimacy, compliance itself is a problematic  question.  These
              problems of legitimacy and compliance assume even  broader importance in the
              context of emerging transnational legal  institutions like the European Court
              of Justice.  The European  Court of Justice, the high court of the European
              Community, has  become the most powerful judicial institution in Europe and has
               been the single institution most effective at promoting the  integration of
              Europe.  In light of its increasingly salient and  controversial decisions, it
              is important to ask how this court is  acquiring political legitimacy and how
              willing are individual  Europeans to accept its decisions.    This project
              investigates the connections between legitimacy and  compliance, focusing on
              the European Court of Justice.  It focuses  in particular on change in mass
              attitudes toward the Court, on how  these attitudes are formed, evolve and
              ultimately affect popular  willingness to accept Court decisions.  The data
              collection will be  by survey of a panel of respondents (300 in each of seven
              countries  that are members of the European Community).  The projects promises 
              to make a significant contribution to the scientific understanding  of
              legitimation processes and how legitimacy affects compliance.  ***
