Title       : Improved Conceptual Design Using Implicit Solid Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1995      
File        : a9312932

Award Number: 9312932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255668             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duane W. Storti storti@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Ganter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9312932 Storti          The goal of this project is to create a robust
              conceptual design system in which solids are described by a single potential
              function (rather than approximated by a multitude of faces, volume elements, or
              surface patches as in conventional modelers).  This formulation of geometric
              design, called implicit solid  modeling (ISM), offers three distinct
              advantages:  (1) A straightforward approach to  solid modeling which is
              intuitive and easy to learn.  (2) All of the basic data which defines the shape
              of a solid is specified and manipulated  using exact, rational arithmetic which
              guarantees that geometric property evaluation tests performed are robust and
              reliable.  (3) Point/solid classification (determining whether a point lies
              inside, on the surface of, or outside a given solid), the fundamental geometric
              test traditionally used in solid modeling, reduces to simply evaluating the
              potential function and comparing its value to a specified threshold level. 
              Moverover, evaluation of the potential function inherently provides (at no
              additional computational cost) a measure of the distance from the given point
              to the surface of the solid, which is exactly the information needed for
              intelligent engineering design.          During the course of this research, an
              effective ISM conceptual design system based on exact computation is created
              and used  to explore ways in which the distance measure provided by the ISM
              potential function can be used to develop improved engineering design tools. 
              The underlying exact computations are achieved using a computer algebra system,
              and swept solids (essential for modeling offset surfaces and path planning) are
              created using tech niques from algebraic geometry including envelope theory and
              elimination theory.  A polygonizer is incorporated to provide capability for
              rapid visualization on standard graphics hardware and availability of a
              suitable output format so that the ISM system can serve as a conceptual
              preprocessor for conventional solid modeling systems and rapid prototyping
              systems based on stereolithography.  While the primary implications of this
              research involve advances in traditional areas of engineering design such as
              sculptured surface description, optimal layout, packaging, and motion planning,
              an additional goal of this project involves broadening the scope of engineering
              design research through enhanced interaction with investigators in the fields
              of computer algebra and algebraic geometry. ***                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
