Title       : Mathematical Sciences:Collaboration Between Statistical and Atmospheric Sciences
               on Modeling the Climate System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9312686

Award Number: 9312686
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Katz rwk@ucar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roland A. Madden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1303,1577,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9312686  Katz       The modeling and analysis of the climate system is a complex
               problem that challenges the statistical, mathematical, and  geophysical
              sciences.  Increased collaboration among these  sciences would result in more
              efficient analyses and more  accurate interpretation of data from the climate
              system and its  models, and in a more reliable assessment of accompanying 
              uncertainties.  It is proposed that a team of statistical  scientist be
              assembled at the National Center for Atmospheric  Research (NCAR) to help
              foster such a collaboration. NCAR,  basefunded by the National Sciences
              Foundation, is a focal point  for basic research on the atmosphere and has
              strong links to  universities throughout North America.  With the addition of
              more  statistical and mathematical expertise, it could serve as well as  a
              focal point for promoting collaboration among geophysical,  statistical, and
              other mathematical sciences.       The general objective is to develop and
              utilize new  techniques of data analysis that arise from the collective 
              understanding of physical scientists, mathematicians, and  statisticians.  The
              climate system has a very large number of  degrees of freedom and exhibits some
              chaotic behavior.   Consequently, the specific focus of the collaborative
              research  would be on the development of inferential methods appropriate  for
              high-resolution analysis of the climate system.  Such  analyses are appropriate
              both because realistic models of the  climate system require the treatment of
              smaller scale phenomena,  and because assessments of societal impact of climate
              require  information on regional or smaller scales.  Besides the immediate 
              benefits to the scientific fields directly involved, improved  understanding of
              the climate system would result in potential  benefits to society that would be
              accrued indefinitely into the  future.  For instance, it could lead to improved
              weather and  climate forecasts over a wide range of time scales from hours to 
              seasons in advance, as well as  to more realistic scenarios of  future changes
              in climate.  Such improvements would be of  substantial value to decision
              makers and policy analysts.
