Title       : University-Industry Relations: Conflict of Interest and Academic Mission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9312179

Award Number: 9312179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Etzkowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Purchase
	      P O Box 337
	      Purchase, NY  105770337    914/253-5000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              


In the United States the university evolved from a teaching to a research
              institution in the late nineteenth century, and into a teaching, research and
              economic development enterprise in the late twentieth century. Acute
              controversy accompanied and continues to accompany these transitions. This
              study examines issues of conflict of interest and conflict of commitment
              arising from academic-industry relations. There are two models which describe
              the approaches universities use to resolve or regulate these conflicts:
              separating academic and business activities, or integrating research and
              business activities under the rubric of a broader institutional mission. The
              degree to which one or the other model dominates indicates the degree to which
              an academic institution has assimilated and legitimated economic development as
              part of its mission. With partial support from this research award, this
              investigator will complete case study research at six U.S. universities. The
              cases provide detailed information about the range of institutional responses
              to these controversies, in historical and sociological context. The research
              will identify and elucidate the origins of the controversies, and the different
              positions and resolutions that institutions assume and arrive at. It will
              assess the implications of these new policies and developments for issues of
              industrial and academic policy, nationally and internationally, and for
              regional development. Results of the study will be published in articles and a
              book which will interest universities, companies and government officials and
              agencies concerned with the changing mission of the university to assist
              economic and social development.


