Title       : Dissertation Research: The Evolution of Complex Social Systems in the Quibor
               Valley, Northwestern Venezuela
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1995   
File        : a9312521

Award Number: 9312521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9312521  Drennan    Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Ms. Lilliam
              Arvello will  collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Coordinating her work
               with that of a larger project she will conduct archaeological  research in the
              Quibor Valley of northwestern Venezuela. This area  is of interest because of
              both the rich prehistoric remains it  contains and the archaeological attention
              which, in the past, has  been directed to it. Ms. Arvello will determine the
              exploitable  resources in the region and how these varied through time and 
              space, and also examine how human settlement patterns changed in  size and
              structure over time. She will survey a total of 30,000 ha.  of the valley using
              standard techniques. On the basis of aerial  photographs and maps, the area
              will be divided into survey units,  each of which will be 100% covered by
              pedestrian survey. All  surface scatters and sites identified will be plotted.
              Surface  collections will be made at each site and systematic intensive 
              surface collection and test pit excavations will be done in  selected
              locations. On this basis it will be possible to determine  spatial changes in
              settlement pattern over time and to examine the  degree of both inter and intra
              site variability in different  periods.    Although Northeastern South America
              has received less  archaeological attention than the Mayan region to the North
              or the  Incan culture of the Andes, this area is important because the same 
              basic processes which led from simple to complex societies took  place here as
              well. Archaeological evidence indicates a progression  from small unstratified
              social groupings to larger and more  stratified chiefdom level societies. The
              Quibor Valley has rich  agricultural lands and archaeological sites in this
              region preserve  paleobotanical information. Researchers have postulated that
              the  introduction of maize and the supposed increase in population  density
              which this allowed is responsible for the emergence of  complex societies in
              this area. However th e data are scanty and Ms.  Arvelo's work should provide a
              more convincing test of this  hypothesis.    This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide  data of interest to many archaeologists. It
              will increase our  understanding of how complex societies developed and will 
              contribute to the training of a promising young scientist.  ***
