Title       : Distributed System Observability and Controllability with Finite-Dimensional
               Sensors and Actuators: Application to Thermal and Fluid Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9312745

Award Number: 9312745
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Chanan Singh                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Mohler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Khapalov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9312745  Mohler  The object of this research is to develop new observability and
               controllability techniques for a number of both linear time-varying  and
              nonlinear distributed-parameter systems with internal discrete-  time
              finite-dimensional observation and control.  Emphasis is given  to location of
              finite-dimensional sensors and actuators.  These  problems, being the inverse
              problems for partial differential  equations of traditional interest, have
              received considerable  attention in the literature, mostly in the linear
              time-invariant  setting.  On the basis of harmonic and nonharmonic analysis it
              was  shown that in this case observability and controllability of the  system
              in question depend crucially upon the associated eigenvalues  (in particular,
              upon their growth and multiplicity) and,  consequently, stationary
              finite-dimensional sensors and actuators  often fail when the space dimension
              is higher than 1.  The research  proposed here is aimed to overcome this
              difficulty on the basis of  the introduction of spatially scanning observations
              and control.   In the above context, the proposed methodology mostly deals with
               the eigenfunctions, while employing in the case of the heat  equation, for
              example, only the sign of the eigenvalues.    It is planned to study the
              interrelation between continuous-time  and discrete-time observations and
              controls for the above systems,  interpreting the discrete-time setting as a
              skeleton for the  continuous-time one.  The objective of research here is to
              develop  a methodology (introduced in our previous studies) that allows us  to
              replace continuous-time sensors and actuators, the spatially-  averaged ones,
              associated with the set-valued mappings will also be  studied.  The latter is a
              natural generalization of the notion of  pointwise observations/control for the
              case of discontinuous  generalized solutions, allowing us to ensure the
              well-posedness of  the finite-dimensional observation and control.  ***
