Title       : JGOFS: Bacterial Cycling Of Dissolved And Particulate Organic Carbon In
               Oligotrophic And Eutrophic Production Regimes Of The Arabian Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1996     
File        : a9312695

Award Number: 9312695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farooq Azam fazam@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9312695  Azam         This is a joint research proposal (F. Azam and H. 
              Ducklow,  co-PIs) to perform quantitative studies on the  significance of
              bacteria in mediating and regulating  biogeochemical fluxes of carbon and
              nitrogen in the Arabian  Sea, as a component of the US JGOFS Arabian Sea
              Process  Study.  We propose a program of core measurements to  quantify carbon
              and nitrogen pools and fluxes as well as  mechanistic studies to understand the
              response of the  bacteria-mediated processes to dramatic changes in many 
              primary production that occur regularly due to monsoonal  reversals in the
              Arabian Sea.  The JGOFS core measurements  will include bacterial abundance and
              biomass, bacterial  production (by both 3H thymidine and 3H leucine 
              incorporation methods), DOC, POC and PN.  Our research is  design, further, to
              address two key questions concerning  microbial heterotrophic  processes
              identified by US JGOFS:  1) How do the community structures which occur during
              the  oligotrophic vs eutrophic periods differentially impact  carbon storage
              and export fluxes?  2) Does the decomposition  of sinking particles slow down
              in the suboxic zone and  result in enhanced vertical flux though this layer? 
              We  hypothesize that sequential occurrence of highly eutrophic  and
              oligotrophic productivity regimes creates a uniquely  robust microbial loop
              during the oligotrophic period at the  expense of slow-to-degrade DOM which
              accumulates during the  eutrophic period.  We  predict that the strong
              dominance of  the microbial loop renders the oligotrophic period net- 
              heterotrphic and this has implications for spatial and  temporal patterns of
              carbon oxidation and exchange.  The  'stored' DOC may also support high
              bacterial carbon demand  (higher than would be supported by particle flux) 
              below the  mixed layer following shoaling of the pycnocline.  A second 
              hyothesis we wish to test is that sinking particles in the  surface waters are
              rapidly solubilized by hydrolytic  ectoenzymes of colonizing bacteria but t he
              enzymatic  solubilization is greatly reduced in the suboxic layer  resulting in
              much slower depth-dissipation of POC.
