Title       : Investigation of Infra Red Spectral Persistence in Condensed Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1995  
File        : a9312381

Award Number: 9312381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert J. Sievers sievers@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9312381  Sievers  Persistent spectral hole burning will be investigated in 
              chalcogenide glasses, polymers, and poled ferroelectrics.  A  ternary
              chalcogenide glass will be used to distinguish processes  which are controlled
              by the glass topology from those which are  dominated by the chemistry of the
              chalcogen (primarily Se)  chemistry.  The influence of network topology on
              short time energy  transfer and the homogeneous dephasing time will be measured
              by  infrared picosecond pump-probe and photon echo experiments,  respectively. 
              The focus in these studies is to determine the  effect of the average
              coordination number on the short time  dynamics.  Polymers will be investigated
              at very low temperatures  to inhibit thermally activated recovery to the
              vibrational ground  state.  Poled ferroelectrics will be studied by reorienting
              the  polar molecules by persistent hole burning in the opposite  direction to
              the crystal polarization.  In a related study, the  nature of localized
              vibrational modes will investigated in various  types of crystals containing
              defects.  In these materials localized  modes may be trapped at a defect site
              leading to persistent changes  in the defect absorption spectrum at low
              temperatures.  %%%  The absorption of light in a glass can be altered when a
              laser beam  is incident on the same region of the glass.  The glass retains a 
              memory of the laser light.  This memory effect is termed "spectral  hole
              burning" because the optical absorption is reduced precisely  for the same
              light energy corresponding to the laser energy.  Study  of the "spectral hole"
              as a function of temperature, time and light  energy provides important
              information about microscopic structural  properties of the glass.  The
              proposed study will extend the  investigation of this effect to ultrashort time
              scales and to  imperfect crystalline solids.  The aim of such studies is to
              modify  a solid in order to observe these hole burning effects at room 
              temperature with the potential application as optical mem ory  devices.  ***
