Title       : High-Speed Communicatins Networking Using Spectrally EncodedUltrashort Light
               Pulses: Technology and Systems Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1996   
File        : a9312256

Award Number: 9312256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah L. Crawford                     
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317831             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew M. Weiner amw@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9215,9256,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9312256  Weiner  This project aims at demonstrating the physical feasibility of
              a novel, high-speed communications network based on encoding and decoding of
              coherent ultrashort light pulses.  In this ultrashort pulse code-division
              multiple-access (CDMA) environment, a multiplicity of users are connected
              together via a common fiber optic communications medium; multiple-access is
              achieved by assigning different, minimally interfering code sequences to
              different subscriber pairs.  A unique attribute of optical CDMA is the use of
              optical processing, which overcomes electronics bottlenecks and implements
              directly in the optical domain certain network operations, such as addressing,
              routing, and security, which traditionally have been performed electronically.
              Ultrashort pulse CDMA offers a new paradigm for exploiting the terahertz
              potential bandwidth of optical fibers, which is not fully utilized by other
              optical networking approaches, and can lead to high-rate local- and
              metropolitan-area networks with reduced control requirements, for applications
              such as supercomputer interconnects and multimedia networking.    This research
              aims at experimental tests of an ultrashort pulse CDMA system and of the
              devices needed to implement such a system.  Encoding and decoding of coherent
              ultrashort pulses were previously demonstrated at visible  wavelengths by means
              of a frequency-domain optical pulse shaping technique; the ability to perform
              such encoding and decoding is a key motivation for the proposed CDMA network. 
              To date, however, no experiments testing ultrashort pulse CDMA at the infrared
              wavelengths compatible with fiber optic technology have yet been conducted. 
              The current proposal aims at assembling a simple ultrashort pulse CDMA testbed,
              including fiber transmission at 1.5um, in order to critically test the physical
              layer performance of this technique.  Research will also be performed on
              several ultrashort pulse component technologies, such as ultrafast fiber
              lasers, integrated encoding and decodin g devices, fiber dispersions
              compensation techniques, and nonlinear optical devices, which will lead to more
              compact and practical implementations of ultrashort pulse CDMA networks.  ***
