Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Physical and Synthetic Studies of
               Organometallic Electrophiles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1998   
File        : a9312709

Award Number: 9312709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dwight A. Sweigart Dwight_Sweigart@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9312709  Sweigart    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Dwight A. Sweigart,
              Department of  Chemistry, Brown University, to pursue with Dr. Young K. Chung,
              Department of  Chemistry, Seoul National University, Korea, for 24 months, a
              program of  cooperative research involving physical and synthetic studies of 
              organometallic electrophiles.  The project will include both organometallic 
              synthesis and electrochemistry.  The synthetic studies will involve the use of 
              manganese to (1) convert arenes to difunctionalized optically pure 
              cyclohexadienes and (2) produce new functionalized derivatives of indoles, 
              steroids, and natural products related to vitamins D and K.  The 
              electrochemical part of the research is designed to study the reactivity of 
              17- and 19-electron organometallic radicals with respect to ligand 
              substitution and other transformations.    The proposed research, if
              successful, will be of significant interest to a  range of chemists, including
              those concerned with organic synthesis in the  natural products and drug
              fields.  The PI and his Korean collaborator are  highly respected chemists in
              the fields of this research.  Their expertise is  complementary.  Dr. Chung's
              group is expert in a wide range of synthetic  procedures and will be
              responsible for perhaps two thirds of the synthetic  work.  The PI's group will
              do perhaps one third of the synthetic work and most  of the electrochemical and
              computer work.  The collaborators will be assisted  by three U.S. graduate
              students supported by this grant and several Korean  graduate students.  This
              project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-  Korea Cooperative Science
              Program which seeks to increase the level of  cooperation between U.S. and
              Korean scientists and engineers through the  exchange of scientific
              information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through  collaboration on
              problems of mutual benefit.  Korean participation in the  project is supported
              by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).   This project  adds
              an international cooperative dimension to the PI's research  under NSF Grant
              No. CHE-8821588.  ***
