Title       : Dissertation Research: Prehistoric Ritual Technology: A Pueblo Case Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1993      
File        : a9312295

Award Number: 9312295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11796              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Charles Adams ecadams@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. E. Charles Adams Mr. William Walker will            
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will participate in             
              the excavation of a large or "great kiva" which is part of the                 
              Homol'ovi II site located in northeastern Arizona. The size of the             
              kiva, ca. 11 m. by 6 m., makes it large both in Southwestern terms             
              and also in relation to other ritual structures at the site. In the            
              course of extensive excavation the site will be trenched to divide             
              it into four quadrants which will be mapped and excavated in their             
              entirety. Pollen and flotation samples will be collected from                  
              features and other locations to assess the ritual use of plants.               
              The chronology of use will be determined through ceramic as well as            
              tree ring and radiocarbon dating. In addition to the ceramic                   
              materials, lithic and groundstone artifacts as well as faunal and              
              macrobotanical remains will be studied. In this way the history of             
              the structure and its use can be reconstructed.                                
                                                                                             
              In the centuries preceding Columbus complex societies developed in             
              the U.S. Southwest. They were characterized by large population                
              aggregations, construction of multistory "apartment" houses and of             
              ritual structures. Archaeologists want to understand how complex               
              societies develop and are maintained and for this reason have                  
              focussed on this Southwest phenomenon. Based both on archaeological            
              and ethnographic evidence, it is known that religion played a                  
              central role both in social control and integration. Just how it               
              functioned and changed over time however is unknown. Through a                 
              study of this grand kiva Mr. Walker will address this issue.                   
              Because ritual features are added over time the history of the                 
              structure and its use can potentially be reconstructed.                        
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons. It will increase our            
              understanding of how complex societies emerge and are maintained.              
              Mr. Walker also wants to develop new techniques both to excavate               
              and to interpret architectural remains such as kivas and his work              
              should set an example which may be applied in other parts of the               
              world. Finally, the project will assist in the training of a                   
              promising young scientist.
