Title       : CAREER: Association of Pathogens with Wastewater Particles-Impact on the
               Biological Quality of Post-Disinfected Wastewater Effluents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0092312

Award Number: 0092312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Loge floge@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The performance of a disinfection system in wastewater secondary effluents is
              typically evaluated by measuring the response of a targeted organism to various
              doses of the applied disinfectant. Coliform bacteria are the most widely used
              indicator of disinfection performance in the United States and their surviving
              numbers form the basis for most discharge permits. At low doses of the applied
              disinfectant, the response of the targeted organism (typically coliform)
              follows first-order kinetics. Deviations from first-order kinetics are commonly
              observed in secondary or tertiary wastewater effluents at moderate to high
              doses of the applied disinfectant. Deviations at moderate to high doses, herein
              referred to as tailing, are characterized by a reduced rate of inactivation of
              the targeted organism with increasing values of the applied
              disinfectant.

The number of particles containing coliform bacteria has
              recently been demonstrated as a significant parameter influencing the
              performance of a disinfection system in the tailing region (Emerick et al .,
              1999b). For coliform bacteria to be a suitable indicator of the inactivation of
              other targeted organisms (e.g., bacterial and viral pathogens), the other
              targeted organism of interest would have to be associated at roughly the same
              frequency and in the same location within wastewater particles as coliform
              bacteria.  Additionally, the comparative efficiencies of various disinfectants
              are dependent on the ability of a particular disinfectant to penetrate into
              wastewater particles.

The overall objective of this proposal is to couple
              novel and innovative research in public health engineering with a comprehensive
              educational program. 

The strategic plan for the integration of research and
              education is a multi-faceted approach that couples research with outreach and
              educational activities, as well as outreach activities with education. Outreach
              activities will focus on developing collaborative partnerships with research
              centers, national laboratories, industry, and government agencies for
              participating in educational endeavors, exchanging research ideas, and the
              field implementation of research findings. Findings from the proposed research
              will be transferred to the appropriate industry counterparts, including
              municipalities and their consultants, to aid in the design and optimization of
              upstream treatment processes to improve the performance of downstream
              disinfection systems.  The recipients of the outreach activities will then be
              brought into the classroom to provide a practical and hands-on perspective of
              how research activities are incorporated by local, state, and national agencies
              and organizations into current industrial and environmental problems.  In this
              manner, the recipients of outreach from the proposed research will serve in an
              advisory role to evaluate the success of the strategic plan implemented by the
              PI for the integration of research and education. The educational plan will be
              continually updated and modified based on comments received from the advisory
              panel.

