Title       : Computational Models of Space in Navigation and Other Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0092605

Award Number: 0092605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric L. Chown echown@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research will explore computer algorithms capable of the same sorts of
              spatial reasoning demonstrated by humans.  The models constructed will in turn
              further a deeper understanding of how humans process space and how that
              processing is sensitive to different kinds of domains.  The PI has proposed a
              model of cognitive mapping called PLAN (Prototypes, Locations, and Associative
              Networks) which has been partially implemented on an advanced mobile robot.  
              This project will develop versions of the PLAN architecture that can be
              implemented on low cost robots using off-the-shelf technology.  The goal is to
              develop a general-purpose spatial architecture independent of implementation
              details such as pattern recognition.   Such an architecture should be
              applicable to non-visual environments as well (e.g., music), and even to
              completely abstract domains.   The algorithms developed in the proposal will be
              aimed at constructing a general methodology for parsing complex domains into
              generic spatial structures in a fashion similar to how humans break up
              large-scale spaces into smaller regions.  Humans appear to rely on special
              places called "gateways" to provide clues as to how to parse environments and
              the gateway structure has the capability of generalizing even to abstract
              domains.  In music, for example, long pauses serve as a kind of gateway
              denoting a change in movements.  The PI, who first introduced the gateway
              construct, has proposed that the kinds of gateways found in an environment can
              significantly impact human performance within the environment.  A deeper
              understanding of this relationship will impact the evaluation and design of
              environments ranging from music to web sites to courses.  The research will
              take place at an undergraduate liberal arts college, and will provide students
              with the opportunity to participate in advanced research and to gain hands-on
              experience with robots.


