Title       : CAREER: A Statistical Framework For Reconstructing 3D Manifolds From Range Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0092065

Award Number: 0092065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225262             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross T. Whitaker whitaker@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Title --- CAREER:  A Statistical Approach to Estimating 3D Manifolds From Range
              
Data

PI --- Ross T. Whitaker

Institution --- University of
              Utah


This project addresses the question of how to automatically generate
              3D 
computer models of objects and scenes using data from a range finding
              
device, such as a laser range scanner, sonar, ultrasound, or radar.  Such
              
3D computer models are important in a wide range of applications including
              
defense surveillance, forensics, teaching, and medicine.  Range measuring
              
devices typically sweep a beam of energy to gather many millions of 3D
              
measurements from surfaces of objects but they have some limitations. 
              
First, because not all object are visible from a single point of view, a
              
single sweep is incomplete.  Second, each individual range measurement is
              
not necessarily accurate because the measurement process is inherently
              
noisy.  The strategy is to systematically fuse together many measurements
              
from different points of view in order to create accurate, complete 3D
              
models.  This project examines some of the fundamental mathematical
              
questions pertaining to this process and then studies how to implement and
              
demonstrate this theory on real data.

Range-finding devices measure
              distances to objects by reflecting energy off 
of the interfaces between
              different types of materials, but they provide a 
noisy, mathematically
              complex, and highly nonlinear transformation from a 
collection of surfaces to
              a set 2D depth maps.  This project will develop 
statistical methods for
              estimating manifolds from this kind of data, 
thereby generalizing the current
              state of the art in estimation theory, 
which is primarily concerned with
              estimating functions or fields.  Thus, 
the goal is to provide a general,
              complete, and practical foundation for 3D 
surface reconstruction.  The
              strategy is to find the surface that maximizes 
the posterior probability
              conditional on a collection of range measurements 
taken from different points
              of view.  The reconstruction framework is 
Bayesian; it includes a sensor
              model as well as prior knowledge about the 
characteristics of the object or
              scenes being modeled.  This work will 
address a number of important issues
              pertaining to this statistical 
methodology for building 3D models, including
              better sensor models, 
high-order priors, fast and robust algorithms, and
              broader applications.  
These developments will comprise a fundamental
              scientific result: the 
generalization of the basic principles of estimation
              theory to the 
challenging and timely problem of 3D surface reconstruction.
