Title       : CAREER: Novel Environmentally-Benign Solders for Electronic Packaging:
               Thermomechanical Behavior and Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0092530

Award Number: 0092530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $493729             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikhilesh Chawla nikhilesh.chawla@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0092530
Chawla 

This CAREER program examines novel, environmentally benign
              solders in bulk form and at small length scales. The research plan includes
              experimental investigations coupled with computational modeling of the
              mechanical behavior and microstructure of promising Pb-Sn solder replacement
              alloys (Sn-Cu, Sn-Ag, and Sn-Ag-Cu). The role of evolution of microstructure,
              including coarsening of the solder microstructure and solder/substrate
              interactions, is examined with respect to the creep and thermal fatigue
              behavior. The evolution of microstructure is modeled using the novel,
              microstructure-integrated, Object Oriented Finite Element Method (OOF),
              recently developed at the National Institute for Standards and Technology
              (NIST).  Novel micromechanical testing techniques will be developed to
              characterize thermomechanical behavior at the solder ball level. Conventional
              FEM techniques, using accurately measured constitutive behavior derived from
              micromechanical testing, will be used to develop life prediction methodologies.
               In addition, an outreach program will be implemented through the Office for
              Minority Engineering Students (OMEP) and the Women in Science and Engineering
              (WISE) program at Arizona State University.  High school teachers will spend a
              summer in the PI's laboratory to gain experience with cutting edge research. 
              Also, part-time students from industry will take part in new and revised
              courses dealing with the subject of materials for electronic packaging,
              including physical and mechanical metallurgy of solders. 
%%%
Given the
              widespread use of Pb-Sn solder in the manufacture and assembly of circuit
              boards, the development and reliability of new Pb-free solders is crucial for
              the successful substitution of these materials in the electronic systems. The
              subject of Pb-free solders is of great interest to local companies such as
              Intel, Motorola, and Onsemiconductor and close interaction with industry is
              expected throughout the course of this career development program. It is
              believed that the education outreach effort will contribute to an increase in
              the number of undergraduate students majoring in materials science. This is
              particularly important given the high demand for engineers with materials
              backgrounds in the microelectronic packaging industry. 
***

