Title       : CAREER: Role of a Ubiquitous Odorant Receptor in Olfactory Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0092693

Award Number: 0092693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie B. Vosshall leslie@mail.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,1187,9177,9178,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, has an acute sense of smell that permits
              it to locate sources of food with great accuracy. Fruit flies strongly prefer
              fermenting fruit as a food source. The overall goal of this project is to
              understand how their olfactory system permits these insects to recognize and
              discriminate the vast number of odorants in the environment, and thereby locate
              their preferred food source. Proteins called odorant receptors are present in
              the nerve cells of the antenna, and these are thought to be responsible for
              relaying olfactory information from the outside world into the fly's brain.
              Each such nerve cell, or olfactory receptor neuron, expresses a different
              odorant receptor, permitting it to identify odorants in the environment.
              Interestingly, a single odorant receptor, called Or83b, is present in all
              olfactory receptor neurons. As such, its role is at odds with the antenna's
              function to distinguish among different odorants. This proposal asks what role
              this unique odorant receptor plays in the olfactory system of the fly. Will
              flies that lack this protein be unable to respond to olfactory stimuli?
              Knowledge gained from these experiments may prove to be useful in mitigating
              the effects of deleterious insects on the environment. Pest insects locate food
              crops and animal hosts largely through olfactory cues. Understanding the
              function of Or83b in Drosophila may result in strategies to control the
              olfactory behavior of deleterious insects that attack agricultural crops and
              act as human disease vectors. The education component of this CAREER award
              involves a course entitled Evolutionary Biology of Brain Morphology and
              Function, which targets pre-graduate students who come to the Rockefeller
              University campus under the auspices of the University's Science Outreach
              Program. The course will provide students with hands-on experience in molecular
              neurobiology, supplemented with outside lectures, and will ask if
              species-specific behavioral differences have a basis in brain morphology.



