Title       : CAREER: Cash and the Social Economy of the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation: Labor
               Allocations, Consumption, and Economic Development on the Periphery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0092527

Award Number: 0092527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Pickering Kathleen.Pickering@colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Pre-industrial indigenous societies organized economic production on a
              "subsistence" level, based on the family and different from that of
              market-based industrial capitalism. In the modern world culturally distinct
              indigenous societies move fluidly between institutions and transactions on both
              sides of the subsistence-market divide.  This Career project involves the
              ethnographic research of a young investigator at Colorado State University. 
              Research on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota will analyze how
              economic production occurs both in family networks and through market
              transactions. The project will investigate how households integrate the market
              and the social economy using methods of time allocation and ethnographic
              participant observation. The project will study consumption and social
              networks, cash requirements, responses to new economic opportunities, and the
              relationships of gender, class, race and ethnicity to build models of labor
              time allocation and household consumption. The data will allow hypotheses to be
              tested relating wage labor, gender and social networks.  Students from the
              University and Oglala Lakota College will work in teams to assist with the
              research.  
The research will advance our theoretical understanding of the
              subsistence-market distinction, will train students in research design and
              methods, will add to the skills of a young investigator, and will help local
              Lakota students to consider advanced studies at the university.

