Title       : CAREER: Surfactant Mixtures in Complex Environmental Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a0092995

Award Number: 0092995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374882             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tohren Kibbey kibbey@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1440,9150,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Overview. The work proposed here will combine research examining environmental
              interactions involving surfactant mixtures, complex environmental sorbents, and
              organic liquid mixtures, with an educational emphasis on developing abstract
              problem solving skills in undergraduate and graduate students. The research
              work will provide new knowledge with immediate direct application in design of
              new environmental remediation systems and understanding the fate of organic
              liquid contaminants in the environment. The educational portion of the proposed
              work will emphasize enhancing abilities of undergraduate and graduate
students
              in quantitative abstract problem solving - an essential skill.

Research
              Plan. The specific research focus of this work will be to provide a
              comprehensive examination of the interactions of complex surfactant mixtures in
              the environment, with emphasis on the impacts of low concentration surfactant
              mixtures on the movement and distribution of organic liquid contaminants in the
              subsurface.  When complex surfactant mixtures are present, individual
              components in the mixtures often have a disproportionate influence on the
              overall surfactant behavior. A quantitative understanding of mixed surfactant
              behavior in this context is essential to understanding the fate of organic
              chemicals in the environment. Experimental work conducted for this project will
              be combined with extensive numerical model development.

Educational Plan.
              The educational component of the work will focus on enhancing students'
              abilities in quantitative, abstract problem solving. This will be achieved
              through an integrated program of activities in undergraduate and graduate
              courses, coupled closely with the proposed research program. Seven specific
              activities will be implemented over the five year project period. In the
              undergraduate and graduate curricula, new educational units will be developed
              and implemented in four separate classes. The educational units will teach
              different aspects of general problem solving methods, targeted to the grade
              level and needs of students in
the class. Classes will be restructured to
              provide hands-on practice with quantitative abstract problem solving. New
              educational units will emphasize important problem-solving skills, such as
              checking answers, testing assumptions, and developing conceptual models.
              Activities with the investigator's research group will include student-led
              discussions of important problem-solving texts, hands-on model development
              workshops, and a student-led K-12 outreach program where graduate students
              supported by the project conduct problem-solving workshops with elementary and
              high school students.

