Title       : Louisiana EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a0092001

Award Number: 0092001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julio E. Lopez-Ferrao                   
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Khonsari   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gene A. D'Amour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry P. Draayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Doris L. Carver  (Project Director former)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Brd of Regents
	      150 Third Street, Suite 129
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708011302    504/342-4253

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of the Louisiana EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement
              project are focused on improving Louisiana R&D competitiveness, building
              partnerships among EPSCoR universities and establishing collaborations between
              the academic and private sectors.  To accomplish these objectives, Louisiana
              proposes the Micro/Nano Technologies for Advanced Physical, Chemical and
              Biological  Sensors Initiative.  Nine universities and several businesses,
              divided into three teams will collaborate to develop a multi-disciplinary
              research initiative within the state.  The universities will form a Research
              Consortium.  The member institutions are the University of New Orleans,
              Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Louisiana State University
              and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Tulane University, Xavier University,
              Southern University, Louisiana Tech University, Grambling University and the
              University of Louisiana at Monroe. 

The proposed scientific program of the
              three Consortium teams will focus on the design and fabrication of
              electromagnetic materials with enhanced properties using nanometer-scale
              material structures and ultra-thin films.  Team 1, Nanomaterials, will develop
              nano-scale functional materials that provide the critical building blocks
              enabling sensor technologies in integrated microsystems to be developed for
              rapid chemical processing and analysis.  Team 1 will fabricate and process
              nanomaterials in different environments for subsequent use by Teams 2 and 3. 
              Team 2, Microfabrication, will focus on integrated combinatorial, microscale
              systems for rapid (bio) chemical synthesis and materials discovery.  This team
              will collaborate with Team 1 to develop nanoscale materials and sensors that
              can be integrated into emerging microsystems and with Team 3 to develop
              nanoscale sensors and arrays for studying neural function.  Team 3, Neural
              Signaling, will address fundamental issues of cell-to-cell communication and
              inter-cellular communication using nanotechnology magnetoliposomes and novel
              microsensors.  This latter effort will expand the neurosciences capability of
              the biological education and research programs at Xavier University and of the
              Teams 2 and 3 participants.  

Video conferencing capabilities will enable
              monthly meetings of the Consortium participants.  In addition,
              multi-institutional courses will be offered via the existing video conferencing
              capabilities, allowing all institutions in the state to benefit from the
              Consortium's research. 

