Title       : CAREER: The Evolution of Social Capital in Field Settings: Experimental
               Measurements and Agent-Based Models of Convention Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a0092953

Award Number: 0092953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281428             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey P. Carpenter jpc@middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Traditionally economists have spent a lot of time studying the creation of
              capital.  In particular, the profession has been interested in the creation of
              physical capital (e.g machinery and other productive assets) and human capital
              (e.g. education).  However, as the study of economic issues becomes more
              interdisciplinary, investigators have become interested in how social forces
              (e.g. social norms) impact economic outcomes.   For example, one might ask how
              does the social norm of fairness, a concept appearing in most cultures but
              differently in each culture, interacts with economic institutions to form
              outcomes?  Historically, such questions have been largely ignored, but recent
              studies have begun accounting for the influence of social capital.  At the core
              of this concept are those characteristics of individuals including trust,
              trustworthiness, reciprocity, and generosity that make economic activity
              possible when it is hard to write and enforce contracts. 

Social capital can
              be defined as a kind of interpersonal grease lubricating economic transactions,
              but is hard to measure.  For example, what does it mean for one group to have
              twice as much trust as another?  As a result, social capital has not so far
              been widely accepted as important by policy makers.  My research seeks to:  1)
              develop new tools based on social-psychological experiments to make meaningful
              measurements of social capital; 2) undertake the measurement of social capital
              in five distinct field locations (Thailand, Vietnam, Japan, the United States,
              and Columbia) where participants are confronted with important economic
              dilemmas on a daily basis; and 3) investigate whether the decision rules used
              by people in important economic situations can be used in computer simulations
              to predict long-run behavioral patterns consistent with real economic outcomes.
              If so, such simulations would be useful for policy analyses that account for
              social capital.
