Title       : MRPG: Perceived Entitativity and Implicit Judgments of Group Members
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0092366

Award Number: 0092366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia L. Pickett cpickett@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People often encounter, observe, and interact with collections of other people.
              Such collections can vary in the extent to which they seem like single, unified
              entities. For example, a baseball team seems more group-like than an audience
              at a movie. The term "entitativity" is used to refer to the degree to which an
              aggregate possesses the features of a single, unified entity. This project
              examines the ways in which a group's degree of perceived entitativity affects
              the judgments that perceivers make about the group and its members. More
              specifically, the project looks at whether judgments of members are biased by
              the perceived entitativity of the group to which the members belong. Two
              studies test hypotheses regarding the role of perceived entitativity in the
              implicit judgments that are made of groups and group members. Study 1 tests the
              hypothesis that high perceived group entitativity increases the speed and
              likelihood of comparative judgments between group members. The expectations of
              coherence and unity that exist for highly entitative groups are predicted to
              lead to intragroup assimilation effects (perceiving group members as being more
              similar to each other than they really are), which can then facilitate
              comparative judgments along a focal dimension. Study 2 examines attentional and
              encoding biases produced by a group's perceived level of entitativity. It is
              proposed that expectations of high entitativity may lead perceivers to pay
              greater attention to shared versus non-shared features of group members. In
              addition, perceived entitativity may bias the encoding of new information about
              the group such that information that is consistent with perceivers'
              representation of the group (i.e., information that contributes to the belief
              that group members are similar and unified) will be more readily learned and
              retained in memory. By examining the role of perceived entitativity in group
              perception and judgment, it will be possible to gain greater understanding into
              both the conscious and non-conscious factors that influence perceivers'
              judgments of group members. This research also has implications for how
              higher-order social judgments of group members are formulated and the biases
              that may be present in these judgments.

