Title       : CAREER: Coordination Issues in Retail Operations Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0092482

Award Number: 0092482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer K. Ryan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9102,9146,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)project is to
              develop operations management models that incorporate issues such as product
              variety, product line selection and pricing.  Two problems will be considered: 
              assortment planning and product line selection.  In assortment planning, the
              retailer makes decisions regarding the number of styles of each product to
              offer and how much inventory to carry.  This problem is difficult because of
              the possibility of substitution between products.  Stochastic inventory models
              that incorporate demand substitution will be developed.  In the product line
              selection problem, the retailer must select a subset of products from a set of
              potential products and determine the price of each product.  This research will
              take a stochastic approach, assuming preferences of consumers are not known
              exactly.  For both problems, the research will start with stochastic models
              developed by the Principal Investigator.  These models will be extended to
              consider:  (1) shelf-space and/or inventory constraints; (2) demand rates that
              are a function of the level of product variety; (3) preferences that vary by
              market segment; and (4) tailers/manufacturer coordination.  The educational
              goal of this CAREER development plan is to expand the educational experiences
              of students to include issues of importance to the service sector, such as
              supply chain management.  The educational plan consists of three components:  a
              graduate course in supply chain management; graduate student research projects
              on the problems described;   and undergraduate research opportunities.

If
              successful, this research will lead to the development of models and decision
              rules for addressing the joint product line selection, pricing and inventory
              management problem.  These models will provide easily implementable decision
              rules that can be used by retailers to improve their management of product
              variety, allowing retailers to reduce inventory levels while satisfying a
              variety of customer preferences.  In addition, these models will  provide
              useful insights into the value of retailer/manufacturer coordination in
              managing product variety.

