Title       : CAREER: The Synthesis and Characterization of New Ferroelectric -
               Second-Harmonic Generating Oxide Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0092054

Award Number: 0092054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $533587             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Shiv Halasyamani psh@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is the synthesis and characterization of a new class of
              electro-photonic oxides. Enhanced electro-photonic materials behavior will be
              achieved through cooperative structural and electronic distortions. The primary
              emphasis will be on the  synthesis of new materials to include a new class of
              double perovskite compounds. The students involved in this research will be
              trained in solid-state techniques that will enable them to synthesize materials
              as both pure powders and single crystals.  In addition to the standard
              solid-state synthetic techniques, a radio-frequency induction furnace will be
              utilized to grow large (5mm) crystals of the new materials. The new materials
              will be structurally characterized by powder and single crystal X-ray
              diffraction. These diffraction measurements will provide the students with a
              solid foundation in crystallography and crystallographic techniques. Variable
              temperature powder X-ray diffraction measurements will be undertaken in order
              to investigate phase changes, as well as elucidate the structural changes that
              occur during a ferroelectric to paraelectric phase transition.  Once the
              materials have been structurally characterized, electro-photonic experiments
              will be performed. Second-harmonic generation and ferroelectric experiments
              will aid in deriving structure-property relationships. The relationships will
              impart to the students an understanding of materials properties with respect to
              synthesis and crystal structure. 
%%%
Electro-photonic compounds find uses in
              dynamic random access memories (DRAM), frequency doubling (SHG), and Pockels
              cells. This integrated research and education project will provide graduate
              students with a thorough education in solid state materials chemistry areas
              such as synthesis, diffraction, and physical property measurements. The
              students wil be highly competitive in the job market as these materials and
              materials characterization areas are of significant importance to the
              industrial community.  

