Title       : CAREER: Energy-Efficient Protocols for Multimedia Traffic in Ad Hoc Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0092986

Award Number: 0092986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398941             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harlan B. Russell hrussel@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9150,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Support for multiple quality-of-service (QOS) levels in mobile,
              distributed, packet radio
networks is required for many commercial wireless
              applications. Mobile radio networks (or ad
hoc networks) are required in
              situations where the network itself must be highly mobile and
where access to
              a fixed infrastructure of base stations is not available. To meet demands
              of
portability and low-power operation, it is desirable for a single ad hoc
              network to service the
traffic demands of a wide range of applications,
              including examples such as all-informed
multicast voice, real-time video,
              large file transfers, and interactive web browsing. Each class of
traffic has
              specific service requirements and these QOS levels must be provided from a
              mobile
and distributed network that operates with battery power only and with
              very limited bandwidth.
     The Wireless Communications Program at Clemson
              University has recognized that
strong interaction among different protocol
              layers in ad hoc radio networks is not only desirable
but in fact essential. A
              single protocol layer cannot guarantee a specific quality of service for
              a
traffic type, but there must be coordination among the routing, queuing,
              traffic scheduling,
congestion control, channel-access, and
              adaptive-transmission protocols. We have already
demonstrated that information
              from the physical and link layers can be effectively utilized by the
routing
              protocol to dramatically improve the end-to-end network performance and reduce
              the
total energy expended by the mobile radios. The proposed research and
              education plan is based
on our previous results that show that strong coupling
              among the protocol layers is vital for
wireless communications networks that
              must interconnect highly mobile users and link them
reliably to a fixed
              infrastructure. This career plan is structured to extend previous results
              through
collaborative research that is focused on the link and network layers,
              and to explore a new topic
area by applying the advances discovered in our
              previous work to new research into the
interaction between the network and
              transport layers.
     The proposed career plan is centered on both
              undergraduate and graduate student
participation. The topics are organized so
              that students with a range of experience levels can
make significant
              contributions. A key priority of the research plan is to include students with
              a
variety of career goals and motivate them to strive for the highest levels
              of scientific and
engineering excellence throughout their careers. Ample
              opportunities are planned to encourage
and develop promising undergraduate
              students to pursue graduate school. An important
component of the educational
              plan is to incorporate research tools in the classroom. Animation
tools that
              illustrate the performance of our distributed protocols have increased
              our
understanding our research and they will prove to be equally valuable in
              the classroom and
laboratory. Rather than simply reading about networking
              protocols in a textbook, students will
implement distributed protocols within
              a discrete event simulation program and see the
performance implications of
              the various protocols.
