Title       : Theoretical Studies in Chemical Kinetics and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0092628

Award Number: 0092628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $618000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolph A. Marcus ram@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rudolph Marcus of the California Institute of Technology is supported by the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to carry out theoretical
              research on chemical reaction rates and related problems in the areas of ozone
              formation, ion transfer, and electron transfer.  The unusual mass-independent
              isotope effect in ozone formation will be investigated, along with related
              experimentally observed pressure and temperature effects of the phenomenon. The
              recent theory of ion transfer across immiscible liquid-liquid interfaces will
              be further developed, along with theory for the approach of an ion to nano- and
              macro-surfaces, using the singular hydrodynamic behavior as a benchmark with
              comparison to available experiments and computer simulations.  Finally, work on
              electron transfers at semiconductor/liquid interfaces will be extended with the
              aim of obtaining a simple local analytical or quadrature expression.  This will
              provide a basis for examining existing phenomenological models, and enable
              testing of a perturbation approach for long-range electron transfer in DNA,
              plant photosystems, and other materials.  All of these theoretical studies are
              motivated by current experimental results. 

The outcomes from this
              theoretical project are expected to impact several scientific and technological
              disciplines. The isotope studies will lead to improved insights into chemical
              reactions in the earth's atmosphere and other planetary atmospheres. 
              Nanotechnology gains are expected with improved understanding of
              electrochemical processes.  This research also has implications for electronic
              device construction and the understanding of chemical corrosion.
