Title       : Sociocultural Variation in Models of Agency: Implications for Choice,
               Motivation, and Well-Being
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0092018

Award Number: 0092018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365564             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hazel R. Markus hmarkus@psych.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines cultural variation in the understandings, experience, and
              operation of human agency with a focus on models of agency. People everywhere
              regard themselves as agentic and have a sense of themselves as an "I" who is
              doing something, but what they experience themselves as doing can vary
              dramatically because they engage different models of agency. For those engaged
              in independent cultural contexts, agency is often experienced as individualized
              or disjoint, as primarily a result of one's own desires, goals, and intentions.
              For those in interdependent cultural contexts, agency is frequently experienced
              as conjoint, a consequence of the engagement of the person with others and of
              the awareness of reciprocal obligations and expectations. In this research, the
              focus is on the nature of the active "I" who is doing something. Although
              agency is often thought to be synonymous with autonomy and "free will", it is
              increasingly evident that agency assumes culture-specific forms. The project is
              organized around three specific hypotheses:

1. In relatively independent
              cultural contexts, actions will be associated with normatively good outcomes
              when one's own interests and intentions are experienced and understood as the
              source of these actions. In relatively interdependent cultural contexts,
              however, actions will be associated with normatively good outcomes when the
              interests and intentions of relevant others are experienced and understood as
              the sources of these actions.

2. Independent cultural contexts are
              characterized by the pervasive distribution of disjoint models of agency that
              promote and require a focus on one's own interests and intentions, whereas
              interdependent cultural contexts are characterized by the pervasive
              distribution of conjoint models of agency that promote and require a focus on
              the expectations of and obligations to others.

3. In relatively independent
              cultural contexts well-being is associated with a sense of disjoint agency,
              whereas in relatively interdependent contexts well-being is associated with a
              sense of conjoint agency.

The research addresses classic theoretical issues
              concerning freedom, responsibility, and the role of others in individual
              behavior. The results should have important implications for basic research on
              the mutual constitution of culture and psychological process, and for further
              analyzing the relationship between mental health and sociocultural context.

