Title       : CAREER: Phylogeny of Ciliates in the Class Phyllopharyngea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0092908

Award Number: 0092908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura A. Katz lkatz@science.smith.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9169,9251,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0092908
Laura A. Katz
   Dr. Laura Katz of Smith College (Northampton, MA)
              has been awarded a CAREER grant to explore evolutionary relationships among
              ciliate protozoa in the class Phyllopharyngea and teach principles in biology
              using a phylogenetic (evolutionary) framework, while encouraging students to
              develop broadly applicable skills in writing and oral presentation. Ciliates
              are a diverse group of microorganisms found free-living in a wide range of
              soil, freshwater, marine habitats as well as in association with numerous
              animals.  Unlike many plants and animals, which have well understood "family
              trees," the evolutionary relationships among ciliates are only beginning to be
              explored. Advances in molecular biological and genomic methods will enable
              these relationships to be determined for the first time.  This is essential for
              describing the biodiversity of microorganisms on earth, and for understanding
              the components of complex microbial communities that help to clean the water,
              purify the air, and sustain the biosphere.  
   The phyllopharyngeans are a
              vastly understudied group of ciliates; only a handful of classification systems
              based on cell structure exist, and there are virtually no genetic data on these
              organisms.  This proposal will identify members of this class and analyze
              relationships among the subclasses of phyllopharyngeans.  To accurately assess
              relationships, genealogies will be inferred using comparative analyses of DNA
              sequences from four genes (small subunit rRNA, alpha-tubulin, the largest
              subunit of the RNA polymerase II and histone H4).  The same markers will then
              be used to test the appropriateness of the classification of suctorians, one of
              the subclasses of phyllopharyngean, based on the mode of reproduction
              (budding).
   The CAREER plan also will use an evolutionary framework to teach
              principles of biology in the classroom and laboratory.  This comprehensive
              educational experience will provide undergraduate students with a basis in the
              'facts' while also stimulating them to develop and test hypotheses.  Testing
              hypotheses about the evolutionary relationships among ciliates will expose
              students to diverse techniques and theories.  The critical thinking, and
              training in written and oral skills in the educational plan will provide
              students with tools that carry beyond biology classes and school laboratory
              work, preparing them to make important contribuions in many facets of American
              society. 

