Title       : Structural Basis of Action of the CcrA Metallo-beta-lactamase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0092524

Award Number: 0092524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin W. Makinen makinen@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Makinene, Marvin W.
MCB-0092524

The structural basis of catalytic action of
              the class B, Zn2+-containing, CcrA metallo-beta-lactamase of Bacteroides
              fragilis will be assigned through an experimental approach employing
              cryoenzymology, electron nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) spectroscopy, and
              computer-assisted molecular modeling. Reaction intermediates of the CcrA
              metallo-beta-lactamase will be determined kinetically with use of cryokinetic
              methods, fluid organic-aqueous cryosolvent mixtures, and synthetic spin-labeled
              penicillin or cephalosporin substrates as spectroscopic probes.  Reaction
              intermediates will be stabilized for ENDOR data collection by freeze-quenching
              of the solution in a manner similar to that employed in freeze-quenching of
              protein crystals for cryo-crystallography.  Active site residues of wild type
              recombinant enzyme will be enriched with isotopes by hydrogen/deuterium
              exchange or biosynthetic incorporation of fluoro-tryptophan for ENDOR
              spectroscopy.  The principal hyperfine coupling components of isotopically
              labeled nuclei in active site residues and on the substrate will be measured by
              ENDOR to determine their through-space (dipolar) hyperfine coupling components
              and to estimate corresponding electron-nucleus distances. The dipolar
              electron-nucleus distances will be used as constraints to assign active site
              structure and substrate conformation by computer assisted molecular graphics
              analysis. To assign the structural roles of the active site Zn2+ ions and of
              metal-coordinated water, paramagnetic Zn2+/Co2+ and Zn2+/Cd2+-hybrid enzymes
              will be used. The Co2+-center will serve not only as the paramagnetic site for
              determining the presence of inner-sphere coordinated water through use of H217O
              but also as a chemical probe to identify metal-linked ionizations governing
              kcat and kcat/KM. By determining substrate conformation, active site structure,
              and metal ion coordination geometry in a reaction intermediate of the CcrA
              enzyme, correlated with the pH profiles of steady-state kinetic parameters to
              assign metal-linked ionizations, the mechanism of the enzyme catalyzed reaction
              will be determined and the chemical and structural roles of the Zn2+ ions and
              metal-coordinated solvent will be assigned.

The ENDOR methods have been
              shown to yield estimates of electron-nucleus distances with less than 5%
              uncertainty in the 3-11 A range for nitroxyl spin-labels and in the 3-8A range
              for VO2+.  The catalytically competent structure of the active site of the
              enzyme will be assigned through molecular graphics analysis constrained by
              ENDOR determined electron-nucleus distances. The combined results will lead to
              a detailed understanding of the structural and chemical roles of the active
              site binuclear metal ion cluster in the hydrolysis of beta-lactam antibiotics
              catalyzed by the CcrA beta-lactamase and how the mechanism of the bi-nuclear
              metallo-beta-lactamases differs from that of their serine hydrolase
              counterparts. 


