Title       : CAREER: Tools and Research to Advance the Use of Strut-and-Tie Models in
               Education and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0092668

Award Number: 0092668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Kuchma kuchma@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The Strut-and-Tie Method (STM) is an emerging and rational design procedure that
              has the potential to revolutionize the way that engineers design
              D-(Discontinuity) Regions in structural concrete.  D-Regions are those portions
              of a structure in which there is a complex variation in strain, such as in
              joints, corbels, and deep beams, as well as in regions near a concentrated
              force, opening or another discontinuity.  This research project will consist of
              three activities that are focused on overcoming barriers that stand in the way
              of the STM's advance in the educational and practicing communities.  (i)
              Much-needed experimental research will be conducted to help assess the
              dimensions, stiffness, and strength characteristics of struts, ties, and nodes.
               (ii) A computer-based design program will be developed that eliminates the
              cumbersome design tasks of making repetitive calculations of truss geometry,
              member dimensions, and stress values.  (iii) Educational resources will be
              created to aid teachers, students, and practitioners in the understanding and
              use of this unfamiliar design methodology.  The results of this research will
              be disseminated on a project web site
              www.ce.uiuc.edu/kuchma/strut&tiehttp://www.ce.uiuc.edu/kuchma/strut%26tie. 
              Through the advance of the STM, students and engineers will be able to design
              all types of D-Regions by simply focusing on the flow of forces in a truss. 
              This will result in the construction of more reliable and efficient D-Regions
              in our civil infrastructure.
