Title       : SGER: Separation of Polyethylene Wear Debris Found in Synovial Fluid Generated
               from Total Joint Prostheses Using Bio-Ferrography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0092944

Award Number: 0092944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54801              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna M. Meyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9104,9161,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0092944
Meyer
The orthopedic community would benefit from knowing the ratio of
              the various constituents contained in the synovial fluid of patients with total
              hip and knee replacements before the onset of complications leading to revision
              surgery. Aspirating the joints of patients with indications is recommended most
              specifically prior to revision surgery. It is the aspirate from these patients
              that will be used as the basis for the proposed set of experiments. The ratios
              of the constituents to each other may be used by physicians as one of several
              tools in the decision whether to perform revision surgery. There may also be
              instances in which surgery will not be recommended based in part on the
              particulate ratios, in which case benefits to both the patient and the economy
              may be realized.  The clinical relevance would be that the surgeon now has a
              quasi-inside look at the prosthesis before surgery, offering some information
              about what area(s) of the implant may require revision. This is not information
              that can be readily seen in x-rays or by other visual means. 

An SGER award
              supports research to examine the feasibility of using a technique called
              Bio-Ferrography to separate the various types of wear particles which form in
              total hip and knee replacements as they wear.  The PI has access to a unique
              collection of over one hundred well-documented samples of synovial fluid
              aspirate which has been obtained from total hip and knee replacements prior to
              revision surgery. The primary wear particles are ultra high molecular weight
              polyethylene (UHMWPE) from the acetabular cup, metal particles such as
              stainless steel or cobalt-cromium-molybdenum from the femoral head, particles
              of bone cement used for fixation of the prostheses at the bone/implant
              interface, and bone particulate itself.   The particles will be tagged with
              magnetic tagging molecules which make it possible to sort them by the magnetic
              field  in the bio-ferrograph.  Identification of suitable tagging molecules,
              sorting of the particles by material and size, and relating the nature and
              amount of wear particles to observations made of the worn joint during and
              after surgery will be the main components of the study.
***


