Title       : CAREER: Dispersive Waves in Nonlinear Media: Dynamics and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0092682

Award Number: 0092682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose Nathan Kutz kutz@amath.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0092682
Mathematical Sciences: CAREER: Dispersive
              Waves in Nonlinear Media: Dynamics and Applications

Abstract

0092682
              Kutz

The study of dispersive waves and their dynamics and stability in
              nonlinear media is fundamental in applications arising from nonlinear optics
              and mean-field theories in atomic physics.  The presence of nonlinearity often
              requires a combination of asymptotic and perturbation methods, scientific
              computation, and rigorous mathematical analysis to achieve a solid mathematical
              framework for understanding a given physical system.  By direct collaboration
              with both industrial partners and members of the physics and electrical
              engineering academic community, quantitative models for the nonlinear optics
              and atomic systems of interest will be developed based upon first principles. 
              These models will be studied in appropriate parameter regimes where simplified
              nonlinear dynamical systems theory can be applied. The results will then be
              recast in terms of their original experimental context so that the theoretical
              predictions can be tested, verified, and modified as necessary.  The specific
              applications of interest concern optical parametric oscillators, optical fiber
              lasers and devices, and Bose-Einstein condensates.  All these systems exhibit a
              stable evolution of nonlinear pulses, fronts, and periodic wavetrains. 
              

This research in mathematical modeling and analysis addresses three classes
              of important problems.  With rapidly developing materials and devices,
              nonlinear optics remains at the forefront of enabling technologies for
              communications and information systems. Of primary importance is the
              stabilization of optical pulses.  This research aims to provide a general
              description of the stability of pulses in a wide variety of lasers and devices
              where nonlinearity plays a key role.  Optical parametric oscillators have
              tremendous potential application for tunable coherent radiation, pattern
              recognition, and optical information processing.  This work will establish
              regions of control for the pulse and front structures in these optical devices,
              facilitating practical implementation of the technology.  Bose-Einstein
              condensates, which have been only recently realized experimentally, are
              expected to have applications in quantum logic and matter-wave transport. 
              Trapping the condensate and sustaining it for long time periods are fundamental
              for making the Bose-Einstein condensates a viable technology. This research
              will focus on various periodic trap configurations that can stabilize the
              condensate in both attractive and repulsive states. 

