Title       : CAREER: Timed Streams: Infrastructure, Applications, and Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0092669

Award Number: 0092669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki E. Jones jones@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   One of the primary, and often the most important, goals of any computer
              system is good performance. So it is for communication networks-throughput is
              the primary evaluator and impetus for new network research and development.  In
              this proposal, we identify a new paradigm for thinking about distributed
              algorithms that exploits a shift in the engineering environment, the
              availability of high-precision globally synchronous clocks with cheap hardware.
               Many research projects are investigating the limits of precision and uses of
              precise time for traditional, e.g., operating system, algorithms.  We propose
              to build on this research, focusing on improved performance of
              application-level algorithms and targeting distributed, real-time databases
              support for e-commerce applications.                                           
                                                                            The career
              development plan outlined in this proposal focuses on the principal
              investigator's efforts to integrate core research and educational objectives. 
              The research project addresses a number of important issues in the discovery
              and analysis of precise time-based algorithms for distributed, real-time
              systems.  The ultimate goal of the proposed work is and estimate of the benefit
              of precise globally synchronous time for a wide variety of applications.  The
              objective is to not only develop and analyze new time based network protocols,
              but to characterize the impact of globally synchronous time on distributed
              algorithms in general.  to achieve this, we introduce the concept of a timed
              stream and propose to investigate how to best implement and use timed streams
              to achieve high performance distributed, real-time applications.               
                                        The educational component is closely related to the
              research plan.  Students at the undergraduate and graduate level, as well as
              industrial participants, will use the software produced and data gathered
              during the research activities detailed in this proposal.  The tools (e.g., new
              Web server technology) will serve as a research engine to collect performance
              data for the purpose of performance-based analysis of distributed algorithms. 
              The education plan also includes development of e-commerce curriculum and
              courses, integrating the proposed research at all levels, and using the basic
              scientific principles of the research, as well as the PI's enthusiasm, to
              encourage young (K-12) scientists.
