Title       : Studies on the Chemistry of Platinum Group Element Complexes Relating to
               Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0092446

Award Number: 0092446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Eisenberg rse7@chem.chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division is supporting Dr. Richard Eisenberg, Chemistry Department,
              University of Rochester, for research on the chemistry of platinum group
              element complexes relating to homogeneous catalysis and bond activation. Part
              one of the project is a series of mechanistic studies involving applications of
              parahydrogen induced polarization (PHIP) to new organometallic systems. This
              method can permit the detection of new hydride intermediates and may help
              elucidate the mechanism of hydrogen addition. The activation of hydrogen by
              oxidative addition to a variety of metal centers will be investigated,
              including rhodium and iridium complexes capable of intramolecular C-H and C-C
              activation and early transition metal hydrides. The addition of hydrogen to
              metal-nonmetal multiple bonds contained in alkylidene, alkylidyne, imido and
              sulfido complexes will also be studied in an effort to provide proof for a
              concerted 4-center addition. Catalytic reactions that will be investigated by
              PHIP include asymmetric hydrogenation and hydroformylation. Part two of the
              project focuses on the bond activation and catalytic reactions of
              organometallic systems that exhibit electrophilic or radical character.
              Cationic diphosphine complexes of Ir(III) and complexes with specifically
              designed tetradentate ligands will be synthesized. These complexes will have
              two adjacent labile sites for substrate binding, activation, and coupling.
              Related electrophilic complexes of Pt and Pd with new diimine and diamine
              ligands will also be studied. These and related complexes will be screened for
              reactivity in reactions that include H/D exchange, isomerizations, C-H bond
              activation, and olefin polymerization. Bond activation by odd electron
              complexes will be studied with new d7 Rh(II) and Ir(II) Schiff base complexes
              that contain tetradentate N and S donor ligands. The metalloradical reactions
              that will be studied most extensively are those involving C-H activation of
              methane, toluene, alkanes, and zylenes, and radical driven polymerizations. A
              program of research on the chemistry of platinum group element compounds
              relating to homogeneous catalysis and bond activation will be conducted.
              

Platinum group element complexes include the most widely used catalysts in
              industry today, and developments in the past decade, particularly with regard
              to asymmetric catalysis and polymerization catalysis, suggest that this role
              will increase in the future. This program will advance our understanding of the
              fundamental transformations that take place at the metal and will help in the
              design of new important catalysts for the chemical and pharmaceutical
              industry.

