Title       : CAREER: Relating Micellar Structure to Aggregate Properties in Polymerization of
               Wormlike Micelles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0092967

Award Number: 0092967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn M. Walker lwalker@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0092967
Carnegie-Mellon
Lynnm Walker

I have three career
              goals; to develop an active research program aimed at answering fundamental
              questions about the dynamics of complex fluids and the influence of those
              dynamics on macroscopic phenomena, to develop a strong complex fluid rheology
              and polymer processing component in the chemical engineering curriculum at
              Carnegie Mellon, and to develop strong links between local industry and the
              undergraduate and graduate programs in an effort to expose students to the
              types of problems faced by the polymer processing and complex fluids
              industries.  Carnegie Mellon provides an optimal environment for me to develop
              these research and education goals through its variety of
interdisciplinary
              research and education programs.  I provide the rheology expertise to the
              Center for Complex Fluid Engineering (CFE) research center and Colloids,
              Polymers and Surfaces (CPS) education program.

In this proposal, an exciting
              extension of current work on micelle dynamics in my research group to the
              polymerization of wormlike surfactant assemblies is outlined.  The
              polymerization of counterions condensed on the surface of wormlike micelles (or
              surfactant aggregates) offers a novel approach to the formation of anisotropic
              nano-particles in solution.  These cylindrical particles have radii of a few
              nanometers and lengths ranging from a few to hundreds of nanometers.  The
              amphiphilic nature of these polyelectrolyte-surfactant aggregates allows them
              to solubilize hydrophobic compounds into aqueous media.  This property is vital
              for applications in detergency, drug delivery, separations and water
              purification. The novel feature arising from the length of these anisotropic
              particles is that they have the potential to act as rheological modifiers, be
              cross-linked to form amphiphilic gels and to form liquid crystalline or higher
              order phases when concentrated.  None of these potential applications can be
              realized without the ability to control the morphology of the nanoparticles
              through reaction.  The hypothesis that drives the proposed research is that
              that counterion composition can be used to control the structure of wormlike
              micelle solutions and that control can be utilized to generate novel high
              aspect ratio polymer-surfactant aggregates through polymerization of
              counterions.  The goal is a quantitative understanding of the relationship
              between counterion composition of wormlike micelle systems and properties of
              the polymerized aggregates.  Secondary goals of the research are investigations
              of the feasibility of controlling polyelectrolyte structure and ionomeric
              copolymer composition using this mechanism and the development of a series of
              novel charged, anisotropic nanoparticles for colloidal and structural
              studies.

Carnegie Mellon is clearly committed to excellence in education and
              I strive to continue that trend. In all courses, I stress the application of
              fundamentals to modern engineering problems and expose students to the
              computational tools necessary to enter into the chemical engineering field.  A
              specific educational goal is to utilize my background in complex fluid rheology
              and polymer processing to fill that gap in the curriculum.  I am incorporating
              polymer processing and rheology into the curriculum through undergraduate
              laboratory modules, development of advanced courses and undergraduate research
              .  I am exposing undergraduate chemical engineering students to industrial
              polymer processing through industrial links for the laboratory modules and, in
              my own laboratory, through industry-driven undergraduate research projects.

