Title       : CAREER: Theory of Moduli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0092165

Award Number: 0092165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandor J. Kovacs kovacs@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator studies problems in algebraic geometry related to families of
              higher dimensional varieties. The main goal of the project is to find good
              definitions of compact moduli functors, with special regard to the moduli
              theory of surfaces. As part of the moduli theory project special efforts are
              devoted to reflexive sheaves and their behavior with respect to morphisms in an
              effort to develop a theory that includes many results for reflexive sheaves of
              rank 1 that are similar to results already known for line bundles. This is very
              important in order to develop a moduli theory of singular varieties, which in
              turn is essential for geometrically meaningful compact moduli spaces. Another
              problem the investigator is studying is generalizations of Shafarevich's
              conjecture and its applications to the case of higher dimensional bases, in
              particular the problem of boundedness and rigidity for families of varieties of
              general type.This research is in the field of algebraic geometry, one of the
              oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one that blossomed to the point where
              it has solved problems that have stood for centuries. Originally, and still in
              its simplest form it treats figures defined in the plane by polynomials. Today,
              the field uses methods not only from algebra, but also from analysis and
              topology, and conversely it is extensively used in those fields. Moreover it
              has proved itself useful in fields as diverse as physics, theoretical computer
              science cryptography, coding theory and robotics. A central problem in
              algebraic geometry is the classification of all geometric objects. In turn an
              important part of classification theory is the theory of moduli. The latter's
              core idea is that one does not only want to understand these objects, but also
              understand the way they can be deformed. Moduli spaces play a very important
              role in theoretical physics. Studying curves on moduli spaces provides
              information on how an object is changing in space-time. This project focuses on
              compact moduli spaces. Those are extensions of moduli spaces in general and
              they give additional information about singular deformations, ones that are
              essentially different from others. Presently the existence of compact moduli
              spaces is known for low dimensional problems. The investigator is studying the
              higher dimensional case. As part of the project, but somewhat independent of
              the above, the investigator and his graduate students are running a website
              that works as a forum for graduate students and young researchers in algebraic
              geometry. Users of this website can pose questions that are likely to be known
              to experts but not available in the literature. The main goal of this project
              is to open a new venue for a larger number of students to access the knowledge
              of experts in the field helping to achieve a more equal opportunity
              environment. In addition, the collected database provides references to results
              that are too "small" to occupy an entire article, but too important to ignore,
              as well as a collection of potential research problems for graduate students. 
