Title       : CAREER: Program in Quantitative Pulmonary Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a0092758

Award Number: 0092758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Reinhardt joe-reinhardt@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0092758
Reinhardt
Modern medical imaging scanners can acquire high-resolution
              multi-dimensional data sets of the human body. These data sets can be analyzed
              to non-invasively study anatomic structure and measure regional physiologic
              function.  There is a growing need for well-trained medical imaging engineers
              with a background in human anatomy and physiology, engineering, and biomedical
              computing, and who are familiar with the unique problems encountered when
              acquiring and processing large image data sets.

This proposal describes a
              long-term career development plan focused on strengthening the curriculum,
              educational environment, and research program in medical imaging in the
              Department of Biomedical Engineering at the University of Iowa.  The research
              aims of this proposal are to develop a comprehensive suite of software tools
              for pulmonary image analysis and use these tools to evaluate regional lung
              mechanical behavior and lung tissue material properties.  By detecting unusual
              mechanical behavior or abnormal tissue material properties, we hope to detect
              early disease and track the progression of disease over time.  These tools can
              be applied to disease processes such as lung cancer, emphysema, and chronic
              obstructive pulmonary disease.

The educational objectives of this work are
              to actively involve undergraduate students in medical imaging research, and
              enhance the undergraduate and graduate medical imaging curriculum by
              introducing new courses focused on developing well-qualified medical imaging
              engineers and image processing software programmers.  Top-notch undergraduate
              biomedical engineers will work for an extended period on a pulmonary imaging
              research project.  This will be a unique opportunity for undergraduates to have
              a focused, "hands-on" experience in medical imaging research.  Proposed
              curricular changes include the development of a new, required undergraduate
              core course on biomedical imaging, and the introduction of a new graduate
              elective course covering advanced topics in medical image processing.




