Title       : SGER: Laser-Guided Direct Writing of Multipotent Adult Stem Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0092810

Award Number: 0092810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99063              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Odde oddex002@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0092810
Odde
Optical forces provide a means of noncontact manipulation of
              microscopic particles, but their full potential in microfabrication and
              engineering applications has not been realized.  A likely reason is that
              microfabrication with an optical trap is tedious, requiring repeated cycles of
              particle capture and deposition on a surface.  An alternative approach is to
              user laser-guided direct writing, a technique invented by the principal
              investigator and Dr. Mike Renn (Optomec Design Company) that uses a weakly
              focused laser beam to generate a steady flow of particles that are optically
              guided along the beam axis.  When the beam is directed toward a target surface,
              the optically guided particles are deposited on the surface with each particle
              piling on top of the previously deposited ones.  By translating the beam axis
              relative to the target surface, a steady line of particles is effectively
              "written" on the surface.  This process, called laser-guided direct writing
              (LGDW), has been used by the principal investigator and Dr. Renn to optically
              deposit a wide range of materials including electronic materials, optical
              materials, and living cells with particle sizes ranging from 100 nm to 10 mm. 
              This novel fabrication microfabrication technique is now being applied to
              microelectronics fabrication by Dr. Renn and co-works at Optomec Design
              Company.  However, LGDW can be equally well applied to biotechnology an this
              project will use LGDW to address key issues in tissue engineering.

A major
              objective of tissue engineering is to reconstitute in vitro the well-defined
              three-dimensional organization of multiple cell types that is characteristic of
              native organs, which in turn tends to promote more native-like function in
              engineered organ equivalents.  However, no method currently available permits
              arbitrary three-dimensional patterning of multiple cell types with single cell
              positioning precision.  Based on the recent work of the principal investigator
              and Dr. Renn where arbitrary two-dimensional patterns of ~100 embryonic chick
              spinal cord cells were directly written on glass substrates, it appears that
              LGDW has this capability.  At the same time, rapid advances are being made in
              the use of stem cells for tissue engineering applications.  At the University
              of Minnesota, Professor Catherine Verfaillie (Department of Medicine) has
              developed a procedure for isolating multipotent adult stem cells (MASCs). 
              These bone marrow-derived cells are then differentiated into a wide range of
              cell types including muscle cells, neurons, epithelial cells, and endothelial
              cells.  In addition, these cells are derived from humans, thus obviating the
              need for animal or human embryonic/fetal tissue.  A key issue in effectively
              developing this application is the proper spatial and temporal induction of
              differentiation in a cell culture environment.  In particular, to achieve the
              required functions of the engineered tissue, it will be necessary to
              recapitulate the native tissue architecture.  To develop a microfabrication
              approach to achieve this goal, the proposed research will investigate the use
              of LGDW for two-dimensional patterning of MASCs and determination of MASC
              viability after guidance as a function of wavelength, intensity, and duration
              of exposure used for patterning.  These studies will explore the application of
              LGDW beyond the current microelectronics applications to encompass stem cell
              technology, one of the most promising areas of biomedical research.


