Title       : Acquisition of Electrical Impedance Analyzer for the ASU Geological Sciences
               Mineral and Rock Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a0092412

Award Number: 0092412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35688              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Tyburczy jim.tyburczy@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0092412 
Tyburczy 

This grant provides partial support for the costs of
              acquiring an electrochemical impedance analysis system for the Mineral and Rock
              Physics Laboratory at Arizona State University (ASU).  The PI is Professor of
              Geology at Arizona State University and will utilize this equipment for studies
              of the electrical properties of earth materials.   

Magnetotellurics and
              geomagnetic depth sounding have revealed zones of anomalously high electrical
              conductivity in a variety of crustal and mantle environments.  In order to
              properly invert and interpret magnetotelluric response functions, the
              electrical response of Earth materials over a suitable frequency range must be
              determined in the laboratory.  The equipment purchased will consist of an
              impedance analysis system consisting of a frequency response analyzer (FRA), a
              potentiostat, a personal computer and specialized software for data
              acquisition/control and data analysis/modeling.  The equipment will be
              interfaced with a high temperature gas mixing furnace, with a  multiple anvil
              high pressure device, and with other types of furnaces and pressure vessels. 
              Studies to be pursued with this equipment include 1) the influence of melt
              composition and texture at low melt fraction on the bulk electrical properties
              of partially molten systems 2)  effects of combined pressure and temperature on
              electrical properties of anhydrous minerals and rocks of the crust and mantle,
              and 3) the influence of hydrogen in hydrous and nominally anhydrous minerals on
              electrical properties.   The results will be interpreted in terms of equivalent
              electrical circuits that can be related to models of ionic processes.  The
              results of these studies will be important for the interpretation and modeling
              of magnetotelluric data and will also shed new light on physical transport
              processes in a variety of geological environments.  The ultimate benefits will
              be more detailed understanding of the temperature profile and physical state of
              matter at depth in the Earth's interior.

***

