Title       : CAREER: Development of Reactor Systems for Treatment of Non Point Source
               Pollution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0092921

Award Number: 0092921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrienne T. Cooper coopera@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1179,1187,9150,9187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The traditional model for engineering is finding an efficient solution to
              specific problems, with the human consumer as the focus and economics as the
              primary driving force. This model often leads to a reductionist approach
              toproblems and fails to take into account factors that lead to sustainable
              solutions. Sustainability requires the consideration of longer-term effects
              from multiple points of view, environmental, social and economic. The effective
              engineer is capable of bringing together these resources and combining them
              with technical innovations to provide solutions that will last and do no harm
              to the generations to follow.

Remediation and destruction of persistent
              pollutants, development and use of renewable energy sources and resources, and
              development of processes and system that significantly reduce or altogether
              prevent pollution are three of the primary requirements for environmental
              sustainability. Social sustainability requires both justice and consideration
              of the cultures of concern. In order to obtain economic sustainability a
              process or system must exhibit long term profitability or at minimum, no
              considerable loss of income or negative effect on the quality of life for the
              persons and/or entities involved. These issues must be considered in a holistic
              framework and problems must be approached systemically. While these
              considerations and requirements are not inclusive, they provide a good starting
              point for dealing with the issues of sustainability.

The goal of this study
              is to evaluate the efficacy of solar photochemical treatment, including
              electrically enhanced photochemical treatment, for such applications, with
              emphasis on stormwater runoff and septic systems. The overall goal of the
              proposed education activities is to provide opportunities at the University of
              South Carolina for pre-college, undergraduate and graduate students to learn
              about sustainability and develop an understanding of necessary
              multidisciplinary concepts. Particular emphasis will be placed on students in
              civil and environmental engineering.

This research program will consist of
              four phases. In the first phase, the concentration will be on the development
              of an immobilized catalyst that is easy to prepare, inexpensive and can act as
              an anode for electrochemical reactions.  Laboratory and solar simulation
              studies will be used in the second phase to evaluate the effect of electric
              field enhancement on the photochemical process and determine kinetic
              parameters. A series of experiments will be conducted in various flow regimes,
              plug-flow, batch and completely mixed flow, using model contaminants resulting
              in kinetic flow models. Reactor design will take place in the third phase. The
              two or three most promising reactor schemes, selected based on the kinetic flow
              model, will be designed built, tested and optimized.  One of the reactor
              designs of phase several will be selected for the pilot evaluations in the
              fourth and final phase.

