Title       : CAREER: Role of Spatiotemporal and Identity Continuity in Object Constancy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0092480

Award Number: 0092480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne P. Hillstrom hillstrom@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Philosophers, artists, and scientists for centuries have thought about how
              people organize the continuous flow of information reaching our sensory organs
              into discrete, individuated perceptual objects.  As advances have been made in
              understanding vision, this topic has reemerged in cognitive psychology,
              artificial intelligence, and neuroscience.  An object is individuated when the
              observer (1) perceives its features as belonging to a connected unit, (2)
              perceives its features as separate from things that are not part of the object,
              and (3) perceives that it is or is not something that was present sometime in
              the recent or distant past.  An object that is believed to be the same even
              when it undergoes changes exhibits what is called object constancy.  Much of
              what we know about object individuation and constancy in adult perception has
              been based on self-report methods.  This research will explore the nature of
              object individuation and object constancy in tasks in which observers are
              attending to an object but are unlikely to be reasoning about its individuality
              or constancy.  The research will employ a variety of tasks that have been
              developed in recent years to demonstrate ways in which attention to objects
              differs from attention to the space that objects occupy.  The research will
              determine whether attention to objects is affected by disruptions to identity
              continuity or spatiotemporal continuity (i.e., the degree to which it is
              consistently present and moves through space in a physically possible way).  By
              exploring which discontinuities disrupt attention to objects, the research will
              establish which continuities are critical to object constancy.  In real scenes,
              spatiotemporal and identity discontinuity rarely are independent of each other.
               In contrast, this research will take advantage of media special effects that
              can dissociate them.  For example, spatiotemporal discontinuity will sometimes
              be accomplished by an identifiable object disappearing unexpectedly and
              reappearing abruptly, and identity discontinuity will sometimes be accomplished
              by one object morphing smoothly into another.  One part of the project will
              build on previous findings that once one part of an object is attended, it is
              easier to detect a subsequently presented target feature when it is elsewhere
              within the attended object rather than equidistant from the attended location
              but in another object.  This project will investigate what disrupts this
              same-object benefit.  For instance, spatiotemporal changes or identity
              discontinuities will be introduced to the cued or uncued object between the
              time the cue is presented and the time the target is presented, to see if the
              same-object benefit is disrupted.  The research will also look for disruptions
              in speed and accuracy of responses to the display.  Finally, it will also
              explore how eye movements are affected by the discontinuities.  The direct goal
              of this research is to understand the fundamental nature of object constancy
              and individuation.  However the results of the research will also have
              implications for engineering robotic systems that use machine vision to guide
              manipulation of dynamic objects.  Such robotic systems need to differentiate
              which parts of visual information belong to coherent objects and which belong
              to different objects.  In a different realm, knowledge of what sorts of changes
              distract people who are processing dynamic displays will aid designers of
              videos understand how special effects can be used to guide people's attention.
