Title       : Network Caching for Efficient Multimedia Content Delivery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0092113

Award Number: 0092113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Predrag R. Jelenkovic predrag@ctr.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward G. Coffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Exponentially increasing multimedia information content has become a
              problem at the
heart of modern communication networks. This is a paradigm
              shift from traditional com-
munication networks, where the primary function is
              information transmission, and where
quality of service improvements are
              attainable through better dimensioning of bandwidth
and switching resources.
              However, in networks where information storage plays a central
role, major
              improvements in quality of service can not be successful without the help
              of
caching, prefetching and/or mirroring of information. It can be argued that
              even if an
unlimited amount of free bandwidth were available, the
              concentration of information on a
small number of servers would cause server
              overloads, resulting in unacceptable download
latencies.
      This general
              problem has created the explosion of research studies that are to be found
in
              the network systems engineering literature on Web caching. Although this work
              has
contributed important engineering solutions, much of it is ad hoc and
              informal. Indeed, in
the large literature on caching research, it is rare to
              find papers dealing with mathematical
foundations, especially those
              underpinning stochastic models. Also, one rarely finds proofs in
a rigorous
              setting of nontrivial stochastic or average-case properties of caching
              structures and
algorithms. It is our thesis here that more systematic
              approaches are needed. This proposal
describes a project to meet this need;
              more generally, we outline a systematic treatment
that focuses on fundamental
              design issues, one that, in dealing with these issues,
              integrates
experimentation, analysis and statistical measurements.
     
              Network cache design objectives are reductions in access latency, traffic
              congestion, and
server loads. These objectives can be attained only through a
              thoughtful design that ad-
dresses many important and challenging research
              topics. Some of the fundamental questions
that remain without definitive
              answers include: dynamic caching and caching with expiration
times; design and
              analysis of easily implemented heuristic algorithms; impact of locality
              in
request sequences on caching performance; caching and prefetching in low
              bandwidth access
environments, with a special emphasis on wireless Web
              accesses; cache allocation and sizing
problems; and Web-graph performance
              modeling. Extending the knowledge base and deep-
ening our insight into these
              and several other equally fundamental caching system design
problems is the
              main theme of this proposal. The ultimate goal is to utilize this
              improved
knowledge base to develop an experimental testbed for achieving
              practically feasible and
efficient network caching systems.
      The
              inherent complexity of the research topics identified here, and the network
              caching
problem as a whole, necessarily call into play all available research
              tools. Thus, methodologi-
cally, the scope of the proposed research ranges
              from mathematical modeling and analysis to
statistical measurements and
              experimentation. The impact of our results, by their interdis-
ciplinary
              nature, will not just be limited to designing multimedia network caching
              systems,
but will potentially lead to improved problem solving techniques in
              related fields of computer
algorithms, software engineering, probability
              theory, and operations research.
