Title       : CAREER: High-Temperature Thermal Transport in LPCVD Polysilicon for MEMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2000  
File        : a0092716

Award Number: 0092716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katsuo Kurabayashi katsuo@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program investigates the impact of high-temperature
              microstructural changes in Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposited (LPCVD)
              polysilicon on microscale thermal transport phenomena in microelectromechanical
              systems (MEMS).  An application of thermal conduction physics, materials
              science, and silicon micromachining is made for generating new scientific
              knowledge needed for the design of polysilicon-based thermal sensors and
              actuators, and for their reliability predictions. To achieve studies at
              high-temperatures, a novel on-chip instrument is developed using MEMS
              techniques.  The instrument is to measure thermal transport property of
              polysilicon films and allows for in situ observation of grain size evolution. 
              Based on the acquired experimental data, theoretical work is performed to model
              thermal transport by accounting for grain size, grain configuration, impurity
              concentrations, and microstructural kinetics.  The developed model is to serve
              for understanding scaling laws and design rules for polysilicon-based MEMS
              devices and CMOS transistors. 

The education program addresses the
              significant demands on heat transfer education for MEMS engineers with the
              purpose of preparing students for "optimizing a product design."  Using
              on-campus information technology resources, this program develops a new heat
              transfer course based on a MEMS thermal design competition.  The thermal design
              project asks student teams to propose a MEMS design that should yield a better
              figure of merit for a particular device, which is strongly influenced by heat
              transfer phenomena.  The course is designed for senior and graduate students
              from various engineering programs.  A web-page-based instruction is implemented
              for this course to promote effective communications among the participants.

