Title       : CAREER: Plan-Based Integration of Control and Coherence in Intelligent
               Exploratory Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0092586

Award Number: 0092586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465695             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Young young@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Exploratory environments - virtual worlds in which users interact with a
              simulation of a physical or abstract space to form, pursue and achieve their
              goals - have shown great success in applications ranging from education and
              training to entertainment to social interaction.   A principal limitation of
              these systems, however, is that users' activities within them are typically
              greatly over- or under-constrained.  To address this problem, the PI will
              develop new plan-based models for the structure of user interactions within
              exploratory environments.   Planning techniques will be used to create novel
              activity within the environment that encompasses both the system-controlled
              characters, the environment and the actions of the user.  The PI will build on
              his prior work in plan generation and plan-related communication to develop an
              architecture for creating, monitoring and controlling interaction in
              intelligent exploratory environments.  This architecture will integrate: 
              planning algorithms that create plans for interaction in virtual worlds whose
              structure is readily understandable by users;  discourse generation algorithms
              that effectively communicate the currently unfolding plan-based activity;  and
              execution monitoring algorithms that mediate the execution of actions between
              the user interface and the virtual world, intervening in appropriate ways when
              actions that the user intends to perform deviate from the system's current plan
              structure.   If successful, the work will greatly increase our ability to
              produce engaging, novel and effective virtual environments in which users'
              domain- and task-oriented learning are enhanced across a range of applications
              and contexts.
