Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0092637

Award Number: 0092637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Danny B. Martin dmartin@contracosta.cc.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Contra Costa CC College
	      2600 Mission Bell Drive
	      San Pablo, CA  948063166    415/235-7800

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is providing scholarships to low- income, academically talented
              students who show interest and promise in majoring in computer science,
              engineering, and mathematics. The college is providing a student- support
              infrastructure through its Center for Science Excellence (CSE), thus
              facilitating the successful graduation of students with an associate- level
              degree and transfer to a four- year college or university. The college's
              student- support infrastructure coordinates formal study, work experience in
              science and technology, and various science- and technology- based activities
              through a social support system. It provides academic support in the form of
              mentoring, academic workshops, tutoring, internship opportunities, leadership
              development, scientific seminars, and field trips. Through active recruitment
              efforts in CSE and a competitive application process, the college is selecting
              40 financially disadvantaged, academically talented students interested in
              computer science, engineering or mathematics who meet all the eligibility
              requirements. The scholarship awards are being distributed during the
              recipients' second year of enrollment at the College and during their first
              year of transfer. Scholarship recipients will enroll as full- time students, be
              expected to maintain a minimum 3.0 grade point average, and follow an
              educational plan prescribing a sequence of courses that is enabling them to
              graduate and transfer to a baccalaureate- granting institution. Experience
              shows that gaining access to a coordinated support system of mentoring,
              internships, and enrichment activities along with high academic expectations is
              an important contribution to students' success.
