Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Social Consequences of the Lesotho Highlands Water
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a0092192

Award Number: 0092192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Burton mlburton@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              One of the five largest development projects currently under construction in the
              world today, the Lesotho Highlands water Project (LHWP) in Southern Africa has
              a major impact on the lives of people affected by the project. This
              dissertation research by a cultural anthropologist from the University of
              California-Irvine will study the effects of the project in Lesotho through the
              lens of gender relations. The differential impact (usually negative) of
              development projects on women has given rise to studies in the various
              traditions of "Women in Development", "Women and Development" and "Gender and
              Development". These glosses describe different approaches to understanding and
              examining women's significance in society and in development. Employing a
              feminist political ecology approach, the student will conduct multi-site
              ethnographic research involving three dam sites at different stages of
              construction and implementation (resettled, impacted, and non impacted), with
              two waves of structured surveys and semi-structured interviews to examine the
              ways project-affected populations are experiencing development.  Gender, class,
              age, and other socio-economic and socio-cultural categories will be examined to
              investigate the social consequences of the LHWP on communities and households.
              The new knowledge to be created will be valuable to development planners as
              well as to students of river basin projects and of southern Africa. In addition
              the project helps to train a young social scientist.
