Title       : Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Tolerance to Herbivory among
               Populations of Scarlet Gilia, Ipomopsis aggregata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0092554

Award Number: 0092554
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ken N. Paige k-paige@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0092554
Paige 

Plant responses to herbivory can be divided into two
              components, plant defenses and tolerance.  Tolerance refers to the ability of
              plants to regrow and reproduce following herbivore damage; i.e., the ability to
              compensate.  Yet little is known about how tolerance evolves, with most studies
              to date focusing on plant defense.  Over the past fifteen years studies have
              been conducted on a specialized case of tolerance in a biennial/perennial herb,
              scarlet gilia, where plants have been observed to achieve greater reproductive
              success by overcompensating for tissues lost to herbivory.  However, scarlet
              gilia's compensatory response is not universal; exhibiting tremendous variation
              both within and between populations.  To assess whether there is a genetic
              basis to population differences in compensation, as well as whether selection
              on plant traits related to compensation differ between populations and
              locations, reciprocal transplant experiments and selection analyses will be
              conducted.  These studies will be conducted within each of four populations
              that have been subjected to very different historical levels of herbivory; two
              of these overcompensate and the other two do not.

Studies on the relative
              importance of genetic versus environmental factors and selection in different
              environments should contribute to our understanding of the evolutionary
              response of plants to herbivory, and add general understanding to the factors
              that do and do not lead to enhanced reproductive success following herbivory. 
              If the mechanisms of overcompensation are genetically based, such responses to
              herbivory should be of great interest to agriculturists who, through recent
              advents in molecular genetic technique, might incorporate these traits into
              crop plants.	

