Title       : Statewide Systemic Initiative Supplemental Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a0092129

Award Number: 0092129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernice T. Anderson                     
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Kaufman mark_kaufman@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Manuel Gomez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip Uri Treisman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7360      STATEWIDE SYSTEMIC INITIATIVES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The eight Phase II Statewide Systemic Initiative (SSI) states, consisting of
              Louisiana, Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Puerto Rico, South Carolina,
              Texas, and Vermont believe that the substantial investments in systemic reform
              made by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and other key partners must
              become more networked and optimized.  In order to move in this direction, the
              SSI states developed A Blueprint for Systemic Reform in Science and
              Mathematics, which describes the essential elements of an empirical theory of
              reform that would inform the work of the SSI states in the immediate future.
              

The Blueprint includes the following recommendations to ensure effective
              networking within the SSI states, with NSF, and other states and local
              districts undergoing systemic reform in science and mathematics:

1.
              Collaborate with researchers at the national level to articulate a generalized
              model of systemic reform within the context of the evolving empirical theory of
              systemic reform.

2. Synthesize, organize, and disseminate numerous reform
              products, such as instructional materials for standards alignment,
              standards-based curricula, assessment instruments, algebra materials,
              self-assessment tools, and strategies for aligning allocation of resources, and
              governance with the systemic reform that have been tested and developed by the
              remaining eight SSIs. 

3. Conduct collaborative research on the elements
              within the generalized model of systemic reform in areas, such as equity,
              standards-based curricula, assessment, pedagogy, and leadership.

4. Provide
              academic and technical assistance to national organizations, industries,
              businesses, and foundations investing in education to help them to understand
              and use a comprehensive systemic approach in improving student performance in
              science and mathematics.

5. Provide academic and technical assistance to
              education systems that want to undertake systemic reform with emphasis on
              standards and on reaching a commitment to reach all students in their
              systems.

In coordination with the Eisenhower Regional Alliance of the
              Northeast and Islands, the eight SSI states propose to demonstrate the
              effectiveness of a systemic support network by collectively initiating the
              implementation of these recommendations.  The SSI states will serve as a
              Systemic Practices Resource Network to supply successful practices and tools to
              newly funded NSF grant recipients, resulting in a support collaborative
              consisting of mature systemic partners with empirical experience that can work
              with existing or new programs.
