Title       : CAREER: Automated Software Understanding for Retargeting Embedded Image
               Processing Software for Data Parallel Execution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2002  
File        : a0092552

Award Number: 0092552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda M. Wills linda.wills@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
This research applies software understanding and reengineering
techniques to
              the problem of retargeting embedded image processing
software to emerging
              parallel architectures that are capable of
efficiently exploiting the inherent
              data parallelism in these
applications.  Image and video processing software
              is found in a wide
range of embedded devices.  There is a significant demand
              for
low-power, compact imaging devices, e.g., for smart cameras,
              wearable
computers, and autonomous vehicle vision systems. Migrating image
              and
video processing programs to new or extended hardware platforms
              that
support data parallel execution will greatly enhance the
              image
processing capabilities and sophistication of embedded devices. 
              This
research seeks to automatically expose the inherent data parallelism
in
              these applications to fuel a new generation of high performance,
high
              efficiency embedded processing systems.  Software understanding
techniques are
              being used to provide a deep model of what computation
is being performed so
              that a broader set of parallelization
transformations can be accomplished and
              more opportunities for
parallelization can be identified.  This work also
              integrates
software reengineering more fully into the education of
              computer
engineers and scientists, and help students learn parallel
              processing
concepts. It will support interactive application of
              parallelizing
transformations and allow students to sharpen their discovery
              and
problem solving skills
