Title       : CAREER: Semidefinite Methods for Robust and Discrete Optimization and Their
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0092972

Award Number: 0092972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Garud N. Iyengar garud@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop and implement new and
efficient
              optimization methods for robust and discrete optimization
problems. The
              applications of interest to us are in the fields of
financial engineering and
              network design. The robust optimization
framework is an attempt to correct for
              the modeling uncertainties
that are inevitable in engineering. Optimization
              problems are
especially susceptible to modeling errors since, in trying to
              exploit
the constraints, the optimal solutions typically amplify the
              errors
several fold. In the robust framework, the perturbations are
              modeled
as unknown, but bounded, and optimization problems are
              solved
assuming worst case behavior of these perturbations. Robustness
              to
modeling and estimation errors is an issue of critical importance
              for
financial optimization problems because of the serious consequences
of
              making wrong bets! Surprisingly, however, robust optimization has
not been
              widely explored in financial engineering. The research
proposed here
              formulates robust dynamical models for financial
problems and develops
              semidefinite rogramming based methods for
solving them. These models
              systematically account for parameter
uncertainty and robustly update
              error-bounds as more information
becomes available over time. In addition, the
              project extends the
semidefinite relaxation methodology to probabilistically
              robust
optimization problems that naturally emerge in the financial
              context.
The other research focus of this proposal is on
              developing
semidefinite models for graph theoretic problems such as
              the
traveling salesman problem and network design. These models employ
linear
              matrix inequalities (LM ) to represent  geometric
constraints, such as graph
              connectivity, specified number of
edge/vertex disjoint paths, etc. The
              optimization problems resulting
from these LM models are, typically, mixed
              integer semidefinite
programs, i.e. semidefinite programs where some of the
              decision
variables are constrained to be integers. Currently,
              mixed
semidefinite programs are appproximately solved by relaxing
              the
integrality constraints. However, as computational ower increases and
the
              interior point methods for solving semidefinite programs become
more
              efficient, the PI expects that there would be a push for
developing systematic
              methods of tightening the relaxations - as in
the case of linear programming
              relaxations of mixed integer programs.
As a first step in this direction, the
              PI proposes to develop several
cutting lane strategies for mixed semidefinite
              programs. Although the
problems of interest to the PI belong to disparate
              application areas,
they are linked in that linear matrix inequalities and
              semidefinite
programming provide the necessary tools to efficiently model
              and
solve them. The education component of this proposal includes
developing
              a sequence of graduate courses on engineering applications
of optimization.
              These courses would fill an important gap in the
curriculum of the Deppartment
              by providing students with a firm
theoretical and practical grounding in
              optimization. The World Wide
Web will be extensively used in these courses.
              All the teaching
material will be available on the web. The PI will develop
              Java-based
applets for all the examples used in the courses which would
              allow
students to experiment with these examples in real time. Also,
              the
optimization resources on the web will be integrated into the
curriculum.
              This should be particularly useful to students from
industry who would take
              the courses over the Video Network. To expose
undergraduate students to
              research, the PI plans to organize an
interdisciplinary research program in
              optimization and its
applications. To facilitate industry outreach, the PI
              plans to
implement the results of the proposed research into a
              software
package and publish expository articles on the applications of
              the
new techniques. The PI expects that the availability of a user
friendly
              software will spur further applications and encourage
industrial
              collaboration.
