Title       : Gaseous Ion Transport in a FAIMS Apparatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a0092436

Award Number: 0092436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry A. Viehland viehland@sassafrass.chatham.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chatham College
	      Woodland Road
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15232    412/365-1100

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1091,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Larry Viehland of Chatham College is funded by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry program to perform theoretical studies on a new
              separation method based on ion mobility spectrometry (IMS).  IMS is based on
              measuring the average drift velocity of different ions through a neutral gas
              under the influence of an electrostatic field.  The PI is conducting a two
              pronged approach to the theoretical study of a new aspect of IMS, namely the
              use of asymmetric applied fields (FAIMS).  First, simple extensions of methods
              employed for similar projects involving drift tube mass spectrometers will be
              applied to questions about peak shape, ion transmission efficiencies and model
              cross sections.  Undergraduates will be involved in this portion of the
              research.  Secondly, the PI will himself develop new kinetic and dynamic
              calculations allowing, for example, the calculation of transport cross sections
              from a set of potential energy surfaces. 

Separation methods based on ion
              mobility pervade analytical chemistry, and IMS  has become an important
              technique for the detection of chemical and biological compounds in the field
              due to its high sensitivity, amenability to miniaturization and ruggedness in
              operation.  Improvements in this method are likely to be rapidly assimilated in
              applications such as industrial quality control and environmental sampling. 
              This work is to be conducted with undergraduate students at Chatham College, a
              women's college.
