Title       : Dissertation Research: Distinguishing Psychological from Energetic Stress
               Effects on Ovarian Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a0092076

Award Number: 0092076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Ellison pellison@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The female reproductive system is sensitive to its environment, and ovarian
              function is often suppressed when confronted with a stressor. Suppression of 
              reproductive function is generally proposed to be an adaptive response in that
              it channels resources towards vital functions while diminishing the likelihood
              of conception at a time when a successful reproductive outcome is marginal. 
              But while such an effect is well documented for energetic stresses such as low
              dietary intake, high physical activity or both, the evidence in support of a
              direct effect of psychological stress on ovarian function is inconclusive. 
              Although some studies have found a relationship between psychological stress
              and suppression of ovarian function, this interaction could be mediated by
              energetics, that is, by changes in activity or eating patterns that result from
              the psychological stress.  This project is designed to determine if
              psychological stress influences ovarian function independent of energetic
              stress. 

The proposed project is designed to investigate 1) the
              relationships between psychological and energetic stress and 2) the individual
              and combined effects of psychological and energetic stresses on bio-markers of
              metabolism and ovarian function.  Behavioral (food intake and physical
              activity), physiological (urinary c-peptide, salivary estradiol, progesterone,
              and cortisol), psychological (anxiety, depression and perceived stress) and
              anthropometric data will be collected and analyzed to investigate the
              relationships between psychosocial stressors, energetic stressors, metabolism
              and female reproductive physiology over the menstrual cycle.

