Title       : CAREER: Application-Oriented Large-Scale Parallel Data Mining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0092978

Award Number: 0092978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohammed J. Zaki zaki@cs.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop a large-scale parallel data mining system
              (PDMS), which can manipulate very large scientific databases. The research
              pursues an application-oriented approach with input from three scientific
              domains: bioinformatics (protein structure prediction), astronomy (rare object
              identification) and materials informatics ("virtual" material design). There
              are two conflicting objectives that must be satisfied: genericity and
              specificity. The PDMS toolkit must be generic in that it can support a range of
              common data mining tasks such as associations, sequences, classification and
              clustering, yet to be usable it must support specificity or domain-specific
              customization. The PDMS system is based on a novel three-tiered architecture
              consisting of a front-end interface and query tool, a middle layer of common
              high-level mining algorithms, and a back-end system consisting of a core set of
              data mining "primitive operations", tightly integrated with a database system,
              and delivering peak parallel or distributed performance. The
              application-oriented approach produces excellent opportunities to advance
              inter-disciplinary educational efforts, and encourages the cross-fertilization
              of ideas and algorithms across these areas. New courses will be offered on the
              design of large scale data mining systems as well as applications of data
              mining in scientific domains. The results of this project will aid research in
              developing more generic data mining tools that are able to leverage high
              performance parallel and distributed techniques in all the phases of the
              knowledge discovery process, and in developing customized tools for important
              scientific applications like bioinformatics, astronomy and materials science. 
