Title       : CAREER: Hybrid Systems of Al/AlOx/Al Tunnel Junctions Coupled to Semiconductor
               Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2002   
File        : a0092726

Award Number: 0092726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450058             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cagliyan Kurdak kurdak@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project centers on hybrid systems of Al/AlOx/Al tunnel junctions coupled
              with semiconductor heterostructures. Arrays of Al/AlOx/Al tunnel junctions are
              known to form a system with macroscopic degrees of freedom that behave quantum
              mechanically. By fabricating such a system of tunnel junctions on a GaAs/AlGaAs
              heterostructure with an electron gas located near the top surface of the
              heterostructure, we can directly control the dissipation independently of other
              parameters, something not previously possible in any quantum system. One of the
              goals of this project is to implement this control over dissipation in various
              structures in order to study fundamental tunneling processes and quantum phase
              transitions. On the semiconductor side, the hybrids also make feasible many
              unique and potentially important experiments. In particular, we will use the
              hybrids to study two of the most basic aspects, the charge and the statistics,
              of the excitations of fractional quantum Hall liquids (FQHLs). Remarkably, the
              excitations of the FQHLs, also called Laughlin quasiparticles, are predicted to
              carry fractional charge and obey unusual fractional statistics different from
              that for fermions or bosons. Measurement of fractional statistics, which we
              hope to tackle using Al/AlOx/Al tunnel junctions, has been a longstanding
              challenge in the field of fractional quantum Hall effect. The research will be
              accompanied by a nationwide outreach program, in which high school students
              across the country will do collaborative measurements to determine the position
              of the North magnetic pole. Doing a measurement on such a global scale will
              provide an interesting and genuine scientific experience, which we hope will
              excite students about science in general.
%%%

Typically macroscopic
              objects, such as dust particles, billiard balls, and planets, obey Newtonian,
              or classical mechanics. Microscopic objects, such as electrons, atoms, and
              molecules, on the other hand, obey a different set of rules and behave quantum
              mechanically. Tunnel junctions composed of aluminum and aluminum oxide layers
              are unique, in that they are macroscopic objects, yet they have certain
              macroscopic features that behave quantum mechanically. By coupling such tunnel
              junctions to semiconductors, we can control the environment to which this
              quantum system is coupled to, something not previously possible in any quantum
              system. One of the goals of this project is to implement this control over the
              environment in  various  structures in  order to study fundamental quantum
              processes that are relevant to a rich variety of systems.  Tunnel junctions can
              also be used to make a new a kind of detector, known as a single electron
              transistor (SET),  which  are  million  times  more  charge  sensitive than 
              commercially available transistors. This extreme charge sensitivity of SETs
              makes feasible many unique and potentially important experiments. In
              particular, we will use the hybrids with SETs to study some of the remarkable
              properties of a new state of matter, known as a fractional quantum Hall liquid.
              New kinds particles arise in this new state matter with very unusual
              properties. Our research will take advantage of the extreme charge sensitivity
              of SETs to investigate these unusual properties of these new particles, which
              have been a longstanding challenge in the field of fractional quantum Hall
              effect. The research will be accompanied by a nationwide outreach program, in
              which high school students across the country will do collaborative
              measurements to determine the position of the North magnetic pole. Doing a
              measurement on such a global scale will provide an  interesting and genuine
              scientific experience, which we hope will excite students about science in
              general.
***




