Title       : Reactions and Stereochemistry of Organometallic Compounds Related to Asymmetric
               Synthesis and Catalytic Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0092222

Award Number: 0092222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $468000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Faller jack.faller@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. John W. Faller, Chemistry Department, Yale University, is supported by the
              Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for studies
              related to asymmetric and regioselective synthesis and catalysis using metal
              complexes. New strategies will be developed for asymmetric synthesis based on
              the use of readily available racemic precatalysts treated with an inexpensive
              chiral poison. The poison selectively deactivates one enantiomer of the racemic
              mixture. The remaining active enantiomer is used to catalyze an asymmetric
              reaction. This general strategy has been demonstrated for asymmetric
              hydrogenations and Lewis acid-catalyzed Diels-Alder reactions. More effective
              poisons will be developed and will be applied to the preparation of chiral
              catalysts for a broad range of asymmetric reactions.  Pseudo-enantiomeric
              complexes, which are composed of bimetallics containing different chiral
              ligands, will be explored. Hemilabile ligands will be used to control the
              stereochemistry in catalytic intermediates. The racemization of chiral 16
              electron intermediates can potentially decrease the selectivity of asymmetric
              catalysts. This racemization process and methods of controlling it will also be
              studied.  

An object which is not the same as its mirror image (e.g. a left
              compared to a right handed glove) is said to be chiral.  Many pharmaceutical
              and agricultural chemicals are chiral and often only one of the two mirror
              image molecules is effective. Since it is difficult to obtain a single mirror
              image, the production of such molecules is an important goal in contemporary
              chemistry. In this project new strategies toward solving the problem of
              "asymmetric synthesis" will be applied to a broad range of reactions and new,
              more economic preparations of important molecules will be developed. In
              addition to the chemical research, this project has the important objective of
              training young scientists in the areas of metal catalysis and asymmetric
              synthesis.
