Title       : CAREER: Assisted Navigation in Large Visualization Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0092308

Award Number: 0092308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370403             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher G. Healey healey@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is  an investigation of methods for assisting with the navigation
              of large, complex
information spaces. Although results from these studies are
              relevant to a number of research areas, interest will be focused on
              construction of a navigation system designed to help viewers
              visualize,
explore, and analyze large, multidimensional datasets. Methods to
              assist with the analysis and navigation of these types of datasets was
              specifically cited as an
important open problem by the joint DOE/NSF panel on
              future research in visualization.

The work will combine a detailed local
              display and a high-level global overview of the locations and structure of
              areas of interest within the dataset. The local view will use perceptual cues
              to harness the abilities of the low-level human visual system. The global
              overview will be built in two separate stages. First, elements of interest will
              be identified using a combination of: (1) explicit rules provided by the
              viewer, and (2) implicit rules built by watching what viewers select, where
              they move, and what they examine. Next, the elements will be clustered into one
              or more areas of interest. The use of graph construction techniques like planar
              triangulations and minimum spanning trees will be investigated  to link the
              elements together. An underlying graph that: (1) supports efficient navigation
              via the application of graph traversal algorithms, and (2) provides an
              effective global overview to visualize the areas of interest and the
              relationships that exist between them will be sought.

A  set of validation
              experiments will be  designed to identify the strengths and limitations of our
              navigation
techniques. Datasets from the oceanography and e-commerce domains
              will be used to test the  system in a
practical, real-world environment. The
              first set of experiments will work with domain experts, in part to provide
              anecdotal feedback on our system, and in part to identify fundamental
              navigation and exploration tasks performed during visualization. These tasks
              will then be integrated into a controlled experiment that studies the
              performance of our system vis-a-vis a system without navigation aids, and
              existing focus+context visualization techniques specifically designed to
              display these types of large, complex datasets.

The research  in
              visualization, navigation, perception, and automated inference of
              viewer
preferences provides a unique opportunity to design a multidisciplinary
              course curriculum that includes instruction in computer graphics and scientific
              visualization, cognitive psychology, and a variety of real-world application
              areas.

The  education plan includes the construction of an instructional
              visualization laboratory, the identification of collaborators from academia and
              industry, the design of a self-contained course curriculum, and the creation of
              a collection of real-world visualization projects to encourage student
              participation in our research programs. The  laboratory will include
              state-of-the-art graphics workstations, as well as visualization-specific
              hardware and software.The priority is to expose students to emerging
research
              issues and real-world visualization problems. This will be accomplished in part
              by building course projects that introduce students to active research
              programs, both in our visualization laboratory and in academic and industrial
              research centers located on our campus.The curriculum will instruct students in
              areas of cognitive and perceptual psychology that impact scientific
              visualization, computer graphics, computer vision, and artificial
              intelligence.

The result will be a collection of courses that introduce
              students of psychology, egineering, natural science and other disciplines  to
              both the theoretical and practical issues of perception and assisted
              computation techniques, and their relationship to scientific visualization and
              computer graphics.
