Title       : Career: Geosynthetic-Reinforced Soil Structures Subject to Strong Earthquake
               Loading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0092739

Award Number: 0092739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hoe I. Ling Ling@civil.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This action is taken within the NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
              Program, NSF 00-89, to support a research/education career project in the use
              of geosynthetic-reinforced soil structures to resist strong earthquake shaking.
               Geosynthetics provide a cost-effective solution in reinforced soil technology
              for many civil engineering structures.  They have been applied widely as
              geosynthetic-reinforced soil retaining walls (GRS-RW), especially modular block
              GRS-RW that has gained wide popularity because of its pleasing esthetics.  But
              structurally, these and other uses of geosynthetics serve a much more critical
              purpose in resisting seismic activity.  While the performance of such
              geosynthetic-reinforced soils under routine (static) loads, and even minor
              earthquakes, has been good, recent experience indicates that improved knowledge
              and performance is needed regarding their response under strong earthquake
              shaking.  In the 1999 Taiwan earthquake that produced large acceleration
              together with a large vertical component of that acceleration, several
              geosynthetic-reinforced soil structures collapsed.  Clearly, available analysis
              and design procedures did not account for such severe dynamic loading.  It is
              this shortcoming that is addressed in this research and education
              program.

The project builds upon prior experimental and numerical research,
              and international cooperation with researchers in Japan undertaken by the PI. 
              State-of-the-art shaking table facilities in Japan are used to test models
              under complex dynamic loading conditions, including vertical acceleration, in
              order to understand better the failure modes.  The result is an improved
              characterization of the soil, the geosynthetic reinforcement, and their
              interaction.  Additional parametric studies will result in a simplified
              procedure that enables GRS-RW to be designed based on permanent
              displacement.

In addition to the technical value to the design community,
              this research program also provides a valuable tool for education.  Two
              specific educational applications are addressed.  First, the courses on
              geosynthetic waste containment and geotechnical earthquake engineering will use
              the results directly, as will the web based home page that already presents the
              PI's current research.  In addition, a web based software package (Java
              Geotech) will be developed, and will join the currently active Geotech Forum
              for undergraduates.  Second, this project, which involves applications in
              currently appealing areas of earthquake resistance and environmental
              remediation, will serve to encourage high school students, and especially
              minority students, to pursue studies relating to these areas.  This will be
              accomplished through two Columbia University related programs to encourage
              interest in science and engineering among minorities: the Double Discovery
              Center and the Salvadori Education Center.  Working through these Centers,
              teaching modules on reinforced soil structures and waste containment systems
              can be presented through lectures and laboratory demonstrations in high schools
              and through field trips, such as to JFK International Airport that is currently
              undergoing expansion, and to Columbia's Biosphere.

