Title       : CAREER: Adaptive Network Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0092806

Award Number: 0092806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samrat Bhattacharjee bobby@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The research objective of this proposal is to design, implement, and evaluate
              a scalable and adaptive network service platform.
  Supporting sophisticated
              new applications, such as multi-party conferencing and streaming media
              transmission, over the Internet poses serious technical challenges for the
              underlying infrastructure.  However, adding some processing inside the network
              enables new network-based services that substantially improves the end-to-end
              performance of these applications. The continual exponential decrease in the
              cost of processing makes network services viable, while the increases in
              application complexity makes it necessary. Link capacities, however, have been
              increasing at rates even faster than increases in processing capacity, and
              current network service platforms are incapable of sustaining non-trivial
              service to multiple flows at line speeds.
  In this proposal, the researcher
              outlines research whose goal is to develop and evaluate adaptive processing
              techniques to scale the number of flows supported by network service platforms.
              Adaptive techniques control degradation in service quality when aggregate
              demand exceeds available resources, and can be applied within a single node or
              across multiple cooperating nodes. The research focuses on the development of
              general adaptation techniques that are applicable across a wide range of node
              architectures and applications.  The  proposed work is grouped into three major
              thrusts: design of the adaptation mechanisms themselves and underlying control
              and resource management mechanisms and interfaces required to adapt processing
              on-line; development of a single- and multi-node policy framework to trigger
              adaptation; and the development of an analytic model of adaptive network
              processing that will allow on-line evaluations of possible adaptations. The
              researcher will evaluate these techniques using a combination of analysis,
              simulation, and experimentation with a number of example services and policies
              implemented over the Odyssey network service platform.                         
                                                                                             
                                  The success of the Internet derives from the spectrum of
              applications it supports. As a new generation of Internet applications emerge,
              a pivotal challenge is to design a scalable and flexible network service
              platform that can sustain processing for multiple end-applications at high
              speeds; otherwise, end-to-end performance will be limited by the processing
              constraints imposed by the network. This research explicitly addresses the
              issues of network processing scalability by using adaptive techniques. By
              reducing, and in some cases eliminating, network processing bottlenecks, the
              work will enable new classes of applications to be supported on a large scale
              over the Internet.
     The educational objective is to design a set of core
              networking courses that introduce students to current developments in the field
              while emphasizing the fundamental concepts and to train students to understand
              how large networks, complex programs, and realistic systems can be built by
              composing relatively small, simple, and modular components.
      The core
              networking curriculum consists of an undergraduate, a graduate, and a research
              course. The undergraduate course teaches the basics of networking with an
              emphasis on the fundamentals.  Students learn by building substantial parts of
              different network layers, and by experimenting with real-world applications
              with which they are already familiar. The aim of the graduate course is to
              understand core network protocols in detail, to appreciate the philosophy
              behind the current Internet protocols, and to introduce students to new
              research ideas in networking. The goal of the research course is to try to
              bridge the gap between theory and implementation: understand the overheads
              incurred in implementing complex protocols and devise mechanisms to mitigate
              their effects.
      The unparalleled success of the Internet has made it
              essential that every CS student understand the basics of networking. This
              curriculum will fill this need for general CS students and will motivate
              students interested networking to pursue further research in the field.

