Title       : CAREER: Evolution in Games: Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0092145

Award Number: 0092145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Sandholm whs@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of three overlapping streams of research within the field
              of evolutionary game theory: evolutionary implementation of congestion pricing;
              preference diversity and preference evolution; and foundations for evolutionary
              models.  The research provides useful new analytical methods for basic and
              applied research. For example, the work on congestion pricing for networks
              should prove valuable for applied research in transportation,
              telecommunication, electronic commerce and many other areas in which congestion
              is a problem.  The final component concerns the creation of a new statistics
              curriculum that should enhance undergraduate economics education.

The first
              part of the project introduces evolutionary techniques for solving
              implementation problems with both hidden information and hidden actions.
              Special attention is paid to problems of network congestion. The problems are
              solved using mechanisms called price schemes, which impose prices on the
              actions available to the agents. The analysis is based on the theory of
              potential games. The investigator builds on his previous work in which he
              obtains a full solution for settings with infinite numbers of agents. Three
              extensions are made for finite player settings: one in which the planner
              possesses no information about demand, another in which he possesses aggregate
              demand information, and a third in which the agents' payoff information and
              behavior are stochastic. Finally, a less demanding notion of implementation is
              proposed for contexts in which the planner can influence the agents' initial
              behavior.

The second part of the project considers preference diversity and
              preference evolution. The research is develops and extends methods of studying
              the evolution of behavior in populations where preferences are diverse based on
              work by Jeffrey Ely and the investigator.  Josef Hofbauer proposes techniques
              for analyzing the differential equations that arise in the Ely/Sandholm model.
              These methods have applications to a number of other models of evolution and
              learning in games, including stochastic play.   This project uses the
              Ely/Sandholm model of behavior evolution as the basis for a general and fully
              dynamic model of preference evolution.

The third part of the project
              addresses foundations for evolutionary models. Previous work by the
              investigator considered a finite population model in which all random elements
              of the evolutionary process are idiosyncratic. It is shown that a global
              description of behavior is provided by a differential equation, while behavior
              near rest points is approximated by a diffusion. A new finite player model with
              aggregate noise is then developed. In this model, imprecision in the
              information obtained by players from some central source creates aggregate
              behavior disturbances. The model admits a global diffusion approximation, which
              can be used to study macroeconomic fluctuations.

The educational component
              of this CAREER award develops a new curriculum for undergraduate statistics
              courses offered in economics departments. The curriculum is distinguished by a
              thorough introduction to probability theory and its economic applications.
              Because probability and statistics are given equal emphasis, students are
              better prepared to obtain a solid understanding of basic statistical tools. 

