Title       : Mathematical Methods for Small Sample Biostatistical Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a0092659

Award Number: 0092659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Kolassa kolassa@stat.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A wide variety of techniques exist for conditional inference on exponential
              families arising from discrete distributions.  Normal theory methods, which
              rely on the approximate multivariate normality of the joint distribution of
              summary statistics from the data set, are often inaccurate for small data sets,
              and their quality can often be poor for summaries that indicate large parameter
              effects.  They also ignore discreteness in the data.  More sophisticated
              approximation techniques, known as saddlepoint techniques, are often used in
              cases when normal theory methods are inadequate.  These techniques often do not
              account for discreteness in data, and hence are suboptimal in their unmodified
              forms.  Exact inferential techniques are also available, but these techniques
              apply only to a limited number of models, require proprietary software, and
              fail when sample size reaches a moderate size.  Extensions to this software
              that employ Monte Carlo techniques for larger sample sizes are not yet
              commercially available.  These Monte Carlo techniques have the further
              disadvantage of delivering a variety of results for the same data set.  The
              techniques proposed use saddlepoint approximations in a way that accounts for
              discreteness in the data while avoiding most of the computationally intractable
              aspects of exact calculations.  Some of the projects proposed in this grant
              application involve new approximations, such as for approximating
              higher--dimensional distribution functions, and others involve modifications to
              existing approximations to avoid numerical instabilities.  Other projects
              involve formulating confidence regions to make accurate calibration easy, and
              modifying the conditioning event to obtain a more powerful analysis, and
              performing diagnostics to ensure that the proper approximations are used. 
              These methods will be general enough to apply to any canonical exponential
              family supported on a lattice, and hence to any generalized linear model with
              canonical link, observations supported on a lattice, and design matrix whose
              entries are confined to a lattice.  Examples of models that will be
              accommodated are logistic regression, Poisson regression including log linear
              models for contingency tables, and multinomial models.  Regression models with
              more exotic error structures, including positive Poisson and negative binomial
              distributions, will also be accommodated.

This proposed research is intended
              to aid in statistical inference on multiple parameters, in the presence of
              other nuisance parameters that are not of direct interest, when the
              distribution modeled is discrete.  For example, the probability that a cancer
              patient will stay in remission can be modeled as a function of a variety of
              factors.  Some of these effects, like which treatment a patient received or
              whether the patient had other cancer--related pathologies, may generalize to
              other populations, and others, like the effect of a particular center where the
              patient was treated, may not generalize.  Thus one might be interested in
              describing the possible values that the parameters of interested take on,
              without being required to simultaneously estimate the remaining parameters. 
              Typically one treats information associated with nuisance parameters as held
              fixed, and performs inference conditionally on this information.  That is, one
              assesses the the evidence concerning the parameter of interest by comparing
              experimental results to the population of possible results such that the
              information about nuisance parameters is held fixed.  The research agenda
              proposed here presents methods for doing these calculations, which balance high
              computational costs of exact methods against potential inaccuracies of
              approximations, and introduces and combines new methods for both
exact and
              approximate calculations.  These new methods will make the analysis of small
              discrete data sets, commonly occurring in applied sciences, quicker and more
              accurate.
