Title       : CAREER: Evolutionary Change in Gene Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0092603

Award Number: 0092603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500165             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen M. Chamberlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0092603
Chamberlin

One evolutionary theme that can be derived from the field
              of molecular developmental genetics is that diversity in morphology among
              species is achieved with a remarkably similar set of regulatory proteins.  In
              the context of this similarity, current models suggest that diversity results
              from precise alterations in the functions of developmental regulatory genes. 
              However, the molecular mechanisms underlying evolutionary changes in gene
              function are poorly understood, and they are difficult to derive from
              comparisons of divergent species because divergent species are the product of a
              large number of changes.  In contrast, comparisons between closely related
              species may provide a sufficiently similar genetic and developmental background
              for the mechanism responsible for a specific change to be studied.  
In the
              nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, the lin-48 gene encodes a zinc finger
              transcription factor.  lin-48 is important in the development of hindgut
              (rectum) cells and the excretory duct cell, and is expressed in these cells. 
              Expression of C. elegans lin-48 transgenes is conserved when they are
              introduced into the closely related species C. briggsae, except the excretory
              duct expression is absent.  This project will investigate regulation of lin-48
              as a model for a precise change in a gene's specificity.  A first objective is
              to identify the source of this change by functionally comparing regulatory
              elements from the promoters of C. elegans and C. briggsae lin-48 genes.  A
              second objective is to investigate changes in lin-48 function between the two
              species.  In C. elegans, lin-48 functions redundantly with other genes in the
              development of the excretory duct cell.  Accordingly, the hypothesis that C.
              briggsae excretory duct development has shifted to rely on the function of one
              of these redundant genes will be tested.  Graduate student mentoring will be
              integrated into these first two objectives.  A third objective is to survey
              other Caenorhabditis zinc finger genes for differences in expression pattern
              between species.  This objective will be carried out as part of an
              undergraduate research program.  A fourth objective is to increase problem
              solving opportunities, peer tutorials, and active learning in a molecular
              genetics course for non-majors to encourage an interest in, and understanding
              of, genetics among non-specialists.
 


 


