Title       : The Growth of Flexible Problem Solving: Learning to Adapt to Changing Verbal and
               Non-Verbal Tasks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0092027

Award Number: 0092027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gedeon O. Deak deak@cogsci.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
The Growth of Flexible Problem Solving:  Lewarning to Adapt to
              Changing Verbal and Non-Verbal Tasks
Gedeon O. Deak
	How do children adapt to
              changing problems and tasks?  The proposed research will investigate
              preschoolers' ability to shift problem-solving strategies in response to
              changing task demands.  There is evidence that this is difficult for many 2- to
              6-year-olds, and this has implications for early education because success in
              school-even in kindergarten-requires adapting to changing tasks.  Three
              cognitive processes might be critical determinants of preschoolers' problem
              solving flexibility: deciding what information is relevant to the task-at-hand,
              monitoring changing task demands, and suppressing responses that are no longer
              appropriate.  This raises several questions.  First, is flexible problem
              solving a general skill that rests on these three processes, or does
              flexibility vary domain by domain according to specific skills and knowledge? 
              This investigation will utilize a new non-verbal flexibility test-a non-verbal
              analogue of existing, verbal tests-to assess generalized developmental changes
              in children's flexibility.  Second, are there pervasive individual differences
              in children's flexibility?  Do they reflect stable cognitive profiles? 
              Children will complete a battery of flexibility tests, as well as several tests
              of cognitive skills that might predict problem solving abilities.  Third, can
              we influence children's flexibility by manipulating their strategic response
              when task demands change?  Several studies will experimentally influence, for
              example, the salience of contextual cues that a task has changed.  A related
              study will train preschoolers to notice changes in task demands, and assess
              their ability to generalize this strategy to new tests of flexibility. 
              Together these studies will illuminate the development of a critical high-level
              cognitive skill: Ability to adapt to changing problems.

