Title       : Genetic Studies of ASK Gene Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0092075

Award Number: 0092075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Ma hxm16@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant development requires the coordinated activity of many gene products, which
              can be regulated at both the levels of protein synthesis and degradation.  Many
              regulatory genes controlling flower development encode putative transcription
              factors, but few are known to regulate proteolysis.  Work supported by an NSF
              grant indicates that the Arabidopsis ASK1 gene regulates vegetative and flower
              development and encodes a homolog of the yeast and human SKP1 protein.  SKP1 is
              a subunit of SCF ubiquitin ligase complexes that catalyze the third step of a
              pathway that covalently links ubiquitins to target proteins, mediating the
              degradation of proteins. ASK1 interacts with UFO genetically to regulate flower
              development and the expression of the floral genes APETALA3 (AP3) and
              PISTILLATA (PI).  The working model is that UFO and ASK1 are components of a
              SCF ubiquitin ligase that facilitates the degradation of a negative regulator
              of AP3 and PI expression.  Furthermore, ASK1 is essential for homolog
              separation and segregation during male meiosis I.  In meiosis I, specific
              proteins must be degraded at the metaphase/anaphase transition to allow the
              separation of homologs.  Therefore, the simplest hypothesis is that ASK1
              regulates such a proteolytic event.  Arabidopsis possesses at least 20 SKP1
              homologs, named ASKs.  The functions of the other ASK genes are not known.  The
              fact that the yeast SKP1 gene is essential for mitotic growth suggests that
              other ASK gene(s) probably have redundant functions that together control
              essential cellular processes.  Therefore, understanding other ASK gene
              functions should provide new insights into the role of regulated proteolysis
              during development.    In this project, the ASK1 function in regulating flower
              development will be further analyzed using genetic and molecular approaches,
              including the interaction between UFO and ASK1 in the context of regulation of
              AP3 and PI expression. In addition, the role of ASK1 in controlling homolog
              separation in meiosis I will be investigated using microscopic procedures. 
              Moreover, additional ASK genes will be characterized by expression studies, by
              functional comparison with ASK1, and some of those ASK genes expressed in the
              flowers will be tested for function using reverse genetic approaches.  These
              experiments will likely provide new insights about how plant reproductive
              development is regulated by genes, potentially benefiting agriculture and the
              environment.  The study of gene functions when the Arabidopsis sequencing has
              is just been completed is both timely and beneficial.  The results from these
              experiments will also likely provide the starting points for future research by
              many in the community of plant scientists as well as those studying non-plant
              organisms.


