Title       : CAREER: Designing Communities of Practice to Support Math, Science, Technology,
               and Pedagogy Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0092831

Award Number: 0092831
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $632046             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sasha A. Barab sbarab@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The idea "virtual communities" has captured popular, as well as scholarly,
              attention.   This interest takes place in an America that is increasingly
              concerned about the loss of face-to-face community.  Advocates of online
              communities hope that by leveraging technology, we can recreate a "we" that has
              steadily eroded into many isolated "I's." Educators are exploring the value of
              employing a "community" model for supporting learning. The idea is that through
              participating in a community, novice learners can learn through collaboration
              with others and work with more experienced "old-timers." Much like in an
              apprenticeship, learners observe old-timers, and then gradually begin to adopt
              the practices of the community. In this model, learning is not abstracted from
              useful activity, but a part of it. By making learning immediate, practical, and
              real, educators hope to overcome the historical problems of engaging students
              and teachers in meaningful learning, and the contemporary problems of students
              who are disaffected by school. 

The community-based approach to learning has
              enormous theoretical and practical potential, but it is imperative that these
              environments be studied empirically.   What is the educational value of a
              community approach to learning?  Can learning through participation in a
              community help students overcome the historical barriers to entering math,
              science, and technology, and promote the development math, science, and
              technology skills?  Does it have a special role in fostering deep learning? 
              Are their gender differences and how can we develop online communities that do
              not exacerbate the digital divide? While this grant will learn from other
              successful projects (e.g., Tapped In, Math Forum, etc.), this work will
              primarily focus on the research and design of three different learning
              environments designed to support learning about math, science, and technology. 
              Each one of these projects is substantial and offers a unique contribution to
              our understanding of learning through community participation. However, a
              thorough cross-project analysis will leverage the unique aspects of each
              situation while at the same time allowing us to make scientifically grounded
              claims across cases. We will systematically research both the effectiveness of
              this community approach in terms of learning as well as the processes through
              which such communities form.  
  
For each setting we will emphasize
              different types of evidence. First, the Inquiry Learning Forum project entails
              a Web-based professional development network for improving pedagogical
              practices of preservice and inservice math and science teachers.  We will use
              discourse analysis to examine the quality of their online discussions,
              interviews and questionnaires to assess their conceptions of pedagogy, and
              visits to their classrooms to observe actual practice.  In the second online
              community targeted toward children learning math and science, we will conduct
              pre- and post-tests on their understanding of math and science, interviews to
              test the depth of their understanding of these content areas, and we will use
              content rubrics to examine the richness of the artifacts they produce as part
              of community participation.  Third, in the technology course for preservice
              teachers, we will analyze class assignments, use rubrics to examine portfolios
              of teaching with technology, and observe their classroom practice. Central to
              all this work is a commitment to not only producing scientifically credible
              knowledge about building online communities to support learning math, science,
              and technology skills, but also to providing a community service that takes
              part in and facilitates change.  

