Title       : CAREER: A Unified Approach to Iterative and Universal Methods for Signal
               Processing and Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0092598

Award Number: 0092598
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew C. Singer acsinger@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Singer ABSTRACT:

One of the most difficult aspects of the application of
              theoretical methods to practical systems lies in the translation of a
              real-world problem into a manageable theoretical model.  Often there are a
              number of aspects of the problem that are either difficult to model concisely,
              or that are completely unknown.  For example, in many commercial and military
              applications, compact, efficient devices are desired that can operate in a wide
              range of possible environments. This research is developing a framework for
              explicitly dealing with such uncertainties in a number of important areas such
              as wireless and underwater acoustic communications, signal estimation and
              detection, and forecasting.

In particular, this research leverages some of
              the new and exciting methods for dealing with uncertainty and complexity from
              the information theory literature.  Problems of uncertainty and variability are
              being addressed through the development of robust signal processing methods
              motivated by contemporary applications in lossless source coding and
              competitive on-line algorithms.  Such universal algorithms can provide a
              particularly effective means for handling uncertainty in a variety of adaptive
              estimation problems.  These include universal estimation and equalization
              strategies which without prior knowledge of the signal or channel can
              asymptotically achieve the performance of the optimal filter tuned to the
              signal or channel in use.  These algorithms can be practically implemented and
              integrated into larger systems with relatively low complexity through the use
              of graphical models and iterative processing techniques used in the study of
              turbo codes and low-density parity check codes. Iterative algorithms such as
              factor graphs provide a natural framework for the joint optimization of a
              variety of tasks typically treated separately.  Motivated by the near-capacity
              achieving performance of iterative decoding and turbo-codes, this research is
              developing practical, efficient iterative algorithms for joint detection,
              estimation and decoding of digital communications over single and multi-user
              channels with inter-symbol interference.  The educational component of this
              research program includes significant curriculum development at both the
              undergraduate and graduate levels, and a strong investment in the mentoring of
              graduate students.  A key aspect of this research includes the active
              involvement of undergraduates in ongoing research.



Singer LEVEL OF
              EFFORT STATEMENT:

At the recommended level of support, Andrew Singer will
              make every attempt to meet the original scope and level of effort of this
              project.
