Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Cyclostationary Signal Processing Framework for Optimized
               and Robust Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0092901

Award Number: 0092901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erchin Serpedin serpedin@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: An Integrated Cyclostationary Signal Processing Framework for
              Optimized and Robust Wireless Communications

PI: Dr. Erchin
              Serpedin

ABSTRACT: 

The successful evolution of the future high-speed
              wireless communication networks requires significant advances in adaptive
              signal processing algorithms that are currently employed for synchronization,
              estimation and equalization of time-varying channels. This research involves
              the development of a general and novel framework for designing robust and
              optimal spectrally efficient channel estimation, synchronization, and
              equalization algorithms. Key elements of the work include development of a
              unified framework for designing and analyzing non-data aided joint carrier
              frequency-offset/Doppler shift and symbol timing estimators in time-selective
              and flat-fading channels, development of a robust non-data aided framework for
              estimation and equalization of time- and frequency-selective fading channels,
              and development of a robust non-data aided space-time signal processing
              framework for synchronization and estimation of multipath signals arriving at
              an antenna array. The proposed research offers a wealth of innovative
              educational projects for course and laboratory instruction.

Level of Effort
              Statement:

At the recommended level of support, the investigator will make
              every attempt to meet the original scope and level of effort of the
              project.


