Title       : CAREER Development, Understanding and Control of Aligned Nanofiber/Nanotube
               Polymer Composites for Engineering Applications.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0092621

Award Number: 0092621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374323             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Lozano LOZANOK@panam.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Pan American
	      1201 West University Dr
	      Edinburg, TX  785412999    956/381-2011

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9102,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              : Development, Understanding, and Control of Aligned Nanofiber/Nanotube Polymer
              Composites for Engineering Applications.

This Faculty Early Career
              Development (CAREER) award supports two main projects devised to shorten the
              gap between scientific understanding and engineering of nanofiber/nanotube
              reinforced polymer composites. The first project will focus on the enhancement
              of properties by nanofiber/tube alignment, where the composite can then be
              further processed with conventional composite manufacturing technologies
              providing for high performance structures. This project will be conducted along
              with studying the effects of the aligned nanofibers/tubes on the morphological,
              mechanical, thermal, and electrical properties of the developed composites. The
              second project will center on the study of the rheology involved in the system.
              The development of relationships between rheological properties (i.e. viscosity
              and relaxation modulus) and molecular structure, composition, temperature,
              time, and pressure will promote the understanding of the composite system and
              will relate it to process optimization.  For the education component, the PI
              will develop and teach courses and labs in polymer engineering and polymer
              processing.  A significant component of the education plan will be the
              supervision and mentoring of undergraduates at UTPA, 85 percent of whom are
              Hispanics, first generation college bound who have had limited experiences with
              scientific research. The opportunity to actively participate in cutting edge
              research will be an invaluable tool for our students and will foster the desire
              to continue in research careers. An outreach to middle school students exposing
              them to a "Magic and Science Show" is also part of the education component. It
              is designed to encourage and stimulate an interest in science, mathematics,
              engineering, and technology (SME&T) related courses.

