Title       : Acquisition of Ground-Penetrating Radar Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a0092258

Award Number: 0092258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27218              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Barker barker@geol.binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Bridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Plumb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall H. McGuire  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0092258
Barker

This grant provides funds for the acquisition of
              Ground-penetrating Radar equipment, including a data acquisition system,
              antennas at a number of frequencies, a mounting cart and odometer wheel, a
              field computer and processing software.  This equipment will support current
              and planned research in a wide range of fields, including environmental
              geophysics and hydrology, sedimentary geology, archaeology and electrical
              engineering.  Some applications will use standard antenna configurations and
              signal processing; for these, ease of use is essential.  Other applications
              will make use of alternative antenna configurations and new developments in
              signal processing and interpretation; for these, we require flexibility in the
              system and access to raw data.  While the proposed equipment is intended
              primarily to support research, there is also a very important educational
              component.  Undergraduate and graduate students in geology, geophysics,
              archaeology and electrical engineering will gain experience in GPR data
              acquisition, processing and interpretation.  In doing so, they as well as their
              faculty will gain an understanding of the usefulness and the limitations of
              this powerful tool for their own current and future research.  Support for this
              grant comes from the Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program
              (EAR/IF), with 50% cost sharing by Binghamton University.  The equipment will
              be housed in and maintained by the Department of Geological Sciences and
              Environmental Studies.

***

