Title       : Structure and Dynamics of Proteins from NMR Orientational Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0092661

Award Number: 0092661
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Prestegard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The continued exploration of a potential source of new information on protein
              structure and dynamics in solution is proposed.  The new information comes from
              residual dipolar couplings seen in NMR spectra of proteins when they are
              induced to have low levels of spatial order by their interaction with an
              anisotropic medium, such as an aqueous liquid crystal, or by their direct
              interaction with a sufficiently high magnetic field. The easily measured
              couplings provide an efficient route to information about protein structure and
              dynamics through their dependence on average interaction vector length and
              orientation.  In addition to basic structural studies of isolated proteins,
              objectives include, (i) the development and application of a method for
              defining the geometry of protein-protein interactions in solution, and (ii) the
              development and application of a strategy for quantifying the amplitudes of
              internal motions in proteins.  The definition of the geometry of
              protein-protein interaction serves to move structural and mechanistic
              descriptions from isolated protein domains toward the system wide descriptions
              that are needed for understanding complete life processes. The quantification
              of amplitudes of internal motion provides insight into mechanistic details of
              protein function that might be missed in static representations of structure. 
              The target systems for testing the methodology include a number of well
              characterized proteins such as myoglobin and rubredoxin, but also include
              recently identified electron transfer partners of a rubredoxin from a
              thermophilic organism.

In terms of general impact, this project will provide
              training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students. 
              Development of methods and training in the use of methods that can define
              protein function at a molecular level is becoming increasingly important in a
              post-genomic era.  Vast quantities of protein sequence information can have an
              impact on the development of new biotechnology products, and the treatment of
              disease, but only with an adequate understanding of protein function.

