Title       : CAREER: Cellular Processes in Education and Gene Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0092701

Award Number: 0092701
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James M. Lee                            
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lonnie D. Shea l-shea@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The PI's objective of the proposed research activities is to examine the
              mechanism of gene transfer from a tissue engineering scaffold by developing a
              novel system designed to deliver the DNA directly to the cell microenvironment.
              Gene therapy approaches have expanded into applications for wound healing and
              tissue regeneration, but therapies are limited by the inability to efficiently
              delivery DNA. Tissue engineering scaffolds have demonstrated an enhanced
              delivery; however, an understanding of the mechanism of gene uptake would
              provide fundamental design parameters necessary to optimize gene transfer. His
              hypothesis to be tested is that delivery from the scaffold to which cells are
              adhered enhances uptake due to direct release into the cell microenvironment.
              To test this hypothesis, they propose to ionically complex non-viral DNA with a
              cationic peptide and to subsequently localize the DNA to the adhesion surface
              by tethering the peptide to a hydrogel. The development of a system with
              controlled, efficient gene delivery would impact the fields of wound healing,
              tissue engineering, and gene therapy, and would find application to basic
              studies of cell processes.
The objective of the proposed educational
              activities is centered on the development of
educational tools for elementary,
              high school, and college students, which can be widely
distributed through an
              established infrastructure at Northwestern. Cellular processes and
biological
              systems serve as the basis to attract student interest. At the elementary
              level, events are designed for a Science Olympiad in which students apply the
              scientific method and get hands-on experience. The events are phrased in terms
              of biological phenomenon; however, the concepts are centered on the physical
              sciences, which is an area in which students frequently struggle.

