Title       : Fluctuations and Structure at Liquid-Liquid Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0092469

Award Number: 0092469
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Schlossman schloss@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Synchrotron x-ray surface scattering and Brewster angle microscopy will be used
              in a program of research and education to investigate fluctuations and
              structure at the liquid-liquid interface.  Students will be trained to use
              cutting-edge synchrotron techniques to study interfacial phenomena.  This
              research addresses the poorly understood area of molecular ordering and
              structure at liquid-liquid interfaces.  This interdisciplinary area has
              important consequences for understanding inhomogenieties in condensed matter
              systems, and molecular organization at soft interfaces.  The results will be
              relevant to a range of chemical and biological systems.  The areas of study
              are:  (1) Molecular ordering and phase transitions in surfactant monolayers at
              the water-oil interface, (2) Test of a recent hypothesis about the role of
              capillary waves and intrinsic structure in determining the interfacial width
              between water and alkanes, (3) Determination of the interfacial Hamiltonian
              through the study of fluctuating interfaces interacting over short distances in
              thin wetting films; and (4) Development of a new model system suited for
              structural studies of the adsorption of larger biomolecules to lipid
              membranes.

Surfactant molecules preferentially adsorb to the interface
              between two liquids, such as oil and water.  The surfactants act as a bridge
              that connects two types of materials that would, otherwise, not mix.  These
              surfactants play an important role in many domestic products, such as shampoos,
              paints, and plastics.  More importantly, surfactants form the basis for
              biological cell membranes that support the formation of life on earth.  From
              the point of view of condensed matter physics, it is important to understand
              how large numbers of molecules arrange themselves at interfaces because the
              makeup of these interfaces determine many important properties of materials. 
              Chemists and biologists are also interested in the way molecules arrange
              themselves and transport through liquid interfaces.  This is important, for
              example, in the separation of toxic from non-toxic chemicals and in controlling
              which biological molecules can enter different parts of cells or the liquid
              region between cells.  Due to the importance of these systems they have been
              studied for many years.  However, an understanding of the structure on the
              molecular length scale is lacking.  During the past three years, NSF support
              has enabled the development of powerful x-ray scattering techniques that
              directly probe the organization of molecules at the liquid-liquid interface. 
              The present grant supports the training of students in the further development
              and application of these techniques to areas of physical, chemical, and
              biophysical interest. 


