Title       : Key Determinants for Calcium Binding Affinity of EF-Hand Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0092486

Award Number: 0092486
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jenny J. Yang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0092486
Yang
The specific goals of this project are to understand
              site-specific calcium binding properties of EF-hand loops and identify the key
              factors contributing to calcium affinity of EF-hand motifs in proteins. Calcium
              binding is essential for the biological functions of EF-hand proteins in
              controlling cellular calcium levels and in regulating many cellular processes
              through calcium-induced conformational change. Site-specific information about
              calcium binding properties of individual EF-hand motifs is essential for
              defining the sequence for the calcium binding process and the contribution of
              each EF-hand motif to the conformational change of the intact protein. In this
              research, the PI will investigate the intrinsic calcium binding affinity of
              isolated EF-hand motifs by engineering a single EF-calcium-binding site into a
              scaffold protein.  This approach focuses specifically on the intrinsic binding
              ability of an individual EF-hand motif without the complexities encountered in
              cooperative, multi-site systems of natural EF-hand proteins.  To obtain
              site-specific information about calcium-binding properties of EF-hand loops,
              the building blocks of EF-hand motifs will be systematically introduced into
              the host scaffold. To identify contributions of charged ligands to calcium
              affinity of EF-loops, the number and geometric arrangement of negatively
              charged ligands in isolated EF-loops will be also varied.
