Title       : CAREER: Scheduling of Large Scale Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0092854

Award Number: 0092854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Kaminsky kaminsky@ieor.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of both the research and educational components of this Faculty
              Early Career Development (CAREER) project are to improve the efficient
              scheduling and control of large-scale production systems. Rapid advances in
              information technology have led to unprecedented visibility into each of tile
              stages of production and distribution networks' this has served to highlight
              the need for efficient algorithms and systems to assist managers with the
              effective allocation of resources, and for educational programs that help
              current and future managers effectively use these algorithms and systems.  This
              CAREER research involves rigorous analytical analyses of several classes of
              large-scale production scheduling models.  Novel tools will be developed in
              order to analyze both the structure of various large-scale production
              scheduling problems, and the solution approaches which are typically employed.
              This analysis will increase understanding of these systems, and lead to new,
              efficient, robust algorithms for production scheduling, with a particular focus
              on models which involve due date related objectives, including those in which
              due dates are determined within the context of the model.  Additionally, these
              techniques will be applied to models which capture complexities inherent in
              manufacturing processes which encompass several plants, factories, or sites. 
              The education portion of this proposal focuses on conveying the concepts and
              intuition which will enable students to effectively employ the algorithms and
              systems which result from this research.  This includes the development of new
              courses, and the development of computer games which help to illustrate
              important intuitive concepts about production and distribution networks,  and
              supply chain scheduling.

These models involve scheduling and controlling
              production and distribution across a supply chain, and will enable the
              exploration of the tradeoff between the costs associated with holding
              semi-finished goods between production stages at different facilities, the
              efficient utilization of these facilities, and the minimization of
              transportation costs.

