Title       : Surfactant Transition Metal Chelates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2001     
File        : a0092560

Award Number: 0092560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310400             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Jaeger DAJ@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this renewal award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              supports the work of Dr. David A. Jaeger in the Department of Chemistry at the
              University of Wyoming in Laramie.   The proposed research involves the
              synthesis, isolation, and characterization of two series surfactants based on
              Co(III) chelates, using ligands related to ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid and
              nitrilotriacetic acid.   The structures of the surfactants will be established
              using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR of 1H, 13C and 59Co) ,
              UV/vis, FT-IR, and single crystal x-ray diffraction.   Aggregate morphologies
              in water will be characterized by Krafft  temperature and measurements of
              critical aggregation concentration, NMR, dynamic light scattering, differential
              scanning calorimetry, optical microscopy, and electron microscopy.   Monolayers
              on water will be characterized by surface pressure-area isotherms.   Of
              particular interest will be the dependence of aggregate morphology and
              monolayer behavior on surfactant stereochemistry.

Dr. Jaeger's research
              involves surfactants - surface active agents that prefer to be at the interface
              between phases (such as air and water) - in which binding of chelating ligands
              to cobalt +3 ions plays an important role in fixing the structure of the
              resulting  surfactant molecule, and in giving different properties from what
              they would be in the absence of metal binding.   By systematically changing the
              ligand structure, he hopes to understand the factors controlling the structure
              and properties of the resulting surfactant.   This new class of molecules might
              have several applications including redox-switched systems, site-specific
              protein and DNA cleavage catalysts, and catalytic hydrolysis of amides and
              esters.   The work is expected to provide valuable training for the students
              doing the work because of the variety of experiments and instruments involved.
