Title       : CAREER: Nanoscale Chemistry in One Dimension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0092086

Award Number: 0092086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $595799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peidong Yang p_yang@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1682,9161,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore the following chemical strategies for the general
              synthesis, organization and integration of  nanoscale building blocks: (1)  the
              development of gas-phase and solution-phase chemistry for the synthesis of
              nanowires, nanorods and molecular wires with well-defined sizes and aspect
              ratios; (2) the development of suitable chemical functionalization chemistry
              for the self-assembly and integration of these 1D building blocks; (3) the
              investigation of the thermal and chemical stability of these 1D nanostructures.
              The three types of 1D nanoscale building blocks (nanowire, nanorod and
              molecular wire) in this project share common structural
              feature---one-dimensionality, but differ in their length scale, aspect ratio,
              and rigidity, conseuently also differ in their assembly behaviors and physical
              properties. The interdisciplinary nature of the research will benefit the
              postdoctoral researchers, graduate students and undergraduate students involved
              in the project. Associated educational activities will include exploring new
              means of introducing materials chemistry research into the curriculum for both
              undergraduate and graduate courses. 
%%%
One-dimensional (1D) nanostructures
              are of  both fundamental and technological interest.
They not only exhibit
              interesting electronic and optical properties intrinsically associated with
              their low dimensionality and the quantum confinement effect, but they also are
              potentially the critical components in the nanoscale device applications. This
              project will train students in the important field of nanoscience and foster
              their scientific development in a cross-disciplinary environment. This area is
              viewed by industry as high priority, and students trained in this area of
              nanoscience and technology compete very well in the job market and make
              significant contributions to an area of high national interest. This project is
              funded by the Solid State Chemistry Program of the Division of Materials
              Research and the Advanced Materials and Processing Program of the Chemistry
              Division.

