Title       : MRPG: FMRI Studies on Language and Task Switching in Spanish-English Bilinguals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0092043

Award Number: 0092043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arturo Hernandez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              How do bilinguals select the appropriate language?  Some have suggested that
              selection of the appropriate language involves some sort of functional
              switching mechanism.  However, the question remains whether this switching
              mechanism is specific to switching across two languages, whether the same
              mechanism is used in switching within one language, or whether it is an
              instance of a general switching mechanism that is used across any cognitive
              domain.  This project will address that question by investigating language
              switching and task switching in bilinguals.  Switching is a fundamental process
              that is necessary when one has to disengage from one activity to engage in
              another.  This process requires executive function, a form of focused attention
              that helps one to manipulate information temporarily.  Although these processes
              are fundamental, they are also very fragile.  Damage to the frontal lobes,
              either through dementia, normal aging, or stroke, leads to a reduction in
              executive function and consequently in the ability to switch between tasks and
              between languages.  This research will use functional Magnetic Resonance
              Imaging (fMRI) to investigate the neural substrates responsible for switching
              in bilinguals across two languages, within a single language, and with a
              non-verbal task.  Previous neuroimaging studies have documented the role of the
              dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and other associated areas (the supplementary
              motor area, and the posterior parietal lobe) in executive function.  In
              addition, previous studies by Hernandez have found increased activity in these
              same areas when switching between two languages.  The findings of this research
              are expected to parallel previous results.  Specifically, switching, relative
              to not switching, will reveal activation in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
              supplementary motor area, and the posterior parietal lobe.  Furthermore, the
              results will demonstrate whether the increased activation when switching across
              all three tasks involves the same neural structures.  In a second experiment,
              event-related fMRI will be used to look more closely at switching into the
              dominant language relative to switching into the non-dominant language.  It is
              predicted that activation in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the
              supplementary motor area, and the posterior parietal lobe will be larger when
              switching into the non-dominant language.  The results from this project may
              confirm further the notion that executive function is necessary for switching
              across domains.  Furthermore, it may also confirm that level of executive
              control depends on the fluency in the language.  This approach will also help
              to further elucidate whether selective access involves neural structures that
              are general to any cognitive domain.  As a Minority Research Initiation
              project, this research will aid Hernandez in expanding his expertise in
              neuroimaging.  Furthermore, it will provide both graduate and undergraduate
              students in his laboratory with additional training in cognitive neuroscience. 
