Title       : CAREER: Exploring Nano-Scale Properties of Functionalized Monolayers: An
               Integrated Molecular Simulation and Experimental Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0092699

Award Number: 0092699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaoyi Jiang sjiang@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0092699
U. of Washington
Shaoyi Jiang

An integrated research
              and education plan is proposed for the career development of the Principal
              Investigator (PI).  The proposed research work focuses on exploring and
              controlling nano-scale chemical, structural, frictional, and biological
              properties of thin films formed either by self-assembly or by surface reaction.
               The strengths of this proposed work lie in the integration of simulation and
              theory with experiment and the complement of molecular simulation with ab
              initio quantum chemistry, continuum mechanics, advanced simulation algorithm,
              and high performance computing.  The first objective of the proposed work is to
              explore and control nano-scale frictional properties of thin films.  It
              consists of two components: (a) rigorous interpretation of scanning force
              microscopy experiments on self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) by a hybrid
              simulation method and (b) exploration of novel organic monolayers on silicon
              for applications in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS).  The success of this
              work will advance our knowledge of interfacial dynamics and facilitate efforts
              to develop novel lubricating systems for applications, such as car engines,
              MEMS, and magnetic data storage devices.  The second objective of the proposed
              work is to explore and control nano-scale biological properties of mixed SAMs.
              The work includes (a) the study of protein adsorption on molecular-scale
              uniform mixed SAMs using a combination of scanning probe microscopy, surface
              plasmon resonance, and molecular modeling methods, and (b) the development of
              functionalized surface coatings for biosensors.  The success of this work will
              advance our understanding of interactions between protein molecules and
              surfaces at the molecular level and facilitate efforts to develop biomaterials
              with superior biocompatibilities and biosensors with high selectivity and
              sensitivity.  All components in the proposed work are complementary and are
              centered on the application of nano-scale simulation, theory and experiment to
              both fundamental and engineering problems involving interfacial phenomena.  The
              success of the proposed work will have far-reaching implications for the field
              of interfacial phenomena and a broad impact on new technology.  The existing
              collaborations with various groups in academia, industry, and national
              laboratories will greatly enhance the success of the proposed work.

The
              proposed education plan aims at reaching out to high school students,
              particularly underrepresented groups, providing research opportunities to
              undergraduate students, and integrating molecular concepts and methods into the
              chemical engineering curricula with focus on development of the high school
              outreach.  Education and training of a new generation of skilled work force is
              necessary for rapid progress in nanotechnology.  To accomplish this goal,
              educational activities must involve students at all levels (college and
              precollege), and should include a general effort to popularize nanotechnology. 
              The outreach activities will include giving motivational talks to precollege
              students, developing and implementing educational modules in math and science
              at the high school level, and involving high school students in research
              and/or
module development.  The proposed outreach activities will inspire high
              school students to consider careers in science and engineering, specifically in
              nanotechnology.  Undergraduate research opportunities will better prepare
              students to use their education in the rapidly changing world and to keep
              learning for the rest of their lives.  The introduction of molecular concepts
              and methods into the chemical engineering curricula will broaden the students'
              view beyond the classical approach to a problem.

