Title       : CAREER: Towards an Efficient Ubiquitous Computing Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0092678

Award Number: 0092678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $487651             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivasan Seshan srini+@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                    In 1989, the researcher applied for graduate schooland wrote that global
              network access would change the way people work and that people would use the
              network to "plan travel, pay bills and access libraries of information". A
              decade later, the Internet and Web applications made these network applications
              a reality. As we look to the future, the next major evolution in technology
              will be to make it possible for users to access information and interact with
              all devices in their environment through ubiquitous wireless networks and
              simple inexpensive computing devices such as PDAs [81]. The popular approach to
              achieving this future vision has been to move the applications and network
              services available on the Internet onto the simple mobile devices and the
              wireless network infrastructure. However, innovative network services and
              protocols will be necessary to operate such networks and applications
              efficiently.
      The objective of this NSF CAREER proposal is to examine the
              services that this new generation of mobile applications need from the network
              and to carefully adapt the design and implementation of these services to the
              environment's demands. The unique requirements of this environment include:
  
                Power Awareness. Most mobile devices will be battery operated and thus
              require energy efficiency.
     Wireless Link Characteristics. Wireless links
              are slower due to limited spectrum availability, are prone to loss and
              disconnection, and are often connection-oriented or stateful.
     Network
              Evolution. Since users will not upgrade all their small devices simultaneously,
              the future system must support automatic upgrading, multiple simultaneous
              versions and/or backward compatibility.
     Dynamic Network. The members of a
              network are dynamic due to mobility and range of network.
     Isolation. A
              group of wireless devices should be able to operate in isolation from any
              infrastructure.
     Simple Devices. Many of the devices that participate in
              such a network may be extremely simple.
     Scale of Operation. The future
              network will have billions of small devices.
     New Applications.
              Applications in this environment may need very different services from the
              network.
    The objective of this CAREER proposal is to design a new
              networking and operating system infrastructure for this next generation of
              ubiquitous computing applications. The research plan consists of three major
              stages. In the first stage, the researcher plans to build some of these next
              generation applications to improve the understanding of their requirements. The
              next stage consists of developing protocols and operating system services based
              on these new requirements. The project is  especially interested in 1)
              improving the bandwidth and power efficiency of network protocols, 2) making it
              possible for applications and protocols to adapt to the availability of power,
              availability of bandwidth and other environmental conditions, 3) designing
              service discovery approaches that can handle the query types that are likely
              for mobile applications, and 4) making this environment support the easy
              introduction of new link technologies, network protocols and applications.
              Finally, the research will be evaluated by modifying our test applications to
              use these new services. If successful, this project will significantly change
              how wireless networks and mobile applications of the future will be structured
              and built.
     The education plan proposes to use educational applications
              such as shared note taking [24] and intelligent classrooms [1] among the early
              target applications to be used. In addition, the researcher plans to
              incorporate mobile and wireless education into the already existing mainstream
              undergraduate and graduate networking classes.

