Title       : Field Reconnaissance of Payatas Landfill, Philippines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0092700

Award Number: 0092700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29457              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott M. Merry merry@engr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1636,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This action is to support a field reconnaissance of the devastating landfill
              failure (wasteslide) on 10 July 2000 at the Payatas Landfill in Quezon City,
              Philippines.  This landfill was reported to have been as high as a 7-story
              building prior to the failure.  This failure resulted in extensive loss of life
              and injuries.  Initial reports indicated that the failure was very fast (such
              as a debris flow) and triggered by heavy rainfall during the Typhoon
              Kai-Tak.

This failure is important because other documented landfill
              failures have been primarily along interfaces (Kettleman Hills) or caused by
              foundation failure (Beriolis, Spain and the 1996 Rumpke, Cincinnati waste
              failure).  The Dona Juana Columbia failure was due to improper (pressurized)
              leachate recirculation, and little is known about a 1987 landfill failure in
              Turkey.  To date, there is not a well-documented case of a failure of a
              landfill through the waste.  If this were the failure mode, it would be
              important since the back-calculated strengths would provide data on the static
              strength of municipal solid waste landfills and on the impact of excess pore
              pressure on waste shear strength.  As leachate recirculation and bio-reactor
              technology move from a few isolated test cells to widespread use in US
              landfills, and as urban development encroaches on existing landfills,
              characterization of the mechanical behavior of municipal solid waste and the
              impact of excess pore water pressures on shear strength becomes increasingly
              important.

The US reconnaissance team is travelling to Quezon City for field
              reconnaissance of the failure site.  This investigation is being coordinated in
              the Philippines with a team of engineers from the University of Philippines -
              Diliman (UPD).  Data being gathered by the combined group includes: pre- and
              post-failure geometry, slide plane identification, subsurface conditions, waste
              type and consistency, method of compaction, rainfall records, and other
              information that will allow an effective stress analysis of the failure to be
              performed.  Identification of the pore pressures is a major challenge in the
              analyses.  One important finding will be to assess the relevance of this
              failure to US practice.

The US reconnaissance team will provide full
              documentation of the failure, including geology, geometry, waste and compaction
              type, and weather conditions.  The report will be broadly disseminated via hard
              copy and the Internet.
 Form 7: CMS-0092700; Scott M. Merry, U. of
              Arizona

This action is for a SGER award, and is therefore exempt from peer
              review.  The support of post-failure reconnaissance teams to recover ephemeral
              data requires urgency consistent with the SGER criteria.

This action is a
              further step in the ongoing effort to obtain full-scale data from major
              damaging events such as earthquakes and tsunamis.  But while NSF has provided
              support for many post-earthquake and post-tsunami reconnaissance teams, this is
              the first support that I am aware of for a post-landfill failure
              reconnaissance.

The PI contacted me shortly after this landfill failure in
              the Philippines to discuss a possible NSF-supported reconnaissance
              investigation.  He also received input from the NSF Division of International
              programs.  Given that events such as this landfill failure in the Philippines
              can be regarded as full-scale experiments that cannot be duplicated via
              controlled experiments in the laboratory or in the field, the cost of
              recovering and disseminating data obtained by reconnaissance efforts is
              minuscule compared to the cost of computer, laboratory or field simulations. 
              It is essential that these reconnaissance efforts be supported.

It is
              recommended that this SGER request for support be approved.

