Title       : Thermodynamic Origins of Sequence-Recognition in Ligand-DNA Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0092177

Award Number: 0092177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Graves   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Graves, David E.
MCB-0092177

The long-term objective of this research is to
              gain biophysical insight into the key aspects of sequence selective
              interactions of small molecules with nucleic acids. The model system that has
              been studied thus far involves the sequence-specific DNA binding agent,
              actinomycin D. This compounds shows a marked preference for DNA binding at the
              d(GpC) step through intercalation of the phenoxazone chromophore between the
              adjacent G and C base pairs.  Concomitant with this intercalative binding is
              the interactions of the two cyclic pentapeptide sidechains with the floor of
              the DNA minor groove.  This laboratory has recently demonstrated the bases that
              flank this intercalation site play a major role in directing the thermodynamic
              mechanism for complex formation.  If the 5'-flanking sequence is T (-TGCA-),
              the change in binding enthalpy has been measured to be -2.5 kcal/mol. In
              contrast, when the 5'-flanking base is C (-CGCA-), the change in binding
              enthalpy is found to be -5.8 kcal/mol, nearly 3 kcal/mol more favorable than
              the other flanking sequences. 5 Historically, the binding of actinomycin D to
              DNA has been reported to be enthalpy driven as signified by large positive
              (favorable) binding enthalpies and binding enthalpies of near zero or -1
              kcal/mol. These recent results from this laboratory indicate that the
              thermodynamic binding properties of actinomycin D to oligonucleotides with
              specifically designed single binding sites are quite varied, depending on the
              sequence of bases flanking the actinomycin D binding site. Based on the
              variances observed in the enthalpy and entropy components associated with
              complex formation, linkages between thermodynamic binding mechanism(s) and
              structural features of the actinomycin D-DNA complexeswil be explored. 
              Specifically the structures of the actinomycin D complexes formed with the
              -TGCA- duplex and the -CGCA- duplex will be examined by high-resolution NMR
              methods to discern differences in the structural features of the complex that
              may explain the enhanced enthalpy contribution toward actinomycin D binding to
              the CGCA- duplex.

The use of non-self complimentary deoxyoligonucleotides
              was serendipitous toward the finding of
sequence selective interactions of
              actinomycin D to single-strand DNA. The influence of DNA base sequence on the
              energetics and structural properties of actinomycin D-single strand DNA
              interactions is being examined. These observations could be of considerable
              benefit in gaining insight into how proteins bind single-strand DNA in a
              sequence-selective manner and expanded to biological roles of single-strand DNA
              interactions. The in vivo interactions of actinomycin D to double stranded DNA
              are characterized by high affinity and slow dissociation and have been
              suggested to carry out their biological function of specifically inhibiting
              transcription through blocking the progression of the RNA polymerase along the
              DNA template. With the recent findings of a high affinity of actinomycin D for
              single-stranded DNA,  additional caveats may be added to this proposed
              mechanism, including the possible binding of the drug to single-strand DNA
              within the open complex, and/or to inhibiting reannealing of the single-strand
              DNA. 
