Title       : Alaska EPSCoR Research Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0092040

Award Number: 0092040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Happ George.Happ@alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Alaska Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
              (EPSCoR)
project will feature infrastructure enhancements in three research
              focus areas as
well as strengthen research competitiveness through S&T
              planning, outreach
and education, technology transfer, targeted hires and
              faculty development. The
research focus areas are: Infrastructure and Systems
              for Cold Regions, which
will consider structures that must function at low
              temperatures and develop new
construction and engineering strategies; High
              Latitude Environments
Contaminants Consortium, which will involve engineers,
              biologists and chemists
developing analytical facilities and expertise to
              address water, ground and
atmospheric contaminants that accumulate at high
              altitudes; and Integrative
Approaches to Environmental Physiology which will
              use physiological
adaptations of Alaskan animals to extreme, highly seasonal
              environments as
platforms for addressing general physiological
              questions.
Infrastructure enhancements in these areas build on strengths of
              the three
participating campuses of the University of Alaska (Fairbanks,
              Anchorage and
Juneau) and are consistent with on-going program development and
              strategic
plans. Education and human resource programs will support
              undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral students. Partnerships with colleges
              and rural high
schools having predominantly native student populations will be
              expanded.
Outreach to the Alaska business community and state agencies will
              provide
opportunities for planning and development of the state's science
              and
engineering capacity. The infrastructure improvements will greatly enhance
              the
range and depth of research projects and improve the state's
              research
competitiveness.

