Title       : SGER: An Investigation of Landslide Assessment and Delineation Using Airborne
               Laser Swath Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0092447

Award Number: 0092447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99755              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon R. Schaefer Vernon_Schaefer@sdstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzette R. Burckhard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1634,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Landslides can cause extensive damage; hence early detection, monitoring and
              assessment of potential problem areas are critically important. The ability to
              recognize impending slide locations would assist mitigation, thereby reducing
              major landslide development, disruption of services and possible loss of life. 
              The first step in the characterization of a landslide prone area is the contour
              mapping of its surface.  However, due to the varied topography, standard
              surveying techniques rarely provide contour intervals smaller than 3 m (10 ft).
               Unfortunately, this resolution is unsuitable for delineation of future
              landslide development and remedial measures. 

However, recent advances in
              microcomputers, lasers and GPS positioning technology, have resulted in the
              development of a compact, lightweight, airborne laser mapping system that can
              be operated from a small airplane. It allows one to map 100 square kilometers
              in a single hour, and ultimately create a three-dimensional surface map made up
              of data points spaced 1-meter apart. In addition to rapid data collection,
              vertical accuracies of 5 to 10 cm. (2 to 4 inches) are usually possible.
              

During a flight, the laser sends out pulses that hit the ground surface and
              are reflected back to the plane. By measuring the time it takes the pulses
              (10,000 per second) to complete the roundtrip determines how far away each
              point is from the aircraft.  Then, by knowing where and how high the aircraft
              is, allows one to compute the absolute height and coordinates of the ground
              surface. Several GPS systems both in the aircraft and on the ground (ground
              crews) provide precise location information of the aircraft's position at all
              times. 

The goal of this research is to assess the accuracy and capability
              of airborne laser swath mapping (ALSM) to identify and map landslide areas. 
              Selected areas in South Dakota's Missouri River valley will be used as test
              sites.  A series of measurement and mapping strategies will be performed to
              determine the most efficient, highest sensitivity, and cost effective approach
              to assess and monitor landslide areas. Once this is accomplished, an evaluation
              of the data will then be performed to establish those pertinent parameters
              necessary to characterize landslides.  


