Title       : CAREER: Unified Component-Based Framework for Fault-Tolerance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0092724

Award Number: 0092724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandeep S. Kulkarni sandeep@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal   of this project  is  to  develop  a unified  framework 
              for
developing fault-tolerant systems; this unified framework will
              provide
the   structural continuity to   developers of  fault-tolerant
              systems
while they perform  several tasks such  as design, synthesis,
              testing,
verification, and refinement.  The  unified framework will be based
              on
the  use of  two  fault-tolerance   components, namely detectors  
              and
correctors. Dr. Kulkarni has identified these  two components as
              being
necessary and sufficient for adding fault-tolerance to a rich class
              of
systems.  The use  of detectors and  correctors will  permit
              efficient
implementation as the  knowledge of application-specification  is
              used
in computing  the specification of  the required components.  Also,
              by
permitting  the  reusability   of   fault-tolerance   components, 
              the
framework will help  in reducing the  development cycle for a  system.
To
              simplify the reuse of the  fault-tolerance components, Dr. Kulkarni
will 
              develop  a  component-template   language to specify   templates
--which will 
              be  instantiated  by the  developers   of fault-tolerant
systems--  for
              commonly used    components.  Dr.  Kulkarni  will  also
develop heuristics to
              reduce the complexity of automating the addition
of  fault-tolerance.     
              Finally,   these  heuristics      and    the
component-templates will be used
              to develop a  tool for automating the
addition of fault-tolerance.

