Title       : Research Funding and Productivity at Universities: Studies on Earmarking,
               Set-Aside Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a0092548

Award Number: 0092548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65846              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ana Abigail Payne apayne@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Basic research is an activity whose social benefits exceed private benefits,
              thereby justifying financial support by the federal government. Today, at least
              ten federal agencies play a significant role in funding research at U.S.
              universities, representing, on average, more than 60 percent of total research
              expenditures. Although this percentage has not changed significantly in the
              last 20 years, the distribution of federal research funding to universities
              that have historically received low levels of funding has increased
              substantially. Federal funding is allocated via peer-reviewed and competitive
              processes as well as through processes that may not utilize as rigorous
              analysis of the quality of the research to be undertaken. Two such processes
              are known as earmarking and set-aside programs. These processes have different
              effects on both the types of research conducted and the distribution of funding
              across universities.  This project will explore the effect of earmarking and
              set-aside programs on the distribution of federal research funding across
              universities and on research productivity.  This is an important area to study
              for two primary reasons. First, research and development is considered an
              important contributor to economic growth. Thus, understanding the role the
              federal government plays to promote R&D both nationally and regionally needs
              further exploration to understand the benefits and costs of federal R&D
              funding. Second, given universities must allocate scarce resources across
              research, instructional, and other activities, it is important to understand
              the impact of the different avenues for obtaining federal funding on the
              research produced by the university, as well as the role of research funding in
              the distribution of other forms of revenue.  A theoretical framework will be
              developed that will explore the motivations of universities to seek earmarked
              funding instead of (or as a complement to) funding allocated under a more
              competitive process as well as the motivations of Congress to allocate funding
              via earmarks. Using this framework, the distribution of earmarked funding
              across universities between 1980 and the present will be explored empirically
              to discern which of the theoretical predictions are supported by the data.
              Next, the effect of earmarked funding, alone and in conjunction with total
              federal research funding, on research productivity will be explored. With
              respect to set-aside programs, the research will focus on those universities
              that have benefited from these programs.  Whether and how the research
              productivity of these universities has changed as a result will be explored. 
              Implicit in the project is the development of a framework that explores several
              complex relationships and the development of an extensive data set. This
              project will involve a research assistant to help in all aspects of the
              research. In addition, the assistant will be supervised in an independent 
              research project by the principal investigator, especially with respect to
              helping to develop high quality research skills. 
