Title       : GOALI: Gas-Phase Reactions of Neutral Organic Molecules Desorbed by
               Laser-Induced Acoustic Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  2001    
File        : a0092119

Award Number: 0092119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilkka I. Kenttamaa hilkka@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Aaserud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this GOALI award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the
              Chemistry Division and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities supports
              the work of Dr. Hilkka I. Kenttamaa of the Department of Chemistry at Purdue
              University in West Lafayette, Indiana and Dr. David Aaserud of the Lubrizol
              Corporation. A high-risk/high-gain research project involving Purdue University
              and Lubrizol Corporation is proposed for the study of optoacoustic desorption
              as a means to evaporate neutral molecules into mass spectrometers. The goal is
              to determine whether the combination of laser-induced acoustic desorption
              (LIAD) with gas-phase ion-molecule reactions involving mass-selected reagent
              ions provides benefits in mass spectrometric characterization of thermally
              labile and/or nonvolatile molecules. Preliminary experiments confirm the
              feasibility of the concept, demonstrate high predictability and
              reproducibility, and suggest some intriguing possibilities. For example, the
              ability to bring neutral (not ionic) nonvolatile and/or thermally labile
              molecules into the gas phase would allow a variety of fundamental
              thermochemical, structural and reactivity studies that currently cannot be
              carried out. Further, this simple approach may provide an attractive complement
              to MALDI in qualitative analysis. A matrix should not be necessary, which may
              lead to better predictability. The physical separation of the evaporation and
              ionization events should permit the use of many different types of ionization
              reactions, thus providing control over reaction products and thermochemistry,
              and access to a variety of information for a given analyte. Finally, this
              approach should allow mass spectrometric characterization of some compounds
              that are currently not amenable to such analysis.

Dr. David Aaserud, the
              Co-PI on the award, will commit 5-10% of his time and resources to the proposed
              work where he will jointly advise participating graduate students and provide
              polymer characterization expertise to the project. Interaction will include
              monthly progress reviews and the supervision of one or two doctoral students
              during work at Lubrizol. The students will be exposed to Lubrizol's analytical
              capabilities and to an industrial environment. Lubrizol will provide relevant
              samples and access to any appropriate additional analytical information,
              including GPC, LC, and NMR data. In the technology transfer stage, the
              laboratories at Lubrizol will be accessible for applications of the new
              technologies to industrial samples. The Lubrizol Corporation has provided
              financial support to graduate students and research projects in Professor
              Kenttamaa's laboratory over several years. Lubrizol is committed to continue
              this funding as part or their cost sharing. Lubrizol views the collaborative
              effort as a continuation of its interaction with Professor Kenttamaa's group
              with a significant increase in the commitment of resources.

The proposed
              research is at the frontiers of mass spectrometry in studies of the selective
              transfer of molecules from the solid phase to the gas phase. Lubrizol's
              interest in derivatized polyalphaolefins arises from the fact that these
              substances are important components of many lubricant additives. The
              development of new and better methods to characterize hydrocarbon polymers and
              their functionalized derivatives will allow a better understanding of these
              materials and help Lubrizol to better predict product performance. With the
              support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program and the MPS Office
              of Multidisciplinary Activities, the PI is able to perform potentially
              ground-breaking research as well as work with an industrial partner to explore
              real-world applications of the research. Professor Kenttamaa has a large group
              of undergraduate and graduate students who are female or from underrepresented
              groups. For them the research is expected to provide a valuable educational
              experience.

