Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Female Wage-Labor and Renegotiation of Patriarchal
               Ideologies in Semi-Rural West Bengal, India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a0092174

Award Number: 0092174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria S. Lockwood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In areas of the world with strong patriarchal systems the low status of women
              has implications for general development as well as children's health.  Female
              participation in wage work frequently raises women's status in the household,
              but this relationship is not simple or invariable. This project involves the
              dissertation research of a cultural anthropology student from Southern
              Methodist University.  The project will study the impact of female
              participation in wage work in Calcutta, India, in a patriarchal community of
              poor families. The process of male-female negotiation about family
              decision-making will be studied through an analysis of data from a sample of
              households varying in women's engagement in the wage labor market.  Life
              histories of married women will also be collected to enrich the understanding
              of how women interact with the community and their families. The student will
              test hypotheses relating female wage income and mobility to household
              decision-making power and resource control, kinship obligations and
              self-esteem. This research will contribute to an understanding of the impact of
              wage earnings on women's status.  The new information to be collected will be
              important for planners, administrators and social workers in order to identify
              problems and formulate policies for the improvement of conditions faced by
              women in the developing world. 

