Title       : CAREER: Metals and Intermediates in Biodegradation of
               Ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0092463

Award Number: 0092463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne M. VanBriesen jeanne@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on Ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA), an anthropogenic
              chelating agent widely used in industrial processes, household cleaners, and
              consumer food and health products. EDTA can persist in the environment when
              biodegradation by microorganisms is slow. Environmental effects of chelating
              agents have not been fully explored while uses (particularly in chlorine free
              bleaching applications) are increasing rapidly. The plan focuses on
              understanding the interactions of chemistry and biology that control the fate
              of EDTA and on expanding public understanding of environmental systems and
              non-biodegradable contaminants.

The specific objectives of the plan are as
              follows:
   Evaluate the effect of co-contaminant metals on the biodegradation
              of EDTA.
   Investigate the effect of intermediate formation on the
              biodegradation of EDTA.
   Increase understanding of the knowledge and skills
              of environmental engineering among
       undergraduate and graduate students
              at Carnegie Mellon University.
   Enhance the awareness of secondary teachers
              to the fundamentals of environmental  
       engineering and the scientific
              method.
   Encourage women and minority students to pursue environmental
              engineering.
   Develop a national reputation as a strong researcher and
              dedicated educator.

The research, education, and outreach objectives are
              designed to be integrative. Results in the laboratory and in modeling
              methodologies will be used as examples and case studies in undergraduate
              classes, as problems in advanced graduate classes, and as discussion points in
              outreach activities with secondary teachers. The interactions with teachers and
              students during outreach activities will be used to raise the awareness of
              future engineers about their role in advancing scientific literacy. The P.I.'s
              training and experience as a high school teacher will allow the use of
              interactions with educators at all levels to enhance teaching skills and
              continue development of creative classroom activities.  Activities that are
              unique to this project include development of a course module on the use,
              regulation and environmental effects of anthropogenic chelating agents, and
              hosting high school teachers for summer research in my laboratory.


