Title       : Molecular Composition of the Chloroplast Division Apparatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0092448

Award Number: 0092448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $503069             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine W. Osteryoung osteryou@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY.   The maintenance of plastid populations is essential to the
              viability of photosynthetic eukaryotes and dependent on plastid replication.
              Yet, the molecular mechanisms underlying plastid division remain undetermined.
              In recent years, two nuclear gene families have been identified in higher
              plants, FtsZ1 and FtsZ2, each encoding homologues of the key bacterial cell
              division protein FtsZ. Bacterial FtsZ, a GTPase related to tubulin, polymerizes
              at the onset of cytokinesis to form a ring structure at the division plane that
              constricts the cell. Antisense repression of specific FtsZ1 and FtsZ2 family
              members from Arabidopsis, AtFtsZ1-1 and AtFtsZ2-1, has demonstrated essential
              and functionally distinct roles for both gene families in mediating plastid
              division in higher plants, and firmly established the endosymbiotic origin of
              the plastid division machinery. Further, antibodies highly specific for
              AtFtsZ1-1 and AtFtsZ2-1 have been generated and used in immunofluorescence
              microscopy to show for the first time that both FtsZ1 and FtsZ2 co-localize to
              membrane-associated rings at the plastid division site. Based on experiments
              demonstrating that FtsZ1 but not FtsZ2 is imported into chloroplasts in vitro,
              a model has been proposed for the macromolecular organization of the plastid
              division apparatus wherein FtsZ1 and FtsZ2 assemble into rings on the inner and
              outer surfaces of the chloroplast envelope membranes, respectively, and act in
              concert to constrict the organelle. However, the discovery of a second FtsZ2
              gene in Arabidopsis, AtFtsZ2-2, suggests this model may be incomplete. The
              overall goal of the project is to rigorously test and expand upon the model by
              probing more fully the functions of the three FtsZ proteins in Arabidopsis and
              by identifying and analyzing the functions of additional components of the
              plastid division apparatus. The first objective is to determine the precise
              localization of FtsZ2.  In partial support of this model, it was recently
              determined that both AtFtsZ1-1 and AtFtsZ2-1 and their orthologues in other
              plants localize to membrane-associated rings at the plastid division site. 
              Although the precise localization of each FtsZ in relation to the envelope
              membranes has not been resolved, evidence that FtsZ1 resides in the stromal
              compartment is compelling.  Immunoelectron microscopy and protease protection
              experiments will be employed to determine in which compartment FtsZ2 is
              localized: stromal, cytosolic, or intermembrane space.  The findings will be
              critical in evaluating and expanding upon the model and will significantly
              influence the design and interpretation of other experiments related to the
              composition, assembly, organization and mechanics of the plastid division
              apparatus. The second objective is to test the function of AtFtsZ2-2 in
              relation to that of AtFtsZ2-1.  AtFtsZ2-2 shares over 80% amino acid identity
              with AtFtsZ2-1, strongly implicating it in plastid division but suggesting the
              two proteins may be functionally redundant.  In contrast,  preliminary data
              suggest that AtFtsZ2-1and AtFtsZ2-2 may be functionally distinct.  To resolve
              this apparent contradiction, transgenic plants expressing antisense and sense
              constructs of AtFtsZ2-2 will be generated; their phenotypes will be compared to
              those of the corresponding AtFtsZ2-1 transgenic plants.  Knockout mutants for
              both genes will also be isolated for genetic and cytological analyses of the
              mutant phenotypes singly and in combination.  If plastid division defects are
              observed in the single mutants, the capacity of each of the two gene products
              to complement the other will be determined.  Attempts to distinguish the roles
              of AtFtsZ2-1 and -2 will also include localization studies with
              isoform-specific anti-peptide antibodies and expression pattern analyses with
              gene-specific probes and reporters. The third objective is to identify proteins
              that interact with plant FtsZs.  The well characterized and biochemically
              tractable pea chloroplast system will be used in conjunction with several
              immunoaffinity and crosslinking strategies to identify proteins that interact
              specifically with FtsZ1 and FtsZ2 proteins in higher plants.  Studies beyond
              the scope of this proposal will apply the biochemical insight gained from the
              pea system to continued genetic analysis of chloroplast division in
              Arabidopsis. This project should provide significant new insights into the
              composition, assembly, organization and mechanics of the plastid division
              apparatus. In addition, because of recently revealed mechanistic parallels
              between the processes of chloroplast and mitochondrial division, these studies
              will complement and may have relevance for understanding mitochondrial
              division. 

