Title       : A Knowledge Base for Storage and Analysis of Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0092336

Award Number: 0092336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $538311             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl J. Schmidt schmidtc@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith S. Decker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Expressed sequence tags (EST's), are short nucleotide sequences determined from
              the cDNA copy of mRNA in a given cell, tissue, organ, or organism.  EST's are
              widely used and equally widely generated, providing  information about gene
              identity, expression and distribution for a wide range of organisms.  Although
              it is relatively easy to generate the sequence information of an EST, there are
              a number of problems associated with storing and using the information.  The
              software platform proposed here integrates a database, a biological ontology,
              or structured language, and sequence analysis functions for an EST knowledge
              base.  This knowledge base addresses three problems faced by a biologist: 
              storage of the data, analysis and archiving  of the results, and integration
              into a cumulative database.  The system is designed to permit a typical
              biologist to install and operate it.  In order to do this, the system will
              provide user-friendly interfaces for additon of sequences, automated running of
              assembly and analysis programs, a query and alert system for complex searches,
              and a data sharing arrangement for geographically separate laboratories to
              permit integration.  As a prototype, a knowledge base on the chicken will be
              developed.  This is particularly useful since the chicken is often used as a
              comparative species for contrasting with mammals such as mouse and human. In
              developing the system, a range of training opportunities will be offered to
              undergraduates, graduates and postdoctoral scientists. 
