Title       : Genome Sequencing of Agrobacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0092815

Award Number: 0092815
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $849412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maynard V. Olson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene W. Nester  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Milton P. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1329,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to produce an accurate, contiguous, well annotated
              genome sequence for the most commonly used laboratory strain of the bacterium
              Agrobacterium tumefaciens. The overall project involves a partnership between
              investigators at the University of Washington and the DuPont Company, although
              all funded activities will be carried out at the University of Washington.
              DuPont scientists will have produced a rough-draft  sequence of the genome at
              the start of the project. The University of Washington investigators will
              convert this rough draft to a finished sequence, which will be publicly
              released starting early in the project and deposited into GenBank once the
              project is complete.  A. tumefaciens is of central interest in basic plant
              biology and in agricultural biotechnology because of its ability to transfer
              DNA from a bacterial plasmid into the nuclear genome of diverse plant species.
              Most genetic engineering of plants depends on this natural DNA-transfer
              mechanism. Aspects of this mechanism are well understood after several decades
              of analysis of the bacterial plasmid that contains the transferred segment of
              DNA. However, relatively little is known about the roles of non-plasmid genes
              scattered throughout the remainder of the A. tumefaciens genome in plant
              pathogenesis and DNA transfer. The genome sequence will allow identification of
              all A. tumefaciens genes. During genome annotation, it will be possible to
              assign tentative functions to a majority of these genes by comparing their
              sequences with the sequences of all bacterial genes of known function. Hence,
              the annotation of the genome is likely to provide immediate insights into the
              genetic basis of A. tumafaciens' remarkable ability to transfer DNA and
              proteins into plant cells. In addition, the genome-sequence data will lay the
              groundwork for subsequent systematic studies designed to establish the
              functions even of the many genes for which the initial computational analysis
              is uninformative.  The data generated with this project will facilitate
              understanding of interactions between bacteria and both plant and animal host
              cells. They will also be of general interest in ongoing efforts to understand
              the interplay between genetic complexity, metabolic capabilities, and the
              functional characteristics of bacteria. A. tumefaciens is of special interest
              with respect to these issues because it has a large genome (5.9 Mbp), is a
              free-living organism with complex habitats including soil and plant tissues,
              and can sense and respond to chemical indicators of plant-tissue damage. Most
              early studies of bacterial genomes have focused on bacteria with small genomes
              that live in highly specialized environments. In contrast, analysis of the A.
              tumefaciens genome will provide insights into bacteria that have large genomes
              and live in environments that make up a substantial portion of the biosphere. 
              Finally, the A. tumefaciens genome sequence will stimulate improvements in the
              genetic engineering of new strains with improved DNA-transfer characteristics,
              thereby stimulating both basic plant science and agricultural biotechnology.
