Title       : CAREER: NMR Studies of Enzyme Structure and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0092962

Award Number: 0092962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark P. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Foster, Mark P.
MCB-0092962

The objective of this CAREER project is to
              reveal how molecular motions affect enzyme function. The limited knowledge of
              structure/motion/function relationships severely limits our ability to predict
              molecular behavior. This knowledge is critical both for understanding catalytic
              mechanisms and for the design of modified enzymes that catalyze novel
              chemistries or specific high-affinity ligands. In this project, functionally
              important molecular motions in bacteriophage l-Integrase are characterized with
              an integrated approach involving nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), pre-steady
              state kinetics, thermodynamics, computation and site-directed mutagenesis.
              Biochemical and biophysical evidence suggests that large amplitude concerted
              loop motions are essential to the function of this enzyme, which catalyzes
              site-specific DNA recombination via the formation of a Holliday junction
              intermediate. To study these motion/function relationships the project
              includes: (1) Comparison of the equilibrium structures, dynamics and
              thermodynamics of the free and DNA-bound enzyme in order to identify the nature
              of the conformational changes required for catalysis. (2) Measurement of the
              kinetics and thermodynamics of DNA binding and cleavage with NMR, mass
              spectrometry, fluorescence and calorimetry. (3) Obtaining a physical
              description of relevant internal motions from molecular dynamics simulations.
              (4) Probing the dependence of function on internal motions by use of
              site-directed mutagenesis and alternate DNA substrates.

The educational
              component of this CAREER award involves development of descriptive tools to
              enable scientists and educators to effectively communicate to students the
              dynamic nature of macromolecules. Currently most didactic treatments of
              molecular structure/function are limited to static pictures that provide little
              insight into the nature of the motional processes that interconvert functional
              substates.

