Title       : Computational Studies of Ion Permeation and Polymer Translocation through
               Biological Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0092285

Award Number: 0092285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rob D. Coalson rob@ringo.chem.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rob Coalson of the University of Pittsburgh is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program and the Molecular Biophysics Program to study
              fundamental aspects of the dynamics of ion permeation and biopolymer
              translocation in protein channels, using a variety of novel numerical and
              simulation methods.  The three-dimensional Poisson-Nernst-Planck theory
              developed by the PI will be extended to include systematically a series of
              improvements on the description of ion and ion-solvent interactions.  A Monte
              Carlo lattice-hopping model of ion permeation will also be explored, and
              results from both approaches will be compared.  The related area of biopolymer
              translocation through protein channels will be investigated, exploring the
              effects of various levels of approximation.  The advances in numerical solution
              procedures for computing simple ion currents and passage times for biopolymers
              that will result from this effort are expected to lead to software that enables
              computer aided design of protein channels with desired properties, such as
              large or rectified ion currents or enhanced chemical sensitivity for
              distinguishing DNA/RNA nucleotides.

The permeation of ions and polymers
              through biological channels is an area characterized by important unanswered
              fundamental questions whose solution will have a direct and significant impact
              in medicine and biotechnology.   By allowing ions to pass through otherwise
              impenetrable cell walls, protein channels contribute to the regulation of many
              physiological processes.  They are blocked by toxins, degenerated by diseases,
              and stimulated by drugs.  Therefore, an understanding of ion permeation is
              relevant to medical applications.  It is also possible to flow strands of
              single stranded DNA and RNA through certain wide ion channels with an electric
              field, a property that may be exploited to generate chemical sensors with
              potential impacts in biotechnology.
