Title       : RUI: The Flex Heart Rate Method in Longitudinal Studies of Daily Energy
               Expenditure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0092077

Award Number: 0092077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58825              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Jenike mjenike@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The longitudinal measurement of total daily energy expenditure (TDEE) is an
              important component of research in anthropology, nutrition, and related
              disciplines.  Flex-HR is a method of  measuring TDEE based on the monitoring of
              heart rate.  It is well-validated, powerful, and practical in both field and
              laboratory settings.  Flex-HR, however, is seldom used in longitudinal research
              because it requires participants to undergo a cumbersome lab-based calibration
              routine within one week of each measurement of TDEE.  Frequent repetition of
              this calibration routine would become overly burdensome and could significantly
              alter the normal activities of research participants.  

This study will
              determine the validity of a modified flex-HR method in which the calibration
              routine is less frequently applied during longitudinal studies.  The project
              will employ a repeated measures design in which the TDEE of 24 participants
              will be measured, with the full calibration routine, at bi-weekly intervals for
              four months with seven and ten month follow-ups. During analysis it will then
              be possible to determine what the effect would have been of having forgone
              multiple iterations of the calibration routine.  All laboratory measurements
              will be carried out in the Anthropology Laboratory at Pomona College and
              participants will be drawn from the student bodies of the Claremont Colleges.
              

Consistent with the goals of the NSF Research in Undergraduate Institutions
              (RUI) program, this project will promote undergraduate research and training.
              In addition to facilitating independent research by students, it will provide
              research assistants with hands-on training in the theory and methods of
              energetics research.  The project will also strengthen research facilities in
              the Pomona College Department of Anthropology, and generate a database and
              other materials that will enhance instruction in nutritional anthropology and
              research methods.  

