Title       : CAREER: rePLay: a Microarchitecture to Support Dynamic Program Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0092740

Award Number: 0092740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjay J. Patel sjp@crhc.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Dynamic optimization is a newly emerging area of computer systems research that
              offers good potential for large  advances in computer performance.  The crux of
              dynamic optimization is the incorporation of dynamic information available only
              at execution time into the optimization process.  Examples of potentially
              useful dynamic information include the likely behavior of branches and the
              likely values of operands. More immediate access to run-time information gives
              dynamic optimizers a notable edge over traditional static optimizers.

The
              rePLay Framework is a set of microarchitectural components for supporting
              dynamic optimization.  RePLay contains hardware that allows the dynamic
              optimizer to run in parallel with program execution thereby reducing the large
              overheads associated with dynamic optimization. RePLay contains hardware for
              identifying candidate regions, for optimizing these regions, fetching regions,
              and sequencing between them.  Furthermore, this microarchitecture creates a
              tight coupling between the optimizer and hardware that detects run-time events.
                Initial results indicate that dynamic information can be used to create very
              long (approx   100 instructions) atomic, single entry, single exit regions of
              code for optimization.

The research focuses on the development of the rePLay
              Framework, specifically in the development of
hardware-based optimizations and
              hardware schemes to support potentially speculative value-based
              optimizations.


