Title       : High Symmetry Catalysts in Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0092490

Award Number: 0092490
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Huw M. L. Davies hdavies@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1950,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Huw M. L. Davies,
              of the Department of Chemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, is
              studying the use of high symmetry catalysts in organic synthesis. Coordination
              of several identical low-symmetry ligands around a central metal core leads to
              high-symmetry chiral complexes. Thus, dirhodium complexes bearing two
              C2-symmetric binaphthylphosphate ligands are D2-symmetric, while those with
              four binaphthylphosphate ligands are D4-symmetric. Three basic reaction types
              catalyzed by such complexes are under investigation. Highly stereoselective
              asymmetric C-H activation is effected by means of intermolecular
              carbenoid-induced C-H insertion. Combined C-H insertion/Cope rearrangement
              protocols lead to carbon-carbon bond formation with potential control of
              stereochemistry at two stereogenic centers and two double bonds. Finally, [3+2]
              cycloaddition between vinylcarbenoids and vinyl ethers generates highly
              functionalized cyclopentenes with excellent stereocontrol at three stereogenic
              centers.

Many of the complex organic molecules displaying desirable
              properties as pharmaceutical agents contain groupings of atoms with precisely
              defined geometric ("stereochemical") relationships. These molecules may differ
              from undesired compounds through as seemingly subtle a relationship as that
              between one's left and right hands (i.e., mirror images), and the development
              of methods for the selective synthesis of such molecules remains a significant
              challenge. Professor Huw M. L. Davies, of the Department of Chemistry, State
              University of New York at Buffalo, is supported by the Organic Synthesis
              Program for his studies of new methods for the selective synthesis of such
              organic molecules. By the preparation of catalysts with carefully designed
              symmetry, Professor Davies effects a variety of reactions, particularly those
              involving the insertion of new carbon centers into carbon-hydrogen bonds, which
              allow for the construction of more complex products with a high degree of
              stereochemical control.
