Title       : Studies of Relational (Declarative) Memory Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0092400

Award Number: 0092400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $610532             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal J. Cohen n-cohen@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew G. Webb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will explore the mechanisms of memory supporting the ability of
              people to remember the details of their experiences.  Previous research has
              indicated that there are different memory systems in the brain that support
              different types or forms of memory.  Considerable recent research has been
              directed at attempting to characterize these systems.

One form of memory
              that has been identified, "declarative" or "relational" memory, is associated
              with the operation of a particular brain system, the hippocampal system.  This
              system is thought to be critical for remembering one's experiences by enabling
              memory for the relations among the elements of the events, situations, or
              scenes encountered in daily life (or in the laboratory).  This form of memory
              maintains information about what people and/or what objects were part of a
              given experience, in what context they were encountered, where they were
              located with respect to the scene and to each other, who did what to whom in
              that experience, and so forth. 

This research will take advantage of a new
              research approach and a set of converging methods to examine the specialization
              of different memory systems for different aspects of memory processing,
              operating simultaneously.  In doing so, it will provide a test of the idea that
              the hippocampal system is specialized to support relational memory processing,
              and it will provide a more detailed characterization of the nature of this
              relational form of memory.

The research will use an eye-movement-based
              methodology to assess memory for items and memory for relations among items,
              both in normal control subjects and in amnesic patients with profound memory
              deficits following hippocampal system damage.  The research methodology will
              allow this assessment to take place separately and simultaneously.  It is
              expected that amnesic patients will be selectively impaired on measures of
              memory for relations among items, across a range of different types of
              relations, while simultaneously being intact on measures of memory for
              (repetition of) individual items.  Additional studies will assess brain
              activation during memory performance of normal human subjects using functional
              neuroimaging methods.  It is expected that activity of the hippocampal system
              will be associated selectively with measures of memory for relations among
              items, again across a range of different types of relations, while activity of
              other brain systems will be associated with measures of memory for (repetition
              of) individual items.

Taken together, such results will provide critical
              information about the nature of relational memory, its dependence on the
              hippocampal system, and its impairment in amnesia.  By furthering understanding
              of how we form and maintain memory for relations among items, this work will
              provide insight into that form of memory most critical for the ability to
              remember our experiences and to learn relational information.  Such insight
              holds enormous promise for guiding the teaching of any domain of knowledge
              involving fundamentally relational material, from structural relations to the
              relations among high-level concepts.
