Title       : CAREER: A Unified Approach to Understanding, Education, and Design of
               Disinfection Processes Using Computational Fluid Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2002   
File        : a0092647

Award Number: 0092647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel J. Ducoste jducoste@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The proposed career development plan seeks to integrate research and education
              to pioneer
innovative techniques for comprehensive characterization of
              disinfection processes. This research will use Computational Fluid Dynamics
              (CFD) models as a numerical tool to: a) design and assess the overall
              disinfection process and b) develop an interactive disinfection education
              module that will be integrated into the civil and environmental curricula as
              well as into two new courses, a one-day introductory course for high school
              students and a four-day course on enhanced-disinfection analysis tools for
              practicing engineers.

The EPA is considering extensive revisions to the
              disinfection by-products (DBP) regulations. At the same time, water treatment
              professionals are faced with the challenging task of improving drinking water
              quality and reducing the risk of waterborne disease outbreaks.

Under the
              Surface Water Treatment Rule (SWTR), the EPA has published disinfection
              regulations
for treatment of surface water sources. The basic assumption in
              this rule is that a specific combination of disinfectant concentration and
              contact time (CT) will lead to a certain degree of inactivation of the target
              microorganism. However, these techniques used by EPA to quantify the amount of
              microbial inactivation have not only been found to be too conservative but may
              also promote DBP formation.

This research program proposes to use CFD to I)
              develop and evaluate alternative disinfection
models for the prediction of
              effluent microbial inactivation through continuous flow systems and II) assess
              the impact of disinfectant injection methods and multiple disinfectant
              injection points on microbial inactivation and DBP formation.  A planned set of
              pilot- and full-scale testing will help validate the numerical results. Another
              major component of this research is the development of a protocol that will
              help engineers customize CFD models for a specific water treatment plant with
              unique raw water quality conditions and pre-disinfection processes. 

The
              educational plan involves the development of a CFD disinfection-education
              module. The
education module will be built on the foundations of the CFD
              disinfection model. However, students will not be required to learn CFD
              modeling. The CFD disinfection-education module will be designed around a
              graphical user interface (GUI) that will be the primary mode of communication
              between the user and the CFD model. The education module is composed of three
              sections: I) power point/video-based disinfection process-lecture series, II)
              solved disinfection problems and simulated tracer tests, and III) team-based
              disinfection design projects. Furthermore, a short course on disinfection using
              a portion of the disinfection-education module will be developed for high
              school students as well as another course on enhanced disinfection analysis
              tools for practicing engineers. A dynamic partnership involving consulting
              engineers, water treatment-plant professionals, and academics will help ensure
              the success of the various phases involved in this research.

