Title       : ITR: Statistical Mechanics of Sloppy Models: From Signal Transduction in the
               Cell Cycle to Forest Modeling and the Nitrogen Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0218475

Award Number: 0218475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Sethna sethna@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1652,1753,1765,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This grant is made in response to a small proposal submitted to the Information
              Technology Research (ITR) Initiative.   The PI will leverage information
              technology and sophisticated methods from the statistical mechanics of
              disordered systems to systematically explore large, complex biological models. 
              These models are sloppy, and the key challenge is to extract reliable and
              falsifiable predictions from them.  The PI will apply statistical mechanics not
              to the physical system, but to the parameters in the dynamical models of the
              system: this meta-modeling technique thus draws predictions from the entire
              ensemble of models that are consistent with the currently available data. 
              Meta-modeling will be applied to four problems.  Three of these are systems
              studied in the field of cellular signal transduction: the Erk system in PC12
              cells; growth factor receptor trafficking and Cdc42; and the cell cycle in the
              colon cell line Caco-2.  The final application is in ecology: the nutrient
              cycles in forested ecosystems.

 The PI bypasses traditional analytical
              methods in mathematical statistics, by leveraging the computational power made
              possible by the information technology revolution.  The sampling methods are
              direct, flexible, and easily implemented; the methods properly average over
              multiple locally optimal states and properly cope with nonlinearity in the
              modeling process.  The PI will use many technical ideas drawn from materials
              simulations.  Numerical efficiency is enhanced through the use of a soft-mode
              symmetry-breaking field to penalize computer time, and through the use of
              algorithms developed to accelerate simulations of glassy materials. 
              Weakly-coupled replicas of the model will be used to avoid problems due to soft
              modes when comparing different cell types: renormalization of parameters will
              be studied when comparing different theories of the same system.  These methods
              are efficiently run in parallel on current large-scale computers; ensembel
              genration could be Grid enabled, delocalized over the Web.

The meta-modeling
              concept of abstracting the modeling process into a statistical mechanics
              problem transforms a tedious, ill-posed search into an exciting new problem in
              complex, disordered systems.  From an applications view, insights drawn from
              the materials physics community form powerful tools, allowing real predictive
              power where only qualitative exploration was previously possible.  From a
              physics view, the prevalence of soft modes in parameter space provides new
              insights and provokes new methods.  From an information technology view,
              intensive computational analysis can now be brought to bear on a large new
              class of problems of importance to science and society.

The three signal
              transduction networks being studied are of particular interest to the
              development of drug therapies in cancer, and are a well-studied preview of the
              kinds of challenges the bioinformatics and proteomics revolution will present
              in the coming decade.  The extension to ecological meta-modeling will lead to
              applications in many other complex systems where incomplete or preliminary data
              nonetheless need rigorous analysis.
%%%
 This grant is made in response to a
              small proposal submitted to the Information Technology Research (ITR)
              Initiative.   The PI will leverage information technology and sophisticated
              methods from the statistical mechanics of disordered systems to systematically
              explore large, complex biological models.  These models are sloppy, and the key
              challenge is to extract reliable and falsifiable predictions from them.  The PI
              will apply statistical mechanics not to the physical system, but to the
              parameters in the dynamical models of the system: this meta-modeling technique
              thus draws predictions from the entire ensemble of models that are consistent
              with the currently available data.  Meta-modeling will be applied to four
              problems.  Three of these are systems studied in the field of cellular signal
              transduction: the Erk system in PC12 cells; growth factor receptor trafficking
              and Cdc42; and the cell cycle in the colon cell line Caco-2.  The final
              application is in ecology: the nutrient cycles in forested ecosystems.
*** 

