Title       : Soft-Pad Grinding of Wire-Sawn Silicon Wafers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0218237

Award Number: 0218237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204549             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhijian Pei zpei@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiao J. Xin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sergei Ostapenko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for research aiming to advance the understanding and
              knowledge of wire-sawn wafer grinding on soft pads and to promote the
              widespread application of the technology. Finite element simulation will be
              carried out to develop a fundamental understanding of the soft-pad grinding and
              its effectiveness in removing the wire-sawing induced waviness, and to generate
              knowledge of the effects of pad materials and process parameters on waviness
              removal. Experiments will be performed to validate the finite element model.
              The understanding and knowledge acquired will provide guidance to overcome the
              technical barriers that have hindered the widespread application of soft-pad
              grinding. 

Success of this project will substantially enhance U.S.
              companies' competitiveness.  Soft-pad grinding is more benign to the
              environment and more cost-effective than lapping.  Achieving the project's goal
              will benefit not only the U.S. silicon wafer industry and semiconductor
              industry, but also society at large. Investigators with complementary
              experience and research skills are joining forces to conduct this research.
              Unique facilities at Kansas State University, University of South Florida,
              MEMC, Norton and Strasbaugh are integrated.  Such collaboration provides
              excellent synergy for project resources, ensures the relevance of research to
              industry, and expedites technology transfer and commercialization.  It also
              provides excellent opportunities for faculty and students to interact with
              industry, and will have highly positive impact to engineering education.

