Title       : Emergency Preparedness Planning and On-Line Evacuation of Large Buildings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0218621

Award Number: 0218621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis Wenger                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elise D. Miller-Hooks edm3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The primary focus of this research activity is the development of the conceptual
              framework and methodological steps for determining optimal and robust tactical
              and operational strategies for rapidly evacuating a large burning building or a
              building that has come under attack by enemy or natural catastrophe. Both
              emergency preparedness planning and real-time execution are addressed. Tactical
              preparedness concerns involve the selection of carefully planned a priori
              evacuation paths that consider the inherent dynamic and uncertain nature of
              conditions that exist in emergency situations requiring evacuation. Operational
              concerns address the on-line determination of evacuation paths that are updated
              in real-time as actual conditions of the building structures and circulation
              systems (i.e. means of egress) are revealed and predictions related to risk of
              continued failure concerning the structural members and portions of the
              circulation systems are updated.
The need for modeling the dynamic and
              uncertain nature of conditions in emergency evacuation stems from the fact that
              such events are often characterized by dangers that strengthen and spread over
              time. These circumstances induce the possibility that successful egress may be
              inhibited by partial or complete failure of key escape paths. Moreover, we
              cannot know how the situation will progress with certainty even if the exact
              location and type of event that initiated the need for the evacuation is known.
              Existing methodologies for determining optimal evacuation paths do not consider
              this uncertainty and the dynamically varying conditions inherent in post-blast,
              fire or other situations requiring emergency evacuation. Instructions that do
              not consider the evolution of damage over time and threats of probable
              additional destruction and deterioration can result in suboptimal decisions
              that can lead to unnecessary imposed risk and unnecessary lost lives. The
              algorithmic developments undertaken in this research effort will explicitly
              consider these characteristics in determination of the evacuation path
              strategies, resulting in robust evacuation plans with lower probability of
              failure than paths determined otherwise. 
Teaching, training and learning will
              be enhanced through the development of real-world case studies that will be
              studied in the classroom and through a comprehensive graduate course related to
              risk analyses and emergency management. 
Evacuation plans resulting from the
              proposed research activities will enable faster and more efficient evacuation
              of a building in the event of military attack, fire, natural disaster,
              discovery of a hazardous material or biological agent, or other circumstances
              warranting quick escape. This will result in reduction in: the number of
              injured persons, trapped evacuees, or lost lives. The methodologies developed
              in this research effort will also be pertinent for evaluating existing
              evacuation plans and for identifying potentially high-risk circumstances. These
              results will impact many other functional areas as well, including, evacuation
              of a geographical region due to military attack, human-made accident, or
              natural disaster, such as an accident involving a nuclear power plant or escape
              of hazardous chemicals, collapse of a structure such as dam walls, hurricane,
              earthquake, flooding, volcanic eruption, or tsunami.


