Title       : Engineering Protein-Based Logic Gates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0218256

Award Number: 0218256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $423938             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendell Lim wlim@itsa.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1708      REVOLUTIONARY COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,1676,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0218256
Wendell Lim
University of California- San Francisco

Engineering
              Protein-Based Logic Gates

Living cells use protein-based signal transduction
              circuits to decide how to respond to environmental stimuli. In eukaryotic cells
              these signaling networks are organized in a hierarchical, component-based
              manner -- they are assembled from multiple interacting proteins, while
              individual proteins are assembled from combinations of a finite toolkit that
              includes catalytic domains (e.g. kinases, phosphates) and protein interaction
              domains.  Current hypotheses suggests that complex cellular circuitry may have
              evolved through recombination of these protein domain components.  The overall
              goal of this project is to exploit this framework to engineer novel
              protein-based sensors, circuits, and computational devices.  The initial focus
              is on individual signaling proteins that function as input/output switches,
              analogous to the fundamental logic gates used to build complex electronic
              circuits.  The proteins often have an output activity that is only triggered by
              a specific set of upstream inputs. Recent studies suggest that these regulatory
              properties result from a relatively simple mechanism in which the interplay of
              intra- and intermolecular domain interactions controls protein conformation and
              therefore activity. In this project domain recombination is being used to
              reprogram natural catalytic activities (e.g. acting nucleators, kinesis,
              phosphates) such that they are precisely controlled by a combination of
              selected molecular inputs (e.g. specific peptide ligands,
              phosphorylation/dephosphorylation).  Targeted switch designs include AND, NAND,
              NOR, and XOR-type input/output relationships.  If successful, this project will
              allow for engineering of complex cell-based sensors.


