Title       : GOALI - The Effect of Changing to Pb Free Solders on Manufacturing Processes:
               Evolution of Solder Joint Microstructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0218129

Award Number: 0218129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Cotts ecotts@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daryl L. Santos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Borgesen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI project is a collaboration with Universal Instruments Corporation to
              study how a transition to lead (Pb)-free solders will affect manufacturing
              processes for electronic packaging. A comprehensive treatment of solder joint
              reliability requires at least three major research efforts: (1) Development of
              a fundamental understanding of solder joint microstructure (grain
              size/structure, phase regions, intermetallics), including the ability to
              predict microstructure at any given time during any given thermal history. (2)
              Development of constitutive relations which quantify deformation properties as
              functions of temperature, strain rate, and detailed microstructure. (3)
              Development of damage functions that quantify the progression of damage for
              given temperature, strain/stress (or integrated functions thereof such as
              ductility exhaustion) and microstructure. In principle, after characterizing
              these relations, establishing a predictive capability for the mechanical
              behavior and reliability of Pb free solder joints is relatively
              straightforward, although extensive, mechanical modeling is required. This
              capability would allow the prediction of accelerated test results for specific
              solder based assemblies, as well as the interpretation of experimental results
              and extrapolation to service conditions. 

However, without the ability to
              predict the variation of important aspects of the microstructure over the
              history of the joint, efforts 2 and 3 above become at best semi-empirical and
              highly questionable for purposes of extrapolation. Particular complications are
              the effects of the progress of damage and the (often cyclic) effects of the
              thermal mismatch induced deformations. This project addresses significant
              issues related to environmentally benign manufacturing, with specific emphasis
              on manufacturing electronics. It is expected that advancements in fundamental
              knowledge of material behavior and processing of this material substitution
              will be made. There is direct involvement of undergraduate and graduate
              students through both research and an educational component, strengthen by the
              industrial collaboration.

