Title       : Collaborative Research: MEMS Tuners for Multiband High-Efficiency Wireless
               Transmitter Front Ends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0218732

Award Number: 0218732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149997             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Papapolymerou papapol@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0218732
Papapolymerou

This proposal addresses design and implementation of
              adaptive RF front ends for the next generation communication systems that will
              require operation at several frequency bands. The adaptive RF front ends will
              be developed by a collaboration between the University of Colorado at Boulder
              (CU) with expertise in microwave high efficiency circuits, and the Georgia
              Institute of Technology (GIT) with expertise in tunable RF MEMS.

More
              specifically, this project will focus on the development of a multi-band RF
              power amplifier used in the transmitter sections of all communication hardware.
              The goal is to demonstrate adaptation of tuning impedances on the millisecond
              scale using MEMS switches for multiband transmitter operation (e.g., the 5.7
              and 24-GHz unlicensed bands), resulting in a larger overall average efficiency
              and multi-band frequency coverage. For this reason, switched-mode PAs (classes
              E and F) will be tuned with a multi-band MEMS output circuit and a
              reconfigurable MEMS input circuit. Linearization using bias and drive control
              of multi-band high efficiency PAs will also be studied, with the main goal of
              proving that these amplifiers are advantageous for modulation schemes that
              require linearity. Results of this work will have direct impact on worldwide
              commercial wireless systems moving from 2G to higher standards in which RF
              front-ends must support multi-band operation under various modulation schemes.
              It could also potentially lead to revolutionary miniaturized load-pull systems
              that replace the bulky and very expensive load-pull systems currently
              available. The proposed solution adheres with the low-power, small-size, low
              weight and low-cost requirements of next generation communication
              systems.

The proposed effort covers a period of three years during which the
              following will be accomplished: 

oDesign and demonstration of a multi-band
              impedance tuner using MEMS
oDesign and demonstration of a multi-band
              high-efficiency power amplifier using switched-mode topologies (such as classes
              E or F) with a simple switch between two output and input matching
              circuits
oStudy of linearization of multiband high efficiency saturated PAs
              using dynamic drive and bias control
oIntegration of the amplifier and tuner
              
oIntegration of transistor with tuners for miniaturized MEMS load-pull

The
              proposed research will be complemented by educational activities that will
              integrate the research findings into the curriculum of both universities and
              other related outreach efforts. GIT and CU will provide travel funds for the
              PIs to visit the collaborator and give seminars to undergraduate and graduate
              students each semester. The PIs plan to propose REU projects, in addition to
              UROP, SMART and SIRFs (undergraduate research and minority programs funded by
              our respective universities), so that GIT undergraduates work at CU in the
              summer, while CU students work at GIT for a semester, with the goal of a
              graduate student recruitment program between the two universities. The
              investigators will follow NSF's reporting requirements and will also publicize
              their results in peer reviewed journals and conferences.

