Title       : NSF\CONACyT: Spatially Resolved Characterization of Nano-Porous SiC Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0218967

Award Number: 0218967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99648              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergei Ostapenko ostapenk@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Wolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Saddow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1385,1788,5922,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for a research project whose goal is to advance the
              understanding and knowledge to develop a new non-contact and non-destructive
              characterization technique based on the effect of thermally stimulated
              luminescence applicable for fast imaging of the full-size bulk silicon carbide
              (SiC) wafers and epitaxial films. The results acquired by this new technique
              will be correlated with other spatially resolved analytical tools, including
              photoluminescence mapping, scanning acoustic microscopy, atomic force
              microscopy and scanning electron microscopy.  The objective of the research is
              to develop a fundamental understanding of the role of nano-porous buffer layers
              between the SiC substrate and the epitaxial films as a means to upgrading of
              the material quality by reducing concentration of defects in the SiC films and
              improvement of operational parameters of devices.  The understanding and
              knowledge acquired will provide guidance to overcome the technical barriers
              that have hindered the widespread application of SiC-based devices for
              high-power/high-frequency and optoelectronic applications.  

The project,
              when completed, will directly benefit SiC wafer and device manufacturers. The
              results should promote the industry-wide adoption of this new metrology
              applicable eventually for in-line process control. One of the major SiC wafers
              and epi-layers producers, Sterling Semiconductors has expressed a deep interest
              in this type of the metrology and offered in-kind support to the university
              group with pre-characterized 2" and 3" diameter research-grade SiC wafers. It
              is anticipated that the project will provide U.S. companies with more
              cost-effective quality characterization processes while simultaneously
              improving parameters of SiC devices. The project is an integrated step towards
              the building a strong research program on SiC technology at the University of
              South Florida. The facilities available for the program include a chemical
              vapor deposition system for epitaxial SiC growth and advanced state-of-the-art
              characterization equipment located at the university clean room. It is believed
              that the program will attract quality graduate students with diverse
              background. The program provides a unique opportunity for the graduate students
              to meet and work with experts from industry, and will have highly positive
              impact to engineering education. The project is based on the international
              cooperation between faculties of the University of South Florida (Tampa,
              Florida), National Politechnic Institute (Mexico) and professionals in industry
              (Sterling Semiconductors) possessing a complimentary expertise in SiC growth
              and characterization. The results of the program will be published in referred
              journals and presented at the major international conferences. Some of them
              will be included to new graduate courses developed by university
              faculties.



