Title       : Local Raw Material Variability and Hunter-Gatherer Lithic Economy in the
               Portuguese Magdalenian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0218499

Award Number: 0218499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108984             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul T. Thacker pthacker@geol.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Paul Thacker and colleagues will
              conduct three seasons of geological and archaeological fieldwork in three
              different regions of Portugal: Estremadura, Ribatejo, and Alentejo. The
              interdisciplinary team includes Portuguese and American specialists assembled
              to investigate regional differences in flaked stone tools during the
              Magdalenian period, ca. 15,000 years ago. Changing environmental conditions at
              the very end of the Pleistocene make the Magdalenian especially interesting and
              appropriate for examining the articulation of prehistoric technology with
              hunter gatherer subsistence and settlement strategies. Untangling the meaning
              of stone artifact assemblage variability requires understanding the situational
              environment in which prehistoric tools were made and used. This project is of
              broad archaeological interest because each of the three study areas is
              characterized by different stone raw material types, abundances, and sizes. For
              example, high-quality, large chert cobbles were exploited throughout the
              Paleolithic in the Rio Maior region, in contrast to the Sor drainage which
              lacks chert sources but has abundant quartz and quartzite gravels.
              Comprehensive sampling and statistical description of these different raw
              material deposits will provide the context within which Magdalenian foragers
              generated stone tool assemblages. Four Upper Paleolithic open air campsites
              will be excavated to obtain large lithic assemblages with associated
              radiometric dates, two in the Alcobertas valley and two in the Sor valley.
              Intrasite spatial analysis of three-dimensionally plotted occupation levels
              will determine the impact of post depositional processes and the degree to
              which site assemblages are functionally-comparable analytical units. This
              sampling strategy will provide at least one Early Magdalenian and one Late
              Magdalenian assemblage in each region, facilitating chronological comparison as
              well as regional ones between the valleys and numerous Magdalenian assemblages
              previously published from the Rio Maior vicinity. Laboratory analyses and
              refitting studies of excavated flaked stone assemblages will explore
              variability at the site and regional level. The organization of stone tool
              technology, transport decisions and artifact use lives will be compared and
              contrasted across the three regions. Paleoenvironmental data will be obtained
              through charcoal-wood species determination while residue and use wear studies
              will contribute to the functional interpretation of site assemblages.

This
              research is important for several reasons. Planned archaeological fieldwork
              will provide new data on the Stone Age occupation of two previously
              unresearched regions of Iberia. The comparative approach of this project will
              investigate the numerous behaviors that result in Portuguese Magdalenian lithic
              variability, possibly revealing stone acquisition and reduction behaviors that
              are social rather than functional in origin. Results will have theoretical and
              methodological significance for archaeologists working in other geographic
              regions and chronological periods, especially researchers exploring the
              interface of hunter-gatherer technological organization and raw material
              exploitation with subsistence and settlement strategies.


