Title       : ITR: Distributed Hybrid Optimization Techniques with Applications to Proteomics
               and Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0218491

Award Number: 0218491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto M. Segre segre@cs.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many computational problems of practical interest can be posed in terms of
              search. Examples include discrete optimization problem that arise naturally in
              many areas of science, engineering and business. The development of a robust
              network infrastructure coupled with the advent of reasonably-priced computing
              equipment has helped focus attention on techniques that use multiple processors
              operating in parallel to improve search performance. Our research focuses on
              the design, development, implementation and evaluation of scalable,
              fault-tolerant, distributed search technique and their application, generally
              in concert with other optimization techniques, to construct hybrid optimization
              systems. 

Much of the work described here relies on a unique underlying
              parallelization paradigm of our own design called nagging.  It contrast to more
              traditional problem partitioning techniques, nagging plays mutiple reformations
              of a problem --- or portions of a problem --- against each other to improve
              performance. We will improve and refine our understanding of nagging, including
              research on adaptive strategies for combining nagging and partitioning
              strategies; to improve and refine our distributed search infrastructure,
              including, for example, the use of cryptographic protocols to support
              authentication and distribution of new applications across management
              boundaries; and to continue our interdisciplinary collaborative efforts to
              apply distributed search concert with other optimization techniques to
              scientific computing problems. 
 


