Title       : ITR: Superimposed Training for Wireless Fading Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0218778

Award Number: 0218778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Tong Zhou gtz@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1686,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              G. Tong Zhou
Georgia Tech Research Corp

A major challenge in wireless
              communications is that the channel changes, sometimes rapidly; thus channel
              state information needs to be acquired frequently before the symbol recovery
              stage. Two prevalent approaches for channel estimation are training based and
              self-recovering (i.e., blind) ones. Pilot symbol assisted modulation (PSAM) is
              a popular training method, in which known pilots are periodically inserted into
              the symbol stream prior to transmission. These pilot symbols occupy time slots
              and impose a recurring transmission overhead. Blind approaches on the other
              hand, are completely data-driven with no loss of information rate but a
              significant increase in complexity. For fast fading channels, blind algorithms
              may require too many data to converge or converge too slowly to be
              practical.

This research investigates a class of superimposed training
              algorithms that combine the best of both worlds. Instead of inserting pilots as
              in PSAM, known periodic pilots are superimposed onto the symbol stream, prior
              to waveform modulation. The channel estimation algorithm may appear to be
              blind, but is superior to blind approaches because simple first-order, and no
              more than second-order statistical methods, are used for channel estimation.
              The superimposed training approach can also be viewed as a watermarking
              technique with the pilot sequence serving as the marker. It is shown to be
              applicable to a variety of wireless channels: frequency selective, time
              selective, and doubly selective fading channels, as well as nonlinear channels.
              Issues investigated include trade-offs among bit error rate, transmission
              power, information rate and capacity, as well as optimization of pilot
              strength, transmission power allocation, and the effect of the added pilots on
              nonlinear power amp!
lifiers.
