Title       : ITR: An Agent-Based Negotiation Framework for the Robust Design of
               Active-Passive Hybrid Piezoelectric Vibration Control Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0218597

Award Number: 0218597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kon-Well Wang kwwang@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Yen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI's Name, Institution: Kon-Well Wang, Penn State University

Proposal Number:
              0218597

Proposal Title: ITR - An Agent-Based Negotiation Framework for the
              Robust Design of Active-Passive Hybrid Piezoelectric Vibration Control
              Networks

Project Abstract 
The objective of the proposed research is to
              investigate novel information technology (IT)-based approach for synthesizing
              electromechanically optimized smart structures.  Specifically, we will develop
              an Agent-based Negotiation framework for the robust design of large-scale
              active-passive hybrid piezoelectric networks (APPN) for structural vibration
              control.  The framework is to assist the designer in making high-level design
              decisions (e.g., the selection of circuit topology) and in analyzing the
              tradeoff among conflicting design objectives, which include the robustness
              requirement for dealing with model uncertainty.  The research tasks include
              methodology development, system analysis, and experimental investigation.  The
              goal of the education plan is to integrate the research with various
              educational programs at Penn State and achieve a broad range of impact on
              student learning.  
The significance and impacts are: (a) This study will be a
              pioneer effort exploring the feasibility of utilizing IT to optimally tailor a
              large-scale electro-mechanically coupled smart structure system, considering
              design uncertainties, tradeoffs, and circuit topology selections.  (b) The
              investigation will have significant impacts on agent-based technology because
              it addresses the increasingly important issue of negotiation among a structured
              team of collaborative agents.  It can increase the scalability of agent teams
              and enable them to adapt themselves to avoid cognitive overload in complex
              domains such as distributed decision makings.  (c) The research will have broad
              influence on many engineering systems.  The automotive, aerospace,
              manufacturing, instrumentation and many other industries will benefit from the
              vibration control technologies developed based on the outcome of this
              investigation.  (d) The educational efforts will have broad impact on teaching
              the next generation of engineers and IT workforce to utilize modern computer
              technology for solving large-scale complex engineering problems with
              uncertainties and conflicting design requirements.

