Title       : QuBIC: Novel DNA Nanostructures for Targeted Molecular Scale to Micron Scale
               Interconnects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0218376

Award Number: 0218376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas LaBean thl@cs.duke.du  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Reif  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1708      REVOLUTIONARY COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0218376
Thomas LaBean
Duke University

Novel DNA Nanostructures for
              Targeted Molecular Scale too Micron Scale

The main thrust of this project is
              to develop fabrication techniques which bridge the gap between two size scales:
              (i) the micron scale, where conventional lithographic methods provide efficient
              top-down object construction, and (ii) the molecular scale, where viable
              bottom-up techniques for object assembly are beginning to emerge.  The key
              problem addressed is how molecular scale structures can be selectively attached
              and interconnected with micron scale structures such that the molecular scale
              structures are functional.  Bridging this gap is particularly important for
              advancing molecular-electronics into practical applications and for continuing
              the miniaturization trend of micro-electronics.  This project approaches the
              scale gap challenge by the use of novel DNA nanostructures that have a scale
              between the two and can be made to selectively assemble with either.  These
              structures present unique opportunities: (i) they provide for selective
              attachments via DNA annealing, (ii) they have length scales and flexibility
              permitting attachment to micron scale structures (iii) they can be metallized
              to provide conductive interconnects, (iv) potentially they can be used to
              orient other nanostructures such as carbon nanotubes.  The major research steps
              to be taken include: (1) development of a diverse family of  DNA
              nanostructures, (2) further characterization of existing DNA nanostructures,
              (3) further development of metallization techniques for these DNA
              nanostructures, (4) attachment experiments to various materials.

	The
              project impacts important educational objectives by providing training
              opportunities for science students at several educational levels.  Funds are
              included for a high school student from the SEED project for under-represented
              minority students, as well as for a graduate student and half the salary of a
              post-doctoral fellow.  Training of students at graduate and undergraduate
              levels is helping to create future scientists with strong interests in
              nanotechnology, DNA engineering, and related fields critical to continued
              growth in electronics and computer sciences.


