Title       : Potato Functional Genomics: Aplication to Analysis of Growth, Development,
               Metabolism and Responses to Biotic and Abiotic Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0218166

Award Number: 0218166
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Baker bbaker@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Award Abstract
As the fourth most important contributor to human calorie
              consumption, the potato bears an enormous influence worldwide.  Its economic
              significance is evidenced by the large output percentage of potato by the
              developing world.  Thus, the global influence and impact of potato makes it
              extremely important and relevant to plant biology and genome research.  No
              other crop system currently being subjected to intensive genomic research
              possesses such a high degree of real-world applicability juxtaposed with
              biological uniqueness.  
	This project is focused on furthering the
              understanding of important features of potato biology: tuber development,
              disease resistance, heterozygosity, and polyploidy.  As potato is highly
              related to other important Solanaceae species such as tomato, we will
              incorporate other Solanaceae species into our studies such that comparative
              analyses can be performed and that we can leverage our potato-based resources
              for maximal gain.  
	This project will provide a comprehensive set of
              resources for genome and transcriptome profiling of disease resistance
              responses and key developmental traits and pathways.  These comprehensive
              resources include: targeted genome sequence analysis of potato and other
              Solanaceae genomic regions where numerous resistance (R) genes and general
              resistance traits have been identified; an evolutionary resource for resistance
              traits including models and bioinformatic tools for prediction and functional
              analysis of durable candidate resistance genes. A transcriptome resource will
              be generated by microarray analysis of Solanaceae development, and response to
              abiotic and biotic stress.  We will extend the use of these arrays outside the
              project by soliciting proposals focused on additional physiological conditions
              from the Solanaceae community.  All data will be made public in a rapid fashion
              to allow the entire Solanaceae community access to the data. This database will
              provide the first comprehensive resource for gene expression patterns in the
              Solanaceae family.
	We will extend our knowledge of plant genomics to the
              community through an outreach program that will include a training program for
              high school and college students and instructors in plant genomics including
              bioinformatics and data mining for marker development for tracing the origin of
              Native American potato varieties and for studies on potato evolution and
              breeding for crop improvement.
Solanacae gardens and associated public
              educational programs on plant genetic diversity, plant breeding and the impact
              of plant genome research on society.  We will also have 
	Each of these
              components, in conjunction with the overarching project objectives, will lead
              to a comprehensive understanding and working knowledge of potato, one of the
              most important dicot foods in the world.

Deliverables:

Public Solanaceae
              dataset of annotated R gene region sequence, R genes and R gene candidates
              (SOLAR)
Conatcts: Baker, Buell, Brown, Jahn, Jiang, May, Bradeen, Helgeson,
              Austin-Phillips

Public predictive bioinformatic tools to identify candidate
              resistance traits for functional testing of resistance genes
Contact:
              May

Public functional genomic Solanaceae resource, Solanaceae Gene
              Expression Database, of expression profiles
Contacts: Buell, Baker,
              Jiang


Gene expression profiling of Solanaceae through external
              collaborations with the plant community
Contact: Buell

Functional
              identification of genes operating in pathogen defense pathways using
              silencing
Contact: Baker

Genomics training program for high school and
              college students. Community Solanum gardens and public information on
              Solanum
Contacts: Baker, Brown, Buell


Internet Addresses (Web or Email)
              for Project Information:
1.	NSF Potato Genome Project
              http://www.bakerlab.usda.gov/NSFPotatoGenome/
2.  TIGR: NSF Potato Functional
              Genomics http://www.tigr.org/tdb/potato/ 
		3.  Solanaceae Genome Network
              http://soldb.cit.cornell.edu/index.html


