Title       : Collaborative Research: How Do Social and Habitat Complexities Shape Brain
               Structure?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0218005

Award Number: 0218005
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431466             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroly A. Shumway cshumway@neaq.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New England Aquarium Corp
	      Central Wharf
	      Boston, MA  021103399    617/973-5200

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1191,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Caroly A. Shumway1, Hans A. Hofmann2
1New England Aquarium; 2Harvard
              University
Collaborative Research: How Do Social and Habitat Complexities
              Shape Brain Structure?

The human brain is larger than that of any other
              primate species. As humans evolved, what environmental or social forces caused
              our own brain expansion? If an animal lives in an extended family group, does
              the need to identify individual members within the group lead to a better
              ability to recognize faces, compared with species that are more solitary? Since
              most vertebrate groups offer only a limited number of species for comparison,
              these questions will be studied in the species-rich African cichlid fishes that
              live in diverse habitats and show an astonishing range of social behaviors. The
              principal investigators have found that complex behaviors occur more often in
              complex rock environments than in simpler sand habitats. Because of the large
              numbers of closely related but behaviorally diverse species in each lake (which
              makes cichlids the "gold standard" for comparative studies exploring how brain
              and behavior evolved), one factor (e.g., social behavior) can be kept constant
              in a comparative study while varying the other (e.g., habitat).  In this way it
              has been possible to show that both factors - environment and social - are
              important evolutionary forces.   In the present study brain structures and
              cognitive abilities (such as individual recognition and spatial memory) of
              species differing in social behavior or habitat will be compared. Ultimately,
              this work will shed light on how environmental and social factors like monogamy
              and familial groups shape brain structure and function. The complex behaviors
              being studied, such as spatial memory and recognition, are of direct relevance
              to humans.

