Title       : Modeling of Nanoscale MOSFETs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0218008

Award Number: 0218008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239866             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dragica Vasileska vasilesk@imap2.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christian Ringhofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               

The purpose of the proposed research effort is to develop methodology
              which
allows simulation of effects playing an important role in
              nano-scale
devices, within the framework of existing device simulators. The
              important
underlying mechanisms are, on one hand, quantum effects such as
              tunneling
and quantization, and, on the other hand, many-body effects,
              electron-ion
interactions and single-dopant effects. The goal of the project
              is to
include these effects into existing models and codes in such a way,
              that
their influence on device performance is accurately represented,
              while
simulations can be made at a computational cost comparable to that
              of
existing particle-based device simulators. The basic approach to
              achieve
this goal consists of the use of novel forms of effective quantum
              potentials
and quantum versions of existing particle-based approaches to
              simulate
short-range many-body interactions. Comparison will be made
              with
experimental data provided by the Nanostructures Research Group at ASU,
              and
Intel and Motorola.  The calibrated tools can help device designers
              in
fabricating optimal device structures with a reduced cost. The
              educational
effort of this project will be closely tied to the proposed
              research
activities. This will be accomplished via specially
              developed
interdisciplinary courses in a classical as well as a distance
              learning
format, and through the direct participation of students in the
              research
project on the graduate as well as the undergraduate level. 
              Course
materials will be developed for this purpose and will be placed on
              the
Computational Electronics Hub that is being developed as part of an
              existing
NSF sponsored project.
