Title       : Virus-Inspired Declarative Geometric Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0218435

Award Number: 0218435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meera Sitharam sitharam@cise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mavis Agbandje-McKenna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1708      REVOLUTIONARY COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0218435
Meera Sitharam
University of Florida 

Virus-Inspired
              Declarative Geometric Computation

The goal of the project is to develop
              geometric computational models and tools for virus assembly from their
              constituent proteins, and virus crystal packing. Furthermore, inspiration of
              the above processes is being used to rethink computationally tractable
              declarative geometry (DG),  defined as the intuitive, constraint-based
              representation and efficient realization of composites of simple interacting
              geometric objects, starting from a declarative specification of the composite's
              properties. In particular, a new game-theoretic constraint model is being
              developed for the underlying class of algebraic-geometric computations and
              corresponding algebraic varieties. Existing software in the form of the PI's
              geometric constraint solver FRONTIER is forming the base for implementing the
              new computational framework. 


The new virus computational models is used
              for the studying the following unanswered questions on carefully chosen,
              geometrically significant viruses: (a) the isolation of crucial geometric
              events during assembly (helpful for disrupting assembly); (b) the isolation of
              assembly events - such as molecular conformational changes - that require the
              involvement of viral genomic material, (helpful for understanding DNA-protein
              interactions); and  (c) the isolation of key geometric events during virus
              crystallization (as an idealized version of molecular crystallization).

The
              new DG virus models is being refined and validated by checking consistency with
              known behavior of viruses and their constituent proteins during assembly and
              crystallization. A small number of other highly focused experiments; selective
              X-ray crystallography and/or cryoelectron microscopy is being performed. As a
              significant player to help with both of the above goals, use the distinctive
              Maize-streak virus (MSV) will be used, whose structure and properties are
              particularly suited to goals of the project. A comparison of the new geometric
              virus models with other geometry-based computational virus models is being
              made.
 

 

