Title       : ITR: Bayesian Models Linking Web Site Structure and Usage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0218759

Award Number: 0218759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235046             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan F. Karr karr@niss.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ashish Sanil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat'l Inst. of Stat. Sci.
	      PO Box 14006
	      Research Triangle Pk, NC  277094006    919/685-9300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

PI: Alan Karr

Proposal Number: ITR-0218759


Despite its
              ubiquity, the World Wide Web is poorly understood. As a consequence, many sites
              are difficult to navigate, hard to use and have confusing structure, to the
              extent that users may be unable to find content and abandon the site. Essential
              needs are to relate user behavior to Web site structure; to compare site usage
              at different times, or for different classes of users; segmentation of
              sessions; quantification of inter-relationships among pages; and prediction of
              user behavior, including forecasts, for example, of the economic impact of
              promotional campaigns. The ultimate impact is more efficient Web sites that
              serve users more effectively. 

This research will create a set of four
              increasingly complex, but scalable, Bayesian models that relate the usage
              (specifically, user page transitions) of a Web site to its structure. It will
              apply, validate and refine the models and use real data from four qualitatively
              different Web sites, an E-commerce site, a site operated by a large financial
              institution, a content site and an information site. The models are scalable
              because the destinations from a given page are classes of pages that mirror the
              tree structure of the site, rather than individual pages. Examples are the
              parent, children and siblings of a page. All four models assume Dirichlet prior
              distributions for transitions from each page. The first three employ very
              aggregated classes of transitions, and differ according to whether the
              transition distributions and the priors are the same for all pages. The fourth
              model disaggregates the "child" and "sibling" destinations. Calculation of
              posterior distributions varies in difficulty: some are available in closed
              form, while others require intensive Markov chain Monte Carlo computation. In
              addition rigorous model assessment will provide insight into what level of
              aggregation is appropriate to which analyses of Web data.

