Title       : ITR: A Versatile, Extensible System for Neutron Scattering Data Visualization
               and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0218882

Award Number: 0218882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Mikkelson mikkelsond@uwstout.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth L. Mikkelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Stout
	      PO Box 790
	      Menomonie, WI  547510790    715/232-1123

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1652,1750,9218,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a grant funded through the Information Technology Research (ITR)
              initiative.  The award is to a predominantly undergraduate institution.
              Time-of-flight neutron scattering experiments provide important insights into
              the structure and dynamics of materials.  These experiments are critical for
              academic and applied research and are carried out at a small number of advanced
              research facilities around the world, including the Intense Pulsed Neutron
              Source (IPNS) Division at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL).  To utilize these
              resources effectively, this project will develop a freely available,
              platform-independent, Java-based system for access, visualization and analysis
              of neutron scattering data.  Initial work has already been undertaken.  The
              result of this initial work is an Integrated Spectral Analysis Workbench
              (ISAW). ISAW is, in principle, applicable to data from a wide variety of
              sources and is extensible by users of the system both through "plug-in"
              operators written in Java and through a basic scripting language.  The system
              provides some highly interactive visualizations, analyses and transformations
              of neutron scattering data in real time for some instrument types.

The
              current project will add important new capabilities to ISAW.  Single crystal
              diffractometers that utilize multiple area detectors and LPSD's to obtain
              volumes of data as a function of time-of-flight pose unique problems.  There is
              a large amount of data and the data is not regularly gridded.  These problems
              are exacerbated when the data is mapped into Q-space or reciprocal space.  This
              project will construct operators and 3-D viewers that allow scientists to view,
              select and manipulate data from such instruments in scientifically meaningful
              spaces.

In addition, the project will add interactive data modeling and
              extensive data access capabilities to ISAW.  Specifically, access to raw
              time-of-flight event data and data from ancillary equipment will be added. 
              Support for importing and exporting data will be extended to the file formats
              NeXus, XML, and some site-specific formats from other neutron
              facilities.

This is a grant funded through the Information Technology
              Research (ITR) initiative.  The award is to a predominantly undergraduate
              institution. Time-of-flight neutron scattering experiments provide important
              insights into the structure and dynamics of materials.  These experiments are
              critical for academic and applied research and are carried out at a small
              number of advanced research facilities around the world, including the Intense
              Pulsed Neutron Source (IPNS) Division at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL).  To
              utilize these resources effectively, this project will develop a freely
              available, platform-independent, Java-based system for access, visualization
              and analysis of neutron scattering data.  Initial work has already been
              undertaken.  The result of this initial work is an Integrated Spectral Analysis
              Workbench (ISAW). ISAW is, in principle, applicable to data from a wide variety
              of sources and is extensible by users of the system both through "plug-in"
              operators written in Java and through a basic scripting language.  The system
              provides some highly interactive visualizations, analyses and transformations
              of neutron scattering data in real time for some instrument types.

The
              current project will add important new capabilities to ISAW.  Single crystal
              diffractometers that utilize multiple area detectors and LPSD's to obtain
              volumes of data as a function of time-of-flight pose unique problems.  There is
              a large amount of data and the data is not regularly gridded.  These problems
              are exacerbated when the data is mapped into Q-space or reciprocal space.  This
              project will construct operators and 3-D viewers that allow scientists to view,
              select and manipulate data from such instruments in scientifically meaningful
              spaces.

In addition, the project will add interactive data modeling and
              extensive data access capabilities to ISAW.  Specifically, access to raw
              time-of-flight event data and data from ancillary equipment will be added. 
              Support for importing and exporting data will be extended to the file formats
              NeXus, XML, and some site-specific formats from other neutron facilities.

