Title       : The Role of Technology on Work Practices in Police Departments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0218304

Award Number: 0218304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne P. Weisband WEISBAND@BPA.ARIZONA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sherry Thatcher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9102,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Technological advances have made effective knowledge management (KM) a
              requirement in many organizations and industries. As these technologies and
              applications become more ubiquitous, the ability to use these technologies for
              knowledge sharing and to impact work outcomes becomes even more urgent. This
              urgency is nowhere more evident than in the public sector, specifically in the
              law enforcement community. As a result of the events of September 11, 2001, we
              have witnessed an increased effort of law enforcement agencies to share
              knowledge and collaborate to promote attentiveness for homeland defense and the
              security of local communities. These changes may be improved by a better
              understanding of how police use new knowledge management technologies now
              available to them. Similarly, we need to assess how these technologies will
              affect the nature of police work. Based upon a solid theoretical foundation,
              this research draws upon existing knowledge about communication and knowledge
              sharing, individual differences, organizational culture, group characteristics,
              incentive systems, and technology to understand organizational change in police
              departments. 

The three major objectives of the proposed research are: (1)
              to understand individual, group, and organizational factors that influence work
              practices in police departments, (2) to understand how changes in technology
              impact work practices, and (3) to understand how these changes in work
              practices affect individual, group, and organizational factors. The research
              uses multiple methods from empirical social science and behavioral research to
              validate our model of factor that influence police work in police departments.
              The research will have theoretical implications for the disciplines of social
              psychology, organization science, information systems, and criminology. The
              research outcomes will be particularly applicable to law enforcement agencies,
              academics studying public sector institutions, organizational change theorists,
              and knowledge management practitioners. 

The research is organized in three
              phases. The first phase serves to evaluate our original model, based on
              previous literature on the effects of individual, group, and organizational
              factors. The second phase builds upon our model to investigate the effects of
              KM technology implementation on work practices. The third phase investigates
              the issue of organization change over time by looking at the impact that KM
              technologies can have on the underlying individual, group, and organizational
              factors in police departments. By focusing on some of the most pressing issues
              for police departments, this research could have substantial impact on police
              departments throughout the United States and national homeland defense
              agencies. 
