Title       : Modeling of Part-Fixture Dynamics With Application to Synthesis of Dedicated and
               Flexible Fixturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0218113

Award Number: 0218113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305024             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shreyes N. Melkote   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of models for analysis of
              part-fixture dynamics in machining and application of these models to the
              synthesis of dedicated and flexible fixturing systems.  The models developed in
              this research will enable part-fixture interaction to be considered in the
              stability analysis of multiple-point machining processes such as milling.  In
              addition, the models will allow the impact of part-fixture dynamics on the
              final part quality to be analyzed and accounted for in the synthesis of both
              dedicated and flexible fixturing systems.

To achieve this goal, a dynamic
              model of the part-fixture system accounting for the effects of micro-slip
              induced damping will be developed.  A simplified lumped parameter approach
              based on contact elasticity principles will be used to develop the model.  The
              model will account for nonlinearities arising from unilateral contact
              conditions, micro-slip and gross stick-slip.  In addition, a modified dynamic
              friction tester will be used to develop empirical models of part-fixture
              contact friction for use with the dynamic model.  The dynamic part-fixture
              model will be applied to the analysis and synthesis of both dedicated and
              flexible machining fixtures such as the pin-array flexible fixture.  On a
              fundamental level, the models developed in this research will complement the
              existing body of scientific knowledge in part fixturing.  On a practical level,
              it will provide the necessary dynamic analysis and synthesis tools, heretofore
              unavailable, for designers and end-users of dedicated and flexible fixturing
              systems.  Application of these models will lead to the development and
              implementation of truly process-capable fixtures.
