Title       : Evolution of Maternal Effects in a Model Avian System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0218313

Award Number: 0218313
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Badyaev abadyaev@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey E. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary T. Mendonca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A central tenet of evolutionary biology is that natural selection  leads to
              
adaptation.  Studies of house finches in Montana and Alabama have
              
documented that indeed, these birds have rapidly adapted to the local
              
environment, despite having colonized these highly ecologically distinct
              
areas only in the last few decades. Local adaptations include different
              
sizes and shapes for males and females but these changes have occurred too 
              
rapidly to be explained by genetically based changes alone. It has been
              
documented previously that rapid changes in how male and female house
              
finches grow and develop in Montana and Alabama are responsible for
              
differences between the populations.  In particular it is the allocation of
              
males and females to different positions in the laying order and strong and
              
sex-specific effects of laying order on growth and development that led to
              
rapid changes in the populations.  How such maternal effects can affect the
              
growth of males and females is the focus of this study. This investigation
              
will test whether female allocation of hormones such as testosterone and
              
prolactin, specific nutrients such as carotenoids and lipids, overall
              
nutrient content of eggs, or the timing of egg incubation varies across
              
laying order and how each of these factors affects the growth and
              
development of male and female offspring. Our investigation is fundamental
              
to a better understanding of how natural selection can lead to rapid
              
adaptation to local environments.  The ability to adjust the growth patterns
              
of males and females as an adaptation to local environments may have
              
enabled the house finch and some other invasive vertebrate species to
              
colonize highly distinct and changing environments.

