Title       : ITR: American National Corpus: A Primary Resource for Linguistics Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0218609

Award Number: 0218609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285127             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy M. Ide ide@cs.vassar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randi Reppen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Nancy Ide and Randi Reppen will
              conduct a three-year project to annotate extensively a 10-million word portion
              of the American National Corpus (ANC).  The ANC consists of both spoken and
              written language from North America across a range of registers, such as
              planned speeches, conversations, fiction, and newspapers.  This research
              project uses techniques from both computational linguistics and corpus
              linguistics to annotate the ANC for a range of grammatical and semantic
              characteristics.  Specifically the project seeks to accomplish three major
              objectives: 1) develop automatic tools for annotating various elements and
              structures in the corpus; 2) create a 'gold standard' portion of the ANC,
              consisting of 10 million words in which the markup, annotation, and parts of
              speech have been hand-validated; and 3) describe the conceptual and meaning
              relations among words in the ANC within the framework of the 'semantic web',
              thus greatly enhancing analysis and retrieval capabilities.  The investigators
              are to carry out this research through a variety of software programs (many
              created specifically for this project), and through extensive human/computer
              interaction to hand-validate the computer assigned labels. 

This research
              project is important for several reasons. First, the resulting corpus will be
              the first publicly available tagged corpus of spoken and written American
              English.  Second, because the annotation of the corpus will be hand-validated,
              the resulting product will approach 100% accuracy. With this carefully
              annotated 10-million word corpus, language researchers will be able to address
              a number of structural and linguistic relationships across texts that
              previously could not be addressed.  Since the corpus will be hand-validated,
              researchers can use this information to develop models for processing
              previously unseen texts. The ANC corpus will be readily available to
              researchers via the web.  In addition to the annotated corpus, the project will
              make available to researchers a suite of tools designed to retrieve information
              from the corpus.

