Title       : Low-Cost Electrically and Mechanically Steerable Array Antennas for
               Internet-in-Sky Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0218805

Award Number: 0218805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yasuo Kuga kuga@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Minoru Taya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Akira Ishimaru  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0218805
Kuga

Despite the economical and technical problems with the current
              Iridium and GlobalStar and proposed Teledesic satellite systems, it is expected
              that a high-speed satellite-based internet will become practical in the near
              future.  Iridium and GlobalStar do not have sufficient bandwidth to accommodate
              high-speed transmission of data. It is undeniable that the future
              anywhere-anytime high-speed internet access requires low-earth-orbit K or
              Ka-band satellite systems similar to the one proposed by Teledesic.

One of
              the major problems with the proposed Teledesic system is the cost of the ground
              station antenna and control system. Unlike a geo-synchronous satellite, the
              low-orbit satellites move from horizon to horizon in 10 to 20 minutes. The
              antenna must be able to keep track of one or more satellite locations in order
              to obtain an uninterrupted connection. This is usually performed using phased
              array or mechanically steerable antennas. Unfortunately, the mechanically
              steerable antennas which use electro-mechanical actuators are usually bulky and
              prone to mechanical failures. The electronic phased array antennas are fast and
              no moving parts are involved, but they are very expensive.

Their objective
              is to develop a low-cost steerable antenna using a novel phase shifter and
              electro-active polymer (EAP) actuators. In order to achieve this objective, the
              PIs propose the following four tasks.
Task 1: Develop a low-cost phase shifter
              for a phased-array antenna using EAP.
Task 2: Design a practical, low-cost
              phased-array antenna.
Task 3: Develop a variable reflector surface antenna
              with EAP actuators.
Task 4: Develop reliable and practical EAP materials and
              actuators.

The phase shifter consists of a tiny mechanically movable
              dielectric element on
transmission lines. To move the dielectric block, they
              will use a newly developed EAP actuator which requires only 1-2V. An EAP
              actuator can also be used as a microwave switch to create a controllable delay
              line. The whole unit can be integrated with the patch antennas on a multi-layer
              PCB. The proposed antenna does not contain any solid state microwave switches
              or electromechanical devices. It can be fabricated inexpensively.  They have
              already conducted the numerical simulations and results were obtained for
              several TL configurations. Another application of the EAP actuator is for a
              mechanically steerable antenna. A profile of a flexible membrane or plates can
              be controlled accurately with an array of EAP actuators. A desired radiation
              pattern can be quickly created by adjusting the surface profile. There are many
              technical challenges to realize the EAP-based antenna. To achieve their
              objective, they must develop reliable EAP materials and actuators.

The PIs
              believe that the proposed low-cost antenna will be one of the key components to
              realize the "Internet-in-the-Sky". Although many aspects of this antenna have
              been tested and verified, they still need to work on several details. An EAP
              actuator is still in an infant state. To design the proposed antenna, they need
              a close collaboration between a material scientist who can design the EAP
              actuator and electrical engineers who can utilize the EAP actuator for the
              antenna applications.

