Title       : Use of Giant Superelasticity Effect for Improving Interface Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0218209

Award Number: 0218209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene I. Rivin rivin@eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The much promoted promise of advancing mechanical design by using such "smart
              materials" as shape memory and superelastic alloys (SMA and SEA) did not
              materialize to a significant degree. The main applications of such materials
              are in medicine (arterial stents, bone reconstruction, etc.) and consumer
              products such as women's bras and "non-destructible" eyeglass frames.  This
              project will extend application of the smart materials, especially of SEA, to
              structures of high productivity precision machines machine tools.  SMA and SEA
              materials are largely produced as wires, tubing, or strips. Up to now, they
              were used in tensile or bending modes of load accommodation, wherein relatively
              small loads cause relatively large deformations. Structural applications are
              usually associated with high loads and relatively small deformations. A limited
              scale preliminary (non-funded) study demonstrated that very high forces can be
              accommodated while causing small deformations if the off-the-shelf wires or
              tubing made from SEA are loaded radially. Moreover, it was discovered that such
              loading mode is associated with extremely large elastic limits. The radially
              loaded SEA wire exhibit elastic limit 20-24 percent, similar to rubber-like
              materials, while having elastic modulus at least one thousand times greater
              than rubber ("giant superelasticity effect"). This unique and until recently
              not known property opens large areas for beneficial applications.  Detailed
              experimental and analytical (finite element modeling) studies of properties of
              various SEA and SMA materials (wires and tubing) under radial loading will be
              performed in the course of this project, to accumulate data necessary for using
              the "giant superelasticity effect" in structural design applications. 
              Application of this effect for toolholders will be explored, together with
              Command Tooling Systems Co. (one of the largest US manufacturers of toolholders
              for CNC machine tools).

It is anticipated, based on the previous results,
              that application of structural dimensional compensators utilizing the unique
              elastic properties of the radially-loaded SEA wires and tubing will result in a
              significant enhancement of stiffness and accuracy of many thousands machine
              tools in the U.S., thus in increasing their machining quality and productivity.
              These effects will be achieved in a very cost-effective way, with minimum
              modifications of the existing toolholders. Assessment of other design
              applications of the giant superelasticity effect will be performed , such as
              for modular tooling systems and for reconfigurable machining systems.
