Title       : ITR: A Unified Representation for Non-homogeneous Models Manifesting Surface,
               Volume, and Vector Attributes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0218809

Award Number: 0218809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine Cohen cohen@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Riesenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1655,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research project will develop improved mathematical representations of
              three-dimensional objects, for use across a variety of applications. 
              Underlying model representations in computer graphics, computer-aided geometric
              design, engineering analysis, and medical visualization have historically been
              driven by different requirements. Thus, different algorithmic and computational
              foundations have evolved yielding two largely disparate formulations.
              Differences in model representations impede cross-pollination of valuable
              techniques, hinder model sharing, and limit cross-area applications.  To attack
              this historically intractable problem, a unified mathematical representation
              that can work across a broad spectrum of applications will be developed, based
              on an extended, multidimensional, parametric tensor product B-spline
              hyper-volume. High dimensional NURBs (Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines) are used
              as a basis because of their ubiquity in practice, universality in modeling,
              good overall computational and interactive behavior, and extensive
              understanding.  Distinguishing itself from the straightforward generalization,
              the extended representation will support a non-hyperrectangular domain
              (non-hexahedral for the trivariate) appropriate to the model, and include
              supplementary attributes, defined over a common multidimensional parametric
              domain. The attributes will model both functional characteristics and data
              represented as scalars or vectors.

Recent advances in several key
              technologies are creating demand for higher dimensional representations and
              corresponding visualization algorithms to design and analyze truly solid
              geometry, i.e., working in a design space of non-homogeneous materials
              manifesting multidimensional attributes. This calls for fundamental advances in
              our computing and visualization environments. One of the practical applications
              is designing optical lenses that achieve refracting power by smoothly varying
              the index of refraction and keeping a simple geometric shape. The combination
              of simple shape with no discontinuities in the index of refraction offers
              substantial optical and mechanical advantages over traditional multifarious
              lens systems.  The project will also have educational benefits, training
              students in the laboratory to help them become leaders in this increasingly
              important field.

