Title       : Medium Energy Ion Scattering Studies of Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0218406

Award Number: 0218406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Torgny Gustafsson gustaf@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses fundamental issues of structure, composition, growth and
              reactivity on tech-nologically relevant thin films. The research explores film
              and interface behavior of ultrathin oxides in the critical 1-10 nm thickness
              range. Plans include growth and analysis of films grown on Si, Ge and SiC. The
              primary technique employed is high-resolution medium energy ion scat-tering
              (MEIS), enabling accurate determination of composition as a function of depth,
              and, in some cases, precise structure determinations. The MEIS experiments will
              be complemented with infrared absorption spectroscopy, scanning tunneling
              microscopy, atomic force microscopy, and photoelectron spectroscopy. Some
              aspects will be done in collaboration with industrial scientists at Bell Labs
              and elsewhere. The project also addresses fundamental studies of ion-surface
              inter-actions, specifically the effect of electronic excitation processes on
              ion scattering spectra as the film thickness drops below one nanometer. The aim
              is to provide fundamental understanding of high-resolution depth profiling of
              surfaces and ultrathin films. This work will be done in close collaboration
              with theorists. The broader technological impact of this work results from
              devel-opment of a microscopic understanding of thin film growth and of new
              experimental and theo-retical tools. A new level of conceptual understanding,
              based on atomic concepts, is expected to emerge which will aid in the continued
              development of electronics. 
%%% 
The project addresses fundamental research
              issues in areas of electronic materials science and condensed matter physics
              having technological relevance. An important feature of the project is the
              strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and education.
              The research program provides excellent opportunities for hands-on experience
              in the use of sophisticated sci-entific equipment. The combined resources,
              including experimental and theoretical methods, provide special opportunities
              for education and training of post doctoral associates, graduate and
              undergraduate students involved in highly interdisciplinary forefront research.
              The direct and visually oriented nature of the information obtained facilitates
              communication of the excitement of surface and materials science to
              undergraduates as well as middle and high school students.
***  

