Title       : Collaborative Research: CRCNS: Detection and Recognition of Objects in Visual
               Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0218693

Award Number: 0218693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomaso Poggio tp@ai.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Earl K. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christof Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Ferster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James DiCarlo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1705      BIOLOGY & INFORMATION TECHNOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0218693
Poggio, Tomaso
MIT

 Collaborative Research: CRCNS: Detection
              and Recognition of Objects in Visual Cortex

A three way collaboration
              between the laboratories of Profs. T. Poggio at MIT,  D. Ferster at
              Northwestern University and C. Koch at Caltech is exploring and evaluating the
              hypotheses that the cortical organization and the neural mechanisms of visual
              recognition can be explained by a coherent theoretical framework built on two
              existing computational models for recognition and attention and, secondly, that
              a combination of physiological work on monkeys and cats, together with visual
              psychophysics  can be used to test and refine the theory.  The research is
              organized into three main projects. The work at MIT is guided by a quantitative
              hierarchical model of recognition, probing the relations between identification
              and categorization and the properties of selectivity and invariance of the
              neural mechanisms in IT cortex. The work at Northwestern University is testing
              a key prediction of the model about the nature of the pooling operation (a max
              operation vs. a linear sum) performed by complex cells in V1.  The experiments
              are done in the anesthetized cat, intracellularly, to allow for a
              characterization of the underlying circuit and biophysical mechanisms. Finally,
              work at Caltech is extending the basic model of recognition by integrating it
              with a saliency-based attentional model.  The computational component of this
              work, centered around the development of a quantitative model of  visual
              recognition, constitutes the primary tool to enforce interactions between the
              investigators: the model suggests experiments and guides planning and
              interpreting new experiments.

