Title       : GOALI: Integrated Signal Processing for Bearing Health Assessment and Life
               Prediction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0218161

Award Number: 0218161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert X. Gao gao@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jim Wei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1468,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) provides
              funding for the development of a unified time-scale-frequency domain signal
              processing technique that is germane to the health assessment and
              time-to-failure prediction of rolling bearings. The project is aimed at
              bridging an existing gap between the state-of-the-art of signal processing
              research in the academia and current bearing condition monitoring practice on
              the factory floor, and will focus on establishing the theoretical foundation
              for an effective and efficient algorithm to estimate a defective bearing's
              damage status and remaining service life. The research will consists of
              numerical simulations in multiple domains, custom-designed experimental
              validation, and systematic analysis of historical data provided by the
              industrial partner of this project.  The developed technique will be
              implemented in the form of a bearing assessment firmware, residing on a Digital
              Signal Processor platform, and installed in a handheld bearing data analyzer,
              suited for direct industry translation to bearing manufacturers and
              end-users.

This research, if successful, will lead to improved capability of
              concurrent machine fault feature extraction in multiple domains. Such a
              technique will be essential to reducing costly and unexpected machine downtime,
              and improving product quality. In a broader context, the research will enhance
              existing curricula in manufacturing and mechanical engineering, create new,
              research-based educational materials, promote collaborations between a major
              public university and the bearing industry, and improve the overall education
              infrastructure at the PI's institution. Ultimately, by being able to more
              reliably predict the health status of a machine system and improve operation
              safety and productivity, the research has the potential to impact a wide range
              of manufacturing processes other than bearings.
