Title       : Corporate Initiatives to Serve Poor Markets as a Driver for Innovation and
               Change: A Longitudinal Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0218156

Award Number: 0218156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart L. Hart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The increasing competitiveness of North American, Western European, and some
              Asian markets is forcing firms to search for new growth opportunities around
              the globe. At the same time, discontent with globalization has increased over
              concerns about environmental degradation, a widening gap between rich and poor,
              and loss of both local autonomy and cultural diversity. Consistent with theory,
              a growing number of US and foreign companies are seeking new business
              opportunities by focusing attention on the most ignored market segment of the
              world: those 4 billion at the bottom of the economic pyramid who earn less than
              $5 a day and lack access to goods and services that meet their most basic
              needs. The ability of firms to serve a market they have traditionally ignored
              requires significant reframing of the business challenge by managers, the
              development of cutting-edge innovations and technologies, and fundamental
              organizational transformation through the creation of new business models. With
              support from the National Science Foundation's Innovation and Organizational
              Change Program, this study will follow the attempts of five multinational firms
              over time to test that theory in the field as they conceive, propose,
              implement, expand or terminate projects that meet the needs of a new market
              segment. The study will occur over a period of three years, during which time
              managers expect that their initiatives will either succeed or fail. If
              successful, these initiatives will become businesses that signal a significant
              change for their firms in terms of strategy, structure, and process. This
              research will focus on how firms can most effectively organize to develop,
              implement, and diffuse these disruptive innovations. 

Five firms in three
              industries -- Chemicals (Dow and Dupont), Consumer Products (Johnson & Johnson
              and Procter & Gamble), and Beverages (Coca-Cola) -- have committed to provide
              access to use a multi-method approach to collect longitudinal data on more than
              eight initiatives. Primary data collection will occur through on-site, semi-
              structured interviews with key managers who can lend insight into the processes
              employed to affect change in their companies. Interviewees range from members
              of the company's Executive Team to in-country project managers, as well as
              external stakeholders (e.g., NGOs, public entities) utilized by the focal
              organization to move their projects forward. Investigators will also analyze
              internal communications including memos, reports, meetings, and email, to
              validate data collected in interviews. These data will be used to inductively
              build and refine a testable model of organizational change related to these
              types of ventures. To test and validate the model, the final phase of the study
              includes the development of a survey instrument and its distribution to a
              larger sample of firms engaged in projects to serve the world's poorest people.
              This research has important intellectual and practical implications. Management
              literature has recognized that over the past decade a set of complex issues has
              emerged as a critical challenge for corporations attempting to optimize
              economic, social, and environmental performance. A substantial body of
              scholarly work focusing on global issues calls for fundamental industrial
              transformation in the future, but offers little insight or prescription for how
              or why that might occur. By grounding this work in the actual activities of
              real firms, this study will not only provide insight into actual bottom-up and
              top-down change and innovation processes employed by companies in the
              marketplace today, but also help explain how and why such processes succeed or
              fail. Results of the study will be extremely valuable to a broad group of
              stakeholders. Companies are interested in more tangible recommendations of how
              they might transform themselves to meet the challenges of sustainable
              development and grow in the future. NGOs and governments around the globe are
              interested in forming a better understanding of how to effectively engage
              companies to work together to increase the economic fortunes of a broader group
              of the world's population.
