Title       : Fundamental Molecular Studies of Complex Fluids for Preservation of Biological
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0218357

Award Number: 0218357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191679             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan J. De Pablo depablo@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Juan J. de Pablo, U of Wisconsin - Madison

"Fundamental Molecular Studies of
              Complex Fluids for Preservation of Biological Systems"

Labile biological
              systems such as proteins, cells, or tissue must often be stored for prolonged
              periods of time. This is generally achieved by freezing the system of interest
              in an aqueous solution containing various additives, whose purpose is to
              minimize the damage that arises from the formation of ice crystals. In some
              cases, it is also possible to freeze-dry the resulting formulation, thereby
              resulting in a product that can be stored without a need for refrigeration. In
              most cases, a large fraction of the biomolecules or cells do not survive the
              freeze-thawing or freeze-drying processes; the rates of recovery are low and
              contribute significantly to the cost and availability of the resulting
              product.

Some examples of these additives, or "protectants ", are provided
              by dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and ethylene glycol, both of which have undesirable
              side effects. In practice, protectant formulations are generally conceived
              through a costly trial-and-error process. And, while some general ideas have
              emerged regarding their function, the precise mechanisms by which protectant
              molecules act to preserve viability during freezing and drying are not well
              understood.

In this work the PI proposes to conduct a systematic and
              comprehensive study of the role of various protectant molecules on the
              stability of proteins in solution and in anhydrous, protectant matrices. The
              work is largely focused on the study of the disaccharides, which in recent
              years have shown promise for effective preservation of biological systems. The
              PI also examines how the same protectants act to stabilize lipid bilayer
              membranes in solution and in dry matrices.

The project includes both
              modeling and experimental components. Computational aspects will take priority
              over experimental (X-ray structure analysis, NMR and calorimetry work will not
              be performed). At the modeling level, the PI uses molecular simulations to
              elucidate the mechanisms by which protectants work, and to identify the main
              structural attributes that render some protectant molecules more effective than
              others. This will require that new simulation methods be develop to facilitate
              the study of large ensembles of complex molecules (water, disaccharides,
              electrolytes and oligopeptides) both remote and near the glass transition
              point. At the experimental level, the PI intends to characterize the
              thermophysical properties of various protectant and model-protein solutions and
              glasses, and to relate these to preservation efficacy and to the results of our
              simulations. The PI may characterize the equilibrium thermodynamic properties
              of lipid bilayers in the presence of protectants and varying amounts of water.
              These data will be compared to simulation results, and will be used to
              rationalize his observations and those of others regarding the preservation of
              cells.

The broader impact of the research is that it will lead to a deeper
              understanding of protein and cell stability in solution and in the presence of
              protectant solutes. It will also generate predictive models and experimental
              thermodynamic-property and transport-coefficient data for rational design and
              optimization of preservation processes. More importantly, it has the potential
              to result in improved protectant molecules and formulations that will permit
              long-term storage of food, pharmaceutical, and biomedical products. The
              potential educational impact of the research is considered high since the PI
              has a record of involving students, including underrepresented groups, in his
              research.

