Title       : US-Pakistan Cooperative Research: Population Genetics of Benthosema Pterotum, A
               Mesopelagic Fish from the Arabian Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0218248

Award Number: 0218248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Giacomo Bernardi bernardi@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1305,5943,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0218248
Bernardi

Description:  This award is for support of a joint research
              project between Dr. Giacomo Bernardi, Biology Department, University of
              California-Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California and Dr. Shahid Amjad, Department
              of Oceanography, The National Institute of Oceanography (NIO), Karachi,
              Pakistan.  They plan to study the population genetics of Benthosema pterotum, a
              mesopelagic fish from the Arabian Sea.  The Arabian Sea has 
complex
              oceanography, which results in high biological productivity.  In the open
              ocean, the topmost trophic level is represented by nekton such as marine
              mammals and large fishes such as tunas and mackerel.  In the northwest Arabian
              Sea and adjacent Gulf of Oman, the topmost trophic level is represented by
              mesopelagic fishes.  These are small, midwater species such as Lanternfishes
              (Myctophidae), Hatchetfishes (Sternoptychidae), and Bristlemouths
              (Gonostomatidae).  The main species reported in abundance is the lanternfish
              Benthosema pterotum.  This will be collected off the coast of Pakistan from the
              Gulf of Oman to the Central Arabian Sea.  Specifically, the investigators plan
              to investigate the genetic differences between Gulf of Oman and Arabian Sea
              populations of B. pterotum off the coast of Pakistan (smaller-scale).  They
              will extract DNA, PCR amplify and sequence nuclear intron, and mitochondrial
              loci to establish patterns of population structure in B. pterotum.  The
              sampling protocol will have approximately 500 individuals to have enough
              statistical validity. 

Scope:  This award will allow a US team headed by the
              PI to collaborate with a Pakistani team from the NIO in a research project of
              significant scientific interest.  The PIs will be working closely with young
              Pakistani scientists at NIO to train them for the optimum methods for fish
              surveys and to catch the specific species. These scientists will then carry out
              most of the fieldwork. They will also be trained in the new molecular
              techniques.  Pakistan's ocean science is at a stage of development where this
              collaboration will greatly help.  This project will have a positive impact on
              NIO and the fisheries departments in Pakistan.  All countries bordering the
              northwestern Indian Ocean would like to harvest B. pterotum commercially. 
              Improved understanding of its population genetics, and other knowledge that
              will follow from this pilot study, will help scientists in the region utilize
              this unexploited fishery resouce.

