Title       : US-South Africa Workshop: Operations Research for Global Logistics Involving
               Africa, Pretoria, South Africa, August 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0218033

Award Number: 0218033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anton J. Kleywegt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0107000   Operations Research                     
              0207000   Transportation                          
Program Ref : 0000,1066,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0218033
Kleywegt

This award supports 10 US participants in a US-South Africa
              Workshop on "Operations Research for Global Logistics Involving Africa,"
              scheduled for August 12-15, 2002, in Pretoria, South Africa.  The co-organizers
              are Professor Anton J. Kleywegt, with the School of Industrial and Systems
              Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology, and Mr. Hans W. Ittmann, in
              the Information and Communication Technology Department at the Council for
              Scientific and Industrial Research.  There will be a total of approximately 30
              participants, who will be drawn from academic, industrial, and governmental
              organizations in the United States, the Republic of South Africa, Mauritius,
              and South East Asia.  The workshop will focus on global logistics and supply
              chain issues, with an emphasis on operations research models and techniques for
              global logistics involving Africa.  The co-organizers expect the participants
              to develop a better understanding of the similarities and differences between
              first-world and third-world logistics problems, as well as the usefulness of
              different techniques for addressing these problems.  Site visits will be made
              to logistics facilities in the Johannesburg/Pretoria/Midrand region.  A major
              goal of the workshop is to establish linkages between the logistics communities
              in the United States and the Republic of South Africa for the development of
              collaborative research and education programs.  

Most logisticians
              throughout the rest of the world know little about Africa's unique logistics
              challenges.  For example, South Africa's logistics system can be characterized
              as heterogeneous, yet it has a fragile infrastructure.  Workshop participants
              will share information about advances in supply chain management and operations
              research applications in logistics.  They will also identify those operations
              research problems involving Africa that are the most relevant and important to
              global logistics.  Results of the meeting are expected to identify new research
              problems not presently encountered by US investigators.  Additionally, the
              African researchers and practitioners will be exposed to new skills and tools
              that they can use to address some of their logistics problems.  Workshop
              results will be disseminated through the web page of The Logistics Institute at
              George Tech, at http://www.tli.gatech.edu, as well as by CD-R copies.   
              

The project supports the participation of five junior investigators from
              the United States.

The Office of International Science and Engineering and
              the Division of Design, Manufacturing, and Industrial Innovation jointly
              support this award.

