Title       : Environmental Dynamics and the Evolution of Human Adaptability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0218511

Award Number: 0218511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2011  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2415584            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Potts potts.rick@nmnh.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig S. Feibel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. deMenocal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anna K. Behrensmeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5282,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Adaptability refers to an organism's ability to endure environmental change, to
              spread to new habitats, and to respond in novel ways to its surroundings - all
              of which typify the living human species, Homo sapiens.  The main objective of
              this project is to investigate the emergence of human adaptability in the
              dynamic settings that characterized the past four million years.  Human origins
              during this period involved a lengthy transition from small apelike populations
              confined to equatorial regions of Africa to a worldwide, highly diverse human
              species capable of altering its surroundings in unprecedented ways.  In this
              project scientists from diverse fields (anthropologists, paleontologists,
              geologists, and environmental scientists) will gather new data to further our
              understanding of how major human adaptations evolved in response to ancient
              environments. 
The period of human ancestry was typified by a very complex
              sequence of environments, including progressive change (global cooling during
              the ice ages), large climate oscillation (repeated change between
              glacial-interglacial and arid-moist conditions), and times of stability.  It is
              not yet known, however, whether early technological change, brain enlargement,
              geographic dispersal, development of symbolic behavior, among other key events
              in human prehistory, coincided with periods of directional change, strong
              fluctuation, or stability.  This project will compare detailed environmental,
              fossil, and archeological records in Africa and East Asia in order to test
              when, where, and why human ancestors developed a greater ability to adjust to
              new surroundings and to modify their habitats. 
	This project will include the
              first comparative analysis of fossil and environmental records from both Africa
              and East Asia, funded by NSF and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.  Excavations
              and laboratory analysis in the two distant regions offer a novel opportunity to
              explore the connection between environmental and evolutionary change and the
              common prehistory of the two regions.  Project research teams will collect data
              to measure change in early human behavior (from archeological sources) and in
              anatomy (from the fossil record).  Change in past animal communities and
              ecosystems will also be studied to provide a context in which to judge the
              development of uniquely human strategies of interaction with the environment. 
              Environmental research teams will use state-of-the-art techniques to examine
              the nature and rate of global change, evident in the ocean record, and of local
              change in areas where humans emerged and spread.
	The project also includes
              geneticists who will experimentally evaluate the possible genetic processes by
              which adaptability evolves.  This research will investigate the model organism
              C. elegans (nematode), and will test for mechanisms of genetic change that
              favor adaptive flexibility to emerge in response to experimental sequences of
              environments.  The combined components of this project are thus designed to
              stimulate communication across experimental and historical approaches within
              and across the natural and social sciences.  Through workshops, conferences,
              and a publicly accessible website and database, our project seeks to unify
              fields that only together can address an unanswered scientific question, the
              origin of adaptability in humans and other organisms.  The broader impacts f
              this research will include public outreach through the web, museum exhibitions,
              distance-learning curricula, and opportunities for student internships.

