Title       : Effect of Fines Type and Content on Liquefaction Resistance and Ground Failure
               Potential
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0218365

Award Number: 0218365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206518             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charng H. Juang HSEIN@CLEMSON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1057,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0218365, Charng H. Juang, Clemson University
"Effect of Fines Type and Content
              on Liquefaction Resistance and Ground Failure Potential"

The ability to
              accurately evaluate the liquefaction potential and the liquefaction-induced
              ground failure potential is important in the engineering planning and design of
              structures in seismic regions.  This research project addresses two important
              issues in the mitigation of earthquake-induced liquefaction hazards, namely the
              effect of fines type and content on liquefaction resistance, and the
              liquefaction-induced ground failure potential.  The first topic concerns the
              triggering of liquefaction, and the second addresses the consequence of
              liquefaction.

With respect to the first topic, recent studies by numerous
              investigators have concluded that both fines content and fines type affect the
              liquefaction resistance of soils, but these affects are not fully accounted for
              in the existing simplified design methods.  Data from recent earthquakes offers
              a rare opportunity to investigate these effects and to improve on the current
              state of the art on liquefaction triggering analysis.

The second topic is
              more challenging, as reflected in the fact that no readily applicable
              site-specific model is currently available for evaluating liquefaction-induced
              ground failure potential.  However, the number of case histories from recent
              earthquakes is now sufficient to establish empirical models for estimating
              site-specific ground failure potential.  This project is collecting this
              additional case history data on liquefaction triggering and ground failure. 
              This case history data, together with the existing databases, is used to
              improve the current state of the art on liquefaction triggering analysis, and
              to develop new empirical models for evaluating liquefaction-induced ground
              failure potential.  Advanced data analysis techniques, including logistic
              regression analysis, mapping function approach based on artificial neural
              network, and Bayesian updating technique, are examined and utilized for
              developing the empirical models.

Both deterministic and probabilistic models
              are being developed.  Since the geotechnical engineering profession prefers the
              deterministic approach, the deterministic models will be developed, but
              equipped with suggested guidelines including risk-calibrated factor of safety. 
              The probabilistic models are being developed for use in performance-based
              earthquake engineering, as well as for mapping liquefaction-induced ground
              failure.

