Title       : CRCNS: Bioinformatics of Alternative Splicing in the Nervous System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0218506

Award Number: 0218506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1786058            (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher B. Burge   (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip A. Sharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tomaso Poggio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1705      BIOLOGY & INFORMATION TECHNOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0218506 
Burge, Christopher B
MIT

CRCNS: Bioinformatics of Alternative
              Splicing in the Nervous System
 
Almost every human cell contains a huge
              instruction manual called the genome with many thousands of pages (the genes),
              each of which tells the cell how to make a particular building block (protein)
              that it needs to live or grow or to perform its assigned function in the body. 
              The cell uses this manual in a complicated way, first copying (transcribing)
              each page that it needs to a piece of scratch paper (the pre-mRNA), and  then
              cutting and pasting (splicing) pieces of the scratch paper (the exons) together
              to form the final recipe (mRNA) for the protein product.  Interestingly, this
              cutting and pasting is often carried out in different ways in different types
              of cells or under different conditions in a process called alternative splicing
              (AS), generating many different varieties of a  protein under different
              conditions.  Alternative splicing is particularly common in  neurons, helping
              to generate protein variants whose properties are optimized to the local
              environment of the neuron.  For example, AS is used to tune the electrical
              properties of ion channels which help different sensory neurons in the inner
              ear respond to different frequencies of sound.  In addition, mutations that
              affect AS are associated with a number of neurodegenerative diseases.  The goal
              of the proposal is to gain a better understanding of the signals in a gene that
              determine how that gene will be spliced when it is expressed in a particular
              part of the brain, and of how alternative splicing is used to modulate brain
              function.   

