Title       : Collaborative Research: International Development of Non-Destructive Tools to
               Quantify Sample Disturbance and Its Correlation to Measured Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0218314

Award Number: 0218314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Sheahan tsheahan@coe.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS- 0218314
PI:		Thomas Sheahan
Institution:	Northeastern
              University
Title:	"Collaborative Research: International Development of
              Non-Destructive Tools to Quantify Sample Disturbance and its Correlation to
              Measured Behavior"

Abstract:

While important progress has been made in
              the use of in situ testing and geophysical methods to determine soil
              stress-strain-strength parameters for design, the state of practice for the
              foreseeable future will often rely on physical soil sample collection for
              laboratory testing.  Samples collected for laboratory testing are often highly
              disturbed, but the geotechnical profession does not have adequate
              non-destructive tools for evaluating that disturbance or correlating it to the
              measured behavior either in situ or in laboratory tests.  Existing methods of
              assessing sample disturbance, such as volumetric strain upon laboratory
              reconsolidation, are not a priori methods, i.e., one does not know a sample's
              quality until a laboratory specimen has been trimmed and set up in a testing
              device. At the same time, we face increasingly demanding geotechnical design
              and analysis problems that require more accurate estimates of soil behavior
              based on both in situ tests and laboratory tests on physical samples.  The
              demands of infrastructure design as well as larger scale problems such as
              submarine landslide analyses require geotechnical engineers to produce not just
              a conservative answer, but the right answer, i.e., the closest to the "true" in
              situ mechanical properties as possible.
This three year project involves an
              international effort to improve our existing state of practice in soft ground
              sampling technology, develop better techniques for assessing sample
              disturbance, and develop improved relationships between field-measured
              mechanical properties, the degree of sample disturbance, and the
              laboratory-measured mechanical properties from those samples. The Principal
              Investigators from the University of Massachusetts Amherst and Northeastern
              University are building on over 15 years of individual and joint experience in
              sampling, laboratory testing and equipment innovation to help solve this
              longstanding problem in the field of soft ground engineering.  In addition, the
              project extends an existing partnership with the Norwegian Geotechnical
              Institute (NGI) to jointly develop field-deployable non-destructive sample
              disturbance evaluation techniques. The project involves: 1) developing
              down-hole block sampling equipment for use with conventional U.S. drill rigs;
              2) sampling a variety of soil types with different degrees of structure from 4
              locations in North America, using both conventional tube and block sampling
              methods; 3) performing seismic piezocone (CPTU) tests at the four sites to
              obtain baseline CPTU measurements and in situ shear modulus (Gmax); 4)
              developing a field suction probe and bender element device to evaluate sample
              effective stress and Gmax, respectively, in block and conventional tube
              samples; 5) implementing bender elements in laboratory test devices to measure
              Gmax after specimen set-up and at small strain levels; 6) conducting a
              laboratory testing program with the modified equipment to comprehensively
              measure the stress-strain-strength behavior of the four soils, including that
              at small and medium strains; 7) developing accurate correlations between the
              field- and lab-measured behavior in the context of the degree of sample
              disturbance and degree of soil structure.
It is anticipated that the results
              from this work will have an impact on the state of the art and state of
              practice in sampling soft soils and correlating disturbance effects to measured
              behavior. A comprehensive framework can be established to link sample
              disturbance with soil behavior fundamentals such as structure and anisotropy. 
              The block sampling method will be demonstrated as a viable tool for U.S.
              practice, and a standard of practice is being developed for quantitative
              assessment of sample disturbance. The correlations between sample disturbance
              and measured behavior will ultimately lead to improved accuracy in laboratory
              results versus the true in situ behavior, and thus more reliable geotechnical
              design without excessive conservatism.

