Title       : Collaborative Research: Mobile Elements and Primate Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0218370

Award Number: 0218370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1418681            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn B. Jorde lbj@odin.genetics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 5282      Human Orig: Moving in New Dir
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5282,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Mobile elements are DNA segments that make copies of themselves that are then 
              inserted elsewhere in the genome. These elements can influence many important
              evolutionary processes, including mutation and rearrangement of chromosomes.
              They may also play an important role in the development of new species. 
              Although mobile elements make up nearly 30% of the human genome, little is
              known about their origins and their mechanisms of replication and insertion. 
              The major goal of this research is to learn more about mobile elements and the
              roles they have played in human and primate evolution.
	Some mobile elements,
              particularly those termed Alus and L1s, are either present or absent at a
              specific chromosome location.  Because the presence of a mobile element at a
              specific location is the more recent, or derived, state, and because these
              elements are not deleted after they are inserted, these polymorphisms are ideal
              for evolutionary analysis.  
	In this collaborative project, a series of at
              least 100 Alu and L1 elements will be ascertained in a diverse collection of at
              least 16 primate species in order to provide a resource for primate
              evolutionary studies.  Because of the role that some mobile elements play in
              key evolutionary processes, a comparison of humans with other primate species
              will help to define unique genetic attributes of our species.  Key changes that
              accompanied human speciation may be identified.  Thus, important information
              about the origins of our species will be obtained.
	A diverse collection of
              300 humans will be typed for 100 L1 insertion elements (this will be added to
              an existing collection of 100 Alu insertion polymorphisms typed in the same
              individuals).  This will produce a powerful resource for addressing questions
              about the demographic history of our species.  Did anatomically modern humans
              experience a population bottleneck in their history?  If so, how severe was
              this bottleneck, when did it occur, and where did it occur?  This research will
              help to further test the hypothesis that modern humans originated in Africa,
              with a small subset of individuals later migrating out of Africa to other parts
              of the Old World. 
	In addition to addressing questions about human origins,
              this project will provide a resource of newly identified and characterized
              mobile elements that can be used by any investigator interested in primate
              genetics.  An important aspect of this project is the training of graduate and
              undergraduate students and of members of under-represented minority
              populations.

