Title       : Collaborative Research/GOALI: Analysis and Optimization Method for Distributed
               Sensor Systems in Electronics Assembly Processes Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0218208

Award Number: 0218208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169787             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dariusz J. Ceglarek darek@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Feng Niu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,1786,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Collaborative Research/Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
              Industry (GOALI) provides funding for the development and implementation of a
              methodology for the analysis and optimization of a distributed sensor system in
              electronics assembly processes for the purpose of process fault diagnosis.  The
              proposed modeling tool will integrate product quality information and process
              characteristics in a multi-station assembly system framework using a
              station-indexed state space model. Then, the diagnosability of a generic
              distributed sensor system will be explored by expending the concept of
              observability in control theory. This will further lead to development of the
              fault diagnosis method for fault feature extraction based on the multivariate
              data analysis.  The understanding of the transformation of quality information,
              offered by the state space quality-fault model and diagnosability analysis,
              will guide the optimal design of a sensing system.  This project will be
              carried out through a close collaboration partnered by Texas A&M University,
              the University of Wisconsin - Madison, and Motorola Florida Research Labs
              (MFRL). The methodology development will be based on, and the resulting
              technology will be tested and implemented in, the Motorola radio assembly
              process.  
     If successful, the results of this project will contribute to
              sensing and information technology in manufacturing: new concepts and criteria
              regarding the performance of sensor systems will be defined and effective
              algorithms for sensing optimization and data analysis will be developed.
              Curriculum developed from research accomplishments will generate long-term
              impacts on the education of quality engineering and production system. The
              resulting technology will also benefit the US electronics manufacturers who are
              under great pressure from their international competitors. According to a White
              Paper issued by the Interconnection Technology Research Institute in 1999, over
              100 of 650 U.S. electronics fabricators have gone out of business in the past
              five years. The lack of six-sigma quality is identified as the weakest point of
              for US manufacturers. Industrial implementation of the resulting methodology
              will aid US manufacturers in remaining competitive and could generate
              substantial economic impacts.
