Title       : ITR/EHR: Augmenting Individuals: Tools for Promoting Productive Reflection in
               Science Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0218938

Award Number: 0218938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anita J. LaSalle                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449388             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet L. Kolodner jlk@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0218938
Janet L. Kolodner
Georgia Institute of Technology

Title: "Tools for
              Promoting Productive Reflection in Science Learning "

This project builds on
              this institution's prior successes with an educational software system called
              SMILE. This system provides structuring and prompting for students working in
              small groups or as individuals as they are getting ready to carry out
              project-based activities and as they are interpreting results and making sense
              of whole-class discussions.  It builds on discussions about the "how-to's" of
              carrying out activities in class and reminds students what to pay attention to.
              The software suite, SMILE, includes tools for planning and reporting on several
              kinds of investigative activities, for reporting on and justifying design
              ideas, for reporting on and explaining design experiences, and for carrying on
              conversations across classrooms about each. SMILE's intentions are (a) to help
              students be productive while working in small groups and (b) to provide the
              kind of help that will make students presentations to the class more articulate
              and understandable by their peers. The goals of the current project are: 1) to
              investigate the hypothesis that relatively simple general-purpose software can
              be used to promote sophisticated reasoning among students about both content
              and process and that that same software is useful to teachers in providing them
              the kinds of reminders that help them better facilitate the kinds of reflective
              reasoning that result in transfer (a) in the contexts of both Learning By
              Design and more general-purpose project-based inquiry science classrooms, (b)
              across a variety of science disciplines, (c) across a variety of grade levels,
              and (d) possibly, in project-based contexts outside of science (e.g., math,
              social studies),  2) to iteratively extend the reach of the software tools
              already designed and constructed to make them more capable and to make them
              applicable to a larger variety of project-based contexts, 3) to develop
              guidelines for productive design and use of tools in support of planning and
              reflection in project-based inquiry classrooms, and 4) to develop teacher
              materials and disseminate software on the web. This institution's experiences
              with Learning by Design have contributed to understanding the ins and outs of
              creating opportunities in the project-based inquiry classroom for the kinds of
              reflective experiences that lead to lasting learning. This current project will
              provide additional insights and tools that may be of value in the broader
              educational community.

