Title       : Synthetic Phase Tuning of Acoustic Guided Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0218648

Award Number: 0218648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229899             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shi-Chang Wooh scwooh@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
The objective of this research program is to study and develop an
              improved guided wave phase tuning technique and its practical applications to
              nondestructive evaluation (NOE) for inspecting thin and slender members in
              civil, mechanical and aerospace structures. An extended study of a novel method
              referred to as "synthetic phase tuning" (SPT) is being developed through this
              project, which could resolve many critical problems associated with guided
              waves by eliminating the complexities due to their multimodal and dispersive
              nature. The innovative concept of the SPT is to reinforce a specific wave mode
              of interest while suppressing or squelching undesired wave modes by
              constructing a phase-tuned wave in a virtual domain. This operational scheme
              may allow for extremely flexible guided wave pulse-echo operations with
              excellent spatial and temporal resolutions.
The program is to understand the
              phase-tuning mechanisms and to study the wave-material (structure) interactions
              using various analytical and numerical methods. Various influencing factors
              such as the characteristics of spatio-temporalloading and transducer
              parameters, e.g., element width, number of elements, inter-element spacing,
              operating frequency, are investigated both theoretically and experimentally. In
              addition, the SPT scheme is extended using the laser- ultrasound techniques in
              order to relax the current limitations of narrow signal bandwidth.
The concept
              of SPT may have a substantial and direct impact not only on scientific and
              technological advancements in the field of NOE, condition assessment, and
              health monitoring,
but also on the industrial sectors in NOE manufacturing and
              services. Although the focus is specifically on NOE, the method does not
              preclude extensions to a broad spectrum of disciplinary fields such as
              communication, geophysical explorations, structural control, and MEMS.

