Title       : ITR: Virtual Porous Medium for Modeling Contaminant Spreading in Groundwater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0218914

Award Number: 0218914
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Allen G. Hunt                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269802             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor Jankovic ijankovi@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eliot H. Winer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0218914
Jankovic

The focus of this research is large-scale contaminant
              spreading in aquifers that exhibit significant variations in properties that
              influence groundwater flow and pollutant transport.  It is widely accepted that
              spatial changes in hydraulic conductivity play a major role in contaminant
              spreading.  The main goal of the study is to apply novel mathematical
              solutions, powerful numerical models, and visualization tools to examine and
              quantify the influence of spatial variations in hydraulic conductivity on
              contaminant spreading in highly heterogeneous aquifers.
Existing mathematical
              models of contaminant spreading can only be applied to aquifers that exhibit
              small variations in hydraulic conductivity.  Existing numerical models can not
              be used to simulate large-scale three-dimensional contaminant spreading in
              highly heterogeneous aquifers.  The key element of the present study is a new
              structural model of hydraulic conductivity, introduced by Gedeon Dagan that
              contains isolated inclusions and a homogeneous background.  Hydraulic
              conductivity of each inclusion is constant.  Actual statistical structure of
              hydraulic conductivity is reproduced by varying locations, sizes, and
              conductivities of inclusions.  Both approximate analytic models and highly
              precise numerical models are developed based on this new structure.  Analytic
              and numerical models are used in this study to predict rates of contaminant
              spreading in highly heterogeneous aquifers.
Inability to visualize
              three-dimensional flow and transport is a bottleneck that prevents better
              understanding of many three-dimensional transport phenomena.  A new
              visualization tool, designed for immersive virtual-reality facilities, will be
              developed and used to investigate transport phenomena such as transverse
              dispersion, contaminant tailing, preferential flow and molecular diffusion. 
              The visualization tool will include the ability to interact with a simulation
              in real time.  A user will be able to stop the simulation of contaminant
              spreading and get specific data associated with any part of the model.  For
              example, it will be possible to choose a location in the three-dimensional
              medium, to introduce a contaminant particle at that location, and to follow the
              particle throughout the aquifer with a "camera" mounted on the particle.  A
              web-based interface will also be developed to enhance research by facilitating
              interactions amongst scientists in different geographical locations and to
              integrate research and teaching.
Development and application of these models
              and visualization tools, termed "Virtual Porous Medium", will likely increase
              our ability to understand and predict contaminant spreading in aquifers.  In
              addition, this first version of the Virtual Porous Medium will serve as a
              platform where other transport mechanisms (such as reactive transport) may be
              implemented at a later stage.



