Title       : GOALI: To Understand Flow-Induced Crystallization Characteristics of
               Polyethylene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0218112

Award Number: 0218112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia A. Kornfield jak@cheme.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raj Krishnaswamy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1467,1504,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project,
              coordinated studies of materials will be conducted.   Semicrystalline polymers
              offer the highly desirable combination of strength conferred by crystalline
              material and toughness provided by finely dispersed noncrystalline regions
              among the crystallites.  The morphology and orientation distribution of this
              nano-scale composite structure dictates the ultimate material properties.  This
              class of polymers enables production of high strength fibers, films and
              injection molded parts widely used from automotive to biomedical industries. 
              Polyolefins are the dominant semicrystalline polymers (over 125 billion pounds
              produced annually) and play a vital role in economic growth and increased
              standard of living.  Yet the fundamental understanding of structure formation
              that underlies their processing-structure-property relations remains largely a
              mystery.  Scientists at Caltech and Chevron-Phillips Co. are teaming up to
              discover the molecular basis of the dramatic effects of processing history on
              the microstructure and material properties of polyethylene.  Unique
              experimental capabilities at Caltech enable real-time observations of structure
              development during and after precisely-defined shearing under isothermal
              conditions.  Chevron-Phillips is providing an array of polyethylene samples
              that span the molecular variables considered most important in industry. 
              

Coordinated studies of these materials will be conducted at Caltech and
              Chevron-Phillips to provide insight into the cascade of events that occur
              during flow-enhanced crystallization, how these dynamics depend on molecular
              attributes, and how these dynamics relate to the structure and mechanical
              properties of blown films made from precisely the same polyethylene samples. 
              In turn, the molecular insights into processing-structure-property relations
              emerging from this university-industry collaboration can speed development of
              new polyethylene resins for improved production rates and/or superior product
              performance. The partnership between Caltech and Chevron-Phillips will provide
              shared mentorships for graduate and undergraduate students relating their
              academic training to the industrial issues.

