Title       : Impact Analysis and Development of New Protection Schemes for Distributed
               Generation in Distribution Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0218309

Award Number: 0218309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Butler-Purry klbutler@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mehrdad Ehsani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Distribution systems are most commonly radial type and composed of overhead and
              underground lines. During the past decade, there has been increasingly more
              interest in utilizing distributed generators (DGs) in distribution systems to
              offer the best long-term solution to reliability, price and pollution issues
              for power utilities. Distributed generators provide a source of active electric
              power, and are directly connected to the distribution network or to the network
              on the customer side of the meter.
Protection for distribution systems aims to
              minimize the duration of a fault and the number of customers affected by the
              fault. This entails the selection and coordination of appropriate protective
              devices. Presently, protection schemes for radial type distribution feeders are
              developed assuming there are no generation sources on the distribution system.
              Hence the protection schemes must be adapted for the new and different
              characteristics that the integration of DGs will bring to distribution feeder
              circuits.
The PIs propose to perform studies of load and fault currents by
              developing new load flow and short circuit analysis methods for radial
              distribution feeders with DGs. Also the PIs propose to adapt the coordination
              and overcurrent relays methodology (directional and non-directional) for radial
              distribution feeder circuits when DGs are energized or not energized. The
              distributed generators that will be studied include AC generators (induction
              and synchronous) and inverter-connected generators (photovoltaic modules, fuel
              cells, etc.)
The PIs will include one graduate student and three undergraduate
              researchers on the research project. Also the results will be integrated into
              two graduate courses.

