Title       : Strategy and Organization in Multi-Generational Technology Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0218016

Award Number: 0218016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Lawless lawless@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project will conduct two complementary studies that focus on
              generational technology change at both industry and organization levels of
              analysis. One will analyze an important, common, but neglected kind of
              innovation, where several generations of product technology co-exist in a
              market. The hypotheses to be tested will illuminate how multiple generations
              affect the emerging variety of firms and patterns of competition over time and
              help explain why such markets are heterogeneous. The tests use hazard-rate
              estimation and other event-history methods and inclusive archival data for US
              software products and their developer firms over 10 years. 

A complementary
              study at INSEAD of the European software market, funded separately from NSF,
              enables comparative and joint analysis. Still, this study ignores ways that
              individual firms adapt to generational technological change. Firm-level
              adaptation is important to theory of organizational innovation and to improving
              managers' capabilities to cope with complex, turbulent markets. Therefore the
              second complementary study will be of change inside a firm covering the same
              products and time period using case studies to describe in-depth the evolution
              of organizational forms and strategies. The cases highlight co-evolution with
              technology and the market of organizational units, product-line scope, firm
              boundaries, and dynamic capabilities. They are developed with the funding and
              cooperation of a corporate partner, Microsoft Corporation. 

Both studies are
              theoretically linked to evolutionary theory, technology change, and
              organizational theory literatures. Both are preceded by technical analysis of
              software product-technology and its evolution. Together, these complementary
              projects will produce more complete prescriptions for managers and researchers
              and make strong contributions to theory and management of innovation. 
