Title       : QuBIC: A Qubit Based on SINIS Josephson Tunnel Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0218652

Award Number: 0218652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Ketterson j-ketterson@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1708      REVOLUTIONARY COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1676,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0218652
John Ketterson
Northwestern University

A Qubit Based on SINIS
              Josephson Tunnel Junction

Forming controlled super positions of quantum
              states lies at the heart of quantum computing and devices that perform this
              function have been termed "qubits". The device chosen here to realize a qubit
              is based on a double-barrier SINIS Josephson junction (where S is a
              superconductor, I is an insulator, and N is a normal metal). The basic strategy
              involves the controlled manipulation of the occupations in a 2-level system
              comprised of the two lowest (the ground and the first excited) Andreev bound
              states (ABS) that can form within an SINIS junction. In fact the parameters of
              the SINIS-based qubit can chosen such that only the above two ABS levels are
              present; this conclusion, which independently follows from the theory, is in
              agreement with preliminary experimental data taken on Nb/AlOxAl/AlOx/Nb
              double-barrier junctions. 
        
     The required control of the two
              Andreev states is achieved by applying appropriate bias voltages and transport
              currents to a device fabricated in a three-terminal geometry. The control
              parameters turn out to be the voltage across one of the barriers, and the
              transport current across one of the super conducting layers; these quantities
              play the role of the dynamic magnetic fields, which enter the associated qubit
              Hamiltonian. 
       
    The primary goal of this proposal is to achieve the
              controlled manipulation of the Andreev bound states and, in parallel, advance
              the understanding of the underlying physical mechanisms. This will include: i)
              extending the present technology for preparing two-terminal SINIS devices to
              3-terminal devices; ii) performing measurements on the ABS characteristics,
              including the observation of Rabi oscillations between the two ABS levels, iii)
              further developing the theory of localized ABS inside double barrier junctions
              to allow for arbitrary barrier transparency and arbitrary impurity
              concentrations in all three electrodes, iv) performing detailed numerical
              simulations of the switching dynamics; v) studying the recombination and
              decoherence effects that relate to the performance of these devices, and lastly
              vi) examining strategies for connecting qubits to form simple logic circuits.
              

