Title       : Development of Novel 3D Nano Lithography: Fundamental Investigations and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0218273

Award Number: 0218273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiang Zhang xiang@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The project is to develop two innovative nano-stereo lithography (nSL)
              techniques: two-photon nSL and near-field nSL with the resolution down to 50nm.
              Both methods promise 3D nanofabrications with computer-aided design/modeling
              capabilities. Preliminary numerical simulations suggest that a spatial
              resolution down to 60 nm can be achieved with near-field nSL. Techniques, such
              as electrical force controlled nano stereo lithography, will be investigated
              and employed to further enhance lithography resolutions. Through this project,
              not only novel nSL processes will be developed, but intriguing fundamental
              mechanisms of nano-stereo-lithography will also be studied to intensify our
              understanding on fundamental science on molecular-scale photon-material
              interactions, for instance self-focusing, radical diffusion, thermal transport
              and viscous effects, and their influences on the resolution. Upon the success
              of the development of proposed nSL techniques, a set of specific nano devices
              will be designed and fabricated. 

Viable three dimensional nanomanufacturing
              technologies and its applications developed in this project will have important
              impacts in human society from biomedical diagnostics to optical communications.
              The research outcome will also benefit the emerging high technology industries
              in United States in competition with foreign countries. Another important
              aspect of this proposed project is the integration of research and edcuation
              through summer undergraduate research. Armed with solid knowledgements,
              state-of-art techniques and innovative ideas, students, especially minority and
              women students will be ready to serve industry needs in the nanomanufacturing
              arena. 


