Title       : Digital Representation of Structural Response for the Reliability Assessment of
               Complex Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0218594

Award Number: 0218594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239929             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michel Ghosn ghosn@ce.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene H. Golub  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
DIGITAL REPRESENTATION OF STRUCTURAL RESPONSE 
FOR 
THE RELIABILITY
              ASSESSMENT OF COMPLEX SYSTEMS

ABSTRACT

Current research efforts in
              structural engineering are geared toward the development of performance based
              design and safety evaluation criteria that take into consideration the various
              uncertainties in estimating system behavior and future loading conditions. 
              System reliability methods provide the means to address these important points.
               However, most existing analytical reliability techniques have one or more
              limitations in their ablity to: a) accurately model structural behavior at high
              loads, b) consider different performance criteria, c) identify multiple equally
              important failure modes, and d) account for load combinations. The application
              of simulation techniques in conjunction with general purpose finite element
              packages provides methods with a strong potential for resolving many of these
              outstanding issues.  The purpose of this research is then to develop a
              simulation-based method for the reliability assessment of structural systems,
              which would realistically model their behavior at high loads, be implementable
              in practical situations, and provide accurate solutions for complex structures
              using efficient algorithms. 

The first tool required to perform a
              simulation-based reliability analysis of a structural system consists of an
              accurate and efficient nonlinear analysis program capable of modeling the
              behavior of the structure for a specific (deterministic) set of conditions. The
              second tool is a systematic search algorithm that can identify
              probabilistically dominant failure modes accounting for the randomness of loads
              and material properties. Closed-form solutions for the response of complex
              nonlinear structures are difficult to obtain and only a digital representation
              of their behavior is possible through the application of the finite element
              method. Point estimates of the response under different load intensities and
              material properties are usually obtained from variations on the Newton-Raphson
              algorithm.  These point estimates may often misidentify the ultimate capacity
              and may not accurately model the softening part of the loading curve due to the
              accumulation of numerical errors and because of the properties of the stiffness
              matrix in these ranges. In this study, the Singular Value Decomposition, SVD,
              method in combination with the Lanczos algorithm will be used to accurately
              trace the response of a structure at high loads. The efficiency, robustness,
              and stability of the proposed method will be demonstrated.  

Due to the
              random nature of the problem, the safety assessment of a structure can only be
              established using reliability techniques. Since the behavior of a structure
              with several failure modes is best represented in digital form, modern
              heuristic techniques may provide the most appropriate tools to assess its
              reliability.  In particular, Genetic Algorithms, GA, have been shown to provide
              robust techniques for the reliability analysis of structures with multiple
              failure modes but may be inefficient due to the shotgun search strategy that
              they are based upon. To improve the efficiency of GA, a filtration operator
              will be introduced based on the principle of genetic elitism. The modified GA
              will provide an efficient method to estimate the reliability of complex
              structures, as well as identify its dominant failure modes and controlling
              random variables.  

This project will introduce advanced tools of
              computational mathematics into the field of structural mechanics. The study
              will stress the application of the proposed methods for the simulation based
              design of civil engineering structures although they will be applicable to
              fields as varied as electronic circuit design and
              Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems.  Training of students in the subjects of
              matrix computational methods, artificial intelligence, and statistical
              computing will be a primary goal.  Such training will provide future
              generations of structural engineers with the well-rounded education needed to
              make decisions and provide solutions to real life complex problems under
              uncertainty. 

