Title       : Family Disruption, Family Response: Social Change, Family Organization, and
               Child Well-being in Southern Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0218139

Award Number: 0218139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90667              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Short Susan_Short@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to improve scientific understanding of the connection
              between family organization and child well-being.  Surprisingly, despite the
              well-established connection, we continue to know little about how and why the
              organization and content of social ties shape child outcomes.  This project
              uses the significant variation in family organization created by family
              disruption in Lesotho to elaborate mechanisms linking family organization and
              resource transfers to children.  Adopting a life course approach, the research
              team will collect contextualized, child-centered data on living arrangements,
              social ties, and resource transfers, and the reasons for their variation within
              and across families.  Methods will include the collection of life histories, as
              well as in-depth interviews, case studies, and participant observation focused
              on two lowland communities.  Recent research with U.S. families has suggested
              that biological relatedness may be important to the transfer of resources to
              children.  We assess the generalizability of this finding, and that of
              competing explanations, by exploring their plausibility in Lesotho, an African
              setting characterized by complex and varied living arrangements, where it has
              been argued that extended kin provide a safety net for children.  Lesotho is
              one of four countries in the world where national adult HIV prevalence exceeds
              30%. The devastation created by this epidemic is further compounded by
              long-term poverty and recent drought.  A better understanding of the social
              processes that underlie resource transfers to children promises to inform
              policies designed to promote the welfare of children in Lesotho, and other
              countries in the midst of such crises. More generally, this project will
              contribute to our understanding of the factors that promote children=s
              resilience in times of family disruption, and in so doing, further delineate
              the boundaries of the family institution as a social welfare provider.  This
              research is supported by NSF's Sociology program and NSF's Office of
              International Science and Engineering.
