Title       : ITR: Development and Applications of the PS-I Computational Modeling Platform
               for Problems of Ethnic Conflict, Globalization, State Stability, and Terrorism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0218397

Award Number: 0218397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian S. Lustick ilustick@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1353,1371,1658,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:  "Development and Applications of the PS-I Computational Modeling
              Platform for Problems of Ethnic Conflict, Globalization, State Stability, and
              Terrorism,"

Professor Ian S. Lustick, University of Pennsylvania,
              P.I.

Problems featuring non-linearities, local effects, multiple equilibria,
              positive feedback loops, and widely distributed processes among heterogeneous
              units, are understood to be common in the social world.   They are also known
              to be intractable for conventional mathematical approaches, no matter how
              sophisticated, and have posed insuperable difficulties for the extension of
              formal modeling approaches in political science and other social sciences. 
              Agent-based modeling, also referred to as computational modeling, is a
              technique for simulating and studying such complex problems by leveraging
              knowledge of simple mechanisms of interaction and performance at the
              micro-level to achieve insights into patterns that emerge at the macro-level.  
              In the social sciences many attempts are being made to harness computers for
              the production of evolutionary simulations corresponding systematically enough
              to the empirical world to produce reliable explanations and predictions.  The
              project's principal objective is to advance this general approach in three
              ways:   1) by providing social scientists with access to and training on PS-I,
              a flexible and powerful platform for the production of theoretically coherent
              agent-based models of social and political phenomena that does not require
              end-users to possess computer programming skills; 2) by working with these
              scholars to develop enhanced graphical and point and click interfaces for
              substantively-oriented rather than computer-oriented users; and 3) to use PS-I
              capabilities to produce high-end research addressing crucial substantive and
              theoretical problems.  


This project  includes applications of PS-I
              simulation techniques to problems including the impact of globalization on
              ethnic and other identity related conflict, the potential of different
              institutional structures for the management or containment of ethnopolitical
              conflict, the consequences of catastrophic terrorism for the performance of
              market economies, mechanisms and conditions for political learning at the
              collective level, the evolution of threat perception, relationships between
              regional integration, nation-state integrity, and subnational
              self-determination movements, the peculiar dynamics of bio-terrorism, and the
              identification and operation of threshold effects and cascades of change in
              various political contexts.   Of particular importance are  applications of
              this simulation technology for producing templates to capture patterns of
              variability and similarity associated with particular kinds of countries, kinds
              of situations, or kinds of threats.  The implications for intelligence
              gathering and analysis are direct and manifest.  Indeed the most impressive
              obstacle to the effective use of these techniques for intelligence purposes has
              been the necessity for users to be computer programmers.  An objective of this
              project is to make the open-ended potential of computational modeling available
              to any scholar or analyst with the requisite knowledge of his/her subject
              matter, the imagination to use virtual tools to think about the real world, and
              access to a standard computer.   
