Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Steganalysis Techniques for Images and Audio
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0218074

Award Number: 0218074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nasir Memon memon@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5940,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0218074
Memon

Description: 
This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor Nasir Memon, Department of Computer Science, Polytechnic
              University of New York, Brooklyn, New York, Dr. Bulent Sankur, Department of
              Electric Engineering, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey and Dr. Ismail
              Avcibas, Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Uludag
              University, Bursa, Turkey.  They plan to develop new steganalysis techniques
              for audio and image data. The development of techniques for audio and image
              steganography and the widespread availability of tools for the same have led to
              an increased interest in steganalysis techniques for image data.  Their
              approach is based on the hypothesis that hiding a secret message in audio or
              image data leaves definite artifacts that can be detected using statistical
              analysis. The steganalyzer is built using multivariate regression on selected
              audio and image features and a training set of cover and stego images. 
              

Scope:  
The three scientists, N. Memon, I. Avcibas and B. Sankur have
              already been collaborating on an international project for three years.  The
              project is expected to lead to joint publications and to the development of
              software to detect hidden messages in audio signals and image files.  The
              steganalysis tools developed would be of significant benefit to the
              intelligence community for surveillance and monitoring purposes.  The project
              involves visits between the PIs for short periods and visits by one U.S.
              graduate student and two Turkish graduate students for longer periods. The
              proposed plan also involves co-advising of all the graduate students working on
              the project. 

