Title       : ITR: A Virtual Stress Testing Machine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0218920

Award Number: 0218920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Impelluso   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This proposed effort will create an internet-distributed, physics-based,
              three-dimensional virtual reality stress-testing machine.  A stress testing
              machine (STM) will be purchased and then reproduced as a 3D CAD model, thereby
              creating a real STM and a virtual STM.  The real STM will be placed on the
              internet using a personal computer.  The virtual STM will be displayed using a
              semi-immersive virtual reality theater and also using a 3D web page. A large
              deformation elasto-plastic finite element code will be written and deployed on
              both a remote high performanc eomputer and on a local cluster of workstations. 
              MPI will be used as a platform independent tool for process parallelization. A
              haptic interface and a data acquitstion tool will drive both the real STM and
              the virtual STM.  The real STM will simply deform tensile specimens.  The
              virtual STM will also deform a virtual object; however, the deformation
              parameters will be obtained from the near real-time finite element code running
              on the two aforementioned acrchitectures.Data regarding network communication,
              process parallelization, fault-tolerance, and graphical displays will be
              acquired and analyzed.	The intellectual merit of this work will be the research
              into the creation of a platform in physics-based virtual reality for education
              and research.	The broader impact of this effort will be the creation of tools
              to enable undergraduate students to possess their own personal, virtual physics
              labs.  The result of this will enable universities to save on cost and wear and
              tear of expensive large-scale hardware.




