Title       : Property, culture and technology: The case of marine aquaculture development in
               Hawai`i
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0218270

Award Number: 0218270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127424             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Umemoto kumemoto@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krisnawati Suryanata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This inter-disciplinary research examines a growing controversy in Hawai'i over
              the introduction of marine aquaculture (mariculture) technology, which involves
              both a new technology and a new system of property. Hawai' i is a multicultural
              society in which there is no racial or cultural majority, and where a strong
              indigenous cultural and political movement brings to the fore a clear cultural
              and epistemic dimension to technology policy controversies. The nature of open
              ocean mariculture technology that depends on a common resource demands a level
              of consensus among the broader community. These two conditions make the case of
              mariculture in Hawaii highly instructive for understanding the role of culture
              in mediating the interplay between technology and society.  The main research
              questions are: 
How does culture influence the mutual interplay of technology
              and society in a multicultural plurality? 
How do cultural differences
              complicate conflicts, in this case those surrounding property changes brought
              by mariculture technology? 
What are the implications of the findings for the
              technological development, the evolution of property regimes, and cultural
              transformation? 
This investigation of the introduction of mariculture uses
              the qualitative method of event analysis; it  follows the actors from different
              standpoint epistemologies to solicit their framing of the events, interactions
              and surrounding controversies. Key actors include mariculture entrepreneurs,
              scientists, Native Hawaiian advocates and cultural practitioners, fishers,
              state agency personnel, land-based 
aquaculture farmers and state legislators.
              Operational questions are organized along four areas of inquiry including: a)
              substance, character and dynamics of controversies; b) property claims; 
c)
              social contests, techno-scientific choices and evolving property regimes; and
              d) cultural norms and practices. 

 

