Title       : ITR: Flathead Reservation Wireless Community Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0218915

Award Number: 0218915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Dupuis steve_dupuis@skc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salish Kootenai Coll
	      P O BOX 117
	      Pablo, MT  598550117    406/675-4800

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1686,9150,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The ITR: Flathead Reservation Wireless Community Network at Salish Kootenai
              College would examine, explore, and adjust how people utilize wireless
              communications technology on this rural reservation to interface more
              effectively from remote locations.  This project will facilitate changes in
              educational and business organizational processes in fixed wireless
              telecommuting through various wireless networking technologies.  In addition,
              this project will also greatly enhance numerous programs and research projects
              both on campus and with other organizations throughout the reservation.  Other
              activities that will be implemented are technologies and services that assist
              in teaching, training and the expansion of innovative educational
              environments.

The goal of this project is threefold.  First, to see how far
              you can push wireless technology in a rural and remote environment to provide
              high-speed network connections.  Second, to radically change the way certain
              educational and business organizational processes are carried out.  Third,
              enhance peoples' experiences with information technology through a variety of
              wireless activities. 

During the first 6 months of the project, a single
              high-speed wireless link will be deployed to provide service to a selected part
              of the reservation.  The second 6 months will focus on conducting the initial
              research activities, review of any results.  The third 
6 months will be
              devoted to making adjustments and modifications to ongoing research activities,
              and the addition of another high-speed link.  The final 6 months will be
              focused on making the transition to a fully self-sufficient, community-owned
              network.

The Flathead Reservation Wireless Community Network will be
              collaborating with other tribal entities on conducting research test
              connections to examine the usefulness and how people respond to high-speed
              wireless network connections.  Over the course of the project, various wireless
              networking technologies will be employed as they become available to test the
              reliability, functionality and practicality of each.  Also, this project will
              collaborate with other NSF-sponsored projects with a wireless component and/or
              focus.

