Title       : Effect of Redundancy in Buildings under Seismic Loads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0218703

Award Number: 0218703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. K. Wen y-wen@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Foutch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Structural reliability/redundancy has become a serious concern in the building
              industry after the poor performance of some buildings in recent earthquakes. 
              This research project carries out a systematic investigation of structural
              redundancy and application to design practice. Within the framework of
              structural dynamic and reliability analyses, the effects of major
              redundancy-contributing factors are systematically examined, with emphasis on
              structural configuration, member ductility capacity, over-strength, interaction
              of structural components, and torsional motions.  Recent SAC Steel Project
              analytical and experimental results of structural member and system behavior
              are used. A risk-consistent redundancy factor is then developed for calculating
              the design forces such that structures of different configurations and designs
              can meet reliability-based performance requirements. The impact of the proposed
              research will be a timely contribution to fundamental understanding of
              structural redundancy and the development of a rational basis for a
              performance-based redundancy design factor in codes and standards.


