Title       : GOALI: Strategic Pricing and Inventory Management of Constrained Capacity with
               Repeated Transactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0218104

Award Number: 0218104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $361727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo Gallego ggallego@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project will explore the impact of customer learning and behavior
              on the optimal pricing of constrained capacity.  The research team seeks to
              characterize instances when incorporating customer behavior will lead to
              strategically optimal policies that deviate significantly from tactically
              optimal policies that ignore customer behavior and implicitly assume a single
              interaction between buyer and seller. This research will provide insight into
              how pricing dynamics are influenced by the interplay between seller policies
              and customer expectations. It has the potential to lead to significant
              improvements in current commercial pricing policies in practice. Such
              improvements would lead to better capacity allocation resulting in improved
              economic efficiencies. The key results of this research project will be
              published in archival and trade journals and presented at national conferences,
              academic and industry seminars.  In addition, the principal investigators will
              create and co-teach a new Ph.D. level course in revenue management and develop
              educational software embodying the key concepts of this rapidly developing
              field, thereby promoting teaching, training and learning.

The problem of
              optimal pricing of perishable constrained capacity over time has received
              considerable attention.  If a good perishes instantaneously and the willingness
              to pay for the good increases over time -- as in the case of airline seats and
              hotel rooms -- the problem of determining optimal prices is known as revenue
              management.  If the willingness to pay decreases over time -- as in fashion
              goods and consumer electronics, the problem is known as markdown management.
              Revenue management has been estimated to provide $1 billion annually for large
              airlines while markdown management has been credited with increasing revenues
              by up to 7%.  It is therefore not surprising that both revenue management and
              markdown management have been the topics of considerable academic research and
              substantial industry investment.  Research into pricing of constrained products
              has generally focused on maximizing the total expected revenue (or
              profitability) achieved from fixed capacity.  This is the goal of the EMSRb
              approach to airline revenue management as well as the focus of markdown
              management systems.  This approach is appropriate when buyers and sellers will
              interact only once.  However, if there are repeated interactions among buyers
              and sellers, then a seller's action today will influence the expectations (and
              hence the behavior) of buyers in the future.  For example, a seller who offers
              distressed inventory at a deep discount will train some buyers to expect this
              in the future and change their behavior accordingly.  Similarly, a seller who
              provides more availability of inventory to a particular market segment than the
              competition will train buyers to turn to him first.  In both cases, sellers may
              achieve higher returns over time from pricing policies that incorporate the
              impact of customer behavior rather than simply maximizing the return from their
              current stock of inventory.

