Title       : Conference on Psychological Science and North American Natives (American
               Indians),Fairbanks, Alaska, June 2003.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0218071

Award Number: 0218071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith James   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1092,9150,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project involves a conference on social science disciplines and American
              Indian peoples. The conference (a) integrates existing knowledge of Native
              psychology and develops a research agenda for advancing such knowledge, (b)
              exchanges information on strategies and tools for teaching Native social
              science and developing a model for such courses and curricula, (c) examines
              ways to better integrate social research, teaching and practice with the needs
              and goals of Native communities, and (d) plans strategies for enhancing links
              between social science and Native communities. 

Native communities and
              individuals face a variety of unique problems and opportunities. Effective
              scientific assistance is needed to help address those problems and
              opportunities.  Skills and expertise from social science could play a critical
              role in assisting with such important issues as Native economic advancement,
              educational attainment, community and individual health, and management of
              tribal resources and services. The potential value of psychological science to
              these outcomes especially exists because many past efforts to execute applied
              projects in Native communities have floundered as much or more due to human
              factors (such as factional infighting, poor planning, poor leadership, or
              inadequate skills) as because of financial or technological inadequacies to the
              projects. Social science has only scratched the surface in investigating the
              unique dynamics of Native cultures, Native social patterns, and Native psyches.
              This project will 1) summarize the state of social science knowledge of Native
              individuals and communities. 2) Develop a social science research agenda.  3)
              Promote exchanges and development of collaborations among social science
              researchers who focus on Native issues. 4) Plan a curriculum to teach Native
              Psychology and create an educational pipeline and an educational structure to
              develop Native Psychology scientists. 




 

 

 

 

