Title       : GOALI: Multi-Materials Laser Densification for Dental Restorations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0218169

Award Number: 0218169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon L. Shaw lshaw@mail.ims.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas B. Cameron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1467,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
              (GOALI) grant is to develop a solid freeform fabrication process, termed as
              Multi-Materials Laser Densification (MMLD), for dental restorations. There are
              currently between 10,000 and 15,000 dental laboratories in the US and a
              majority of these laboratories use porcelain-fused-to-metal (PFM) restoration
              for permanent fixed prosthodontics. PFM restoration is a very time consuming
              and labor intensive work. Labor costs account for about 90percent of the final
              cost to the patient, while dental materials only account for less than 5percent
              of the final cost. It is anticipated that with MMLD technology a dental
              restoration can be built in about one hour from a computer model without
              part-specific tooling and human intervention. As such, the labor cost of the
              dental restoration will be substantially reduced, while a better and faster
              service can be provided to dental patients. The eventual goal is to provide
              MMLD facilities as on-line stations for remote fabrication. At the end of this
              three-year project fixed single unit prosthodontic restorations will be
              demonstrated using the MMLD machine and the STL file of human tooth provided by
              the industrial partner.

To achieve the goal set forth above, clear
              strategies have been defined to (i) investigate line-by-line and point-by-point
              powder delivery and localized laser densification of multiple materials, (ii)
              address various engineering challenges arising from complex laser-material
              interactions, mismatches of multiple materials, and small feature sizes due to
              the nature of dental restoration, and (iii) perform modeling and simulation so
              that dental restorations with adequate mechanical properties, desired aesthetic
              appearance, good dimensional accuracy and fine surface finish can be produced
              in a precise, economical and reproducible fashion.  The PI plans to continue to
              encourage women and underrepresented minority undergraduate students to
              participate in this GOALI project.  The research experiences in integrating
              materials laser processing, and solid freeform fabrication for biomedical
              applications provides students with a strong incentive to take on graduate
              education in this emerging area.
