Title       : ITR: Automatic Collision Avoidance: Algorithm and Online Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0218878

Award Number: 0218878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393697             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelo Miele miele@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The constantly increasing congestion in the sea lanes and air traffic lanes
              raises the risk of ship collisions and aircraft collisions.  This danger was
              tragically illustrated in a recent air disaster over Germany.  This research
              seeks to reduce the collision risk via the development of a high-performance,
              robust, real-time collision avoidance algorithm.  The research approach is
              based on the combination of an offline optimization algorithm generating the
              structure of the solution and an online algorithm approximating the solution in
              real time.
The collision avoidance problem is formulated as a maximin problem
              of Chebyshev type: the objective is to maximize with respect to controls the
              timewise minimum distance between the host vehicle and an intruder.  A
              multiple-subarc version of the sequential gradient-restoration algorithm is
              being developed to solve numerically the optimal control problem.
Because it
              is not feasible to compute the optimal trajectory in real time, a collision
              avoidance guidance algorithm is being developed to approximate the optimal
              trajectory in real time.  This algorithm partitions the collision avoidance
              maneuver into an avoidance phase and a recovery phase.  For the avoidance
              phase, the time interval for which saturation control can be applied is
              determined so as to quickly escape from the collision danger.  During the
              recovery phase, the host vehicle is maneuvered back to the assigned path via a
              feedback restoration algorithm.
To rapidly disseminate the research results
              and foster education in the fields of optimization, guidance, and system
              safety, an online demonstration of the algorithm is being developed.  This
              software will allow remote users to simulate ship/aircraft maneuvers with the
              aid of animated graphical displays and will help the development of collision
              avoidance instrumentation for ships and aircraft.  The research results will
              also be relevant to the orbital debris avoidance for spacecraft.




