Title       : Far UV Spectroscopic Ellipsometry of Electronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0218288

Award Number: 0218288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Freeouf jfreeouf@ece.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0218288
Freeouf

The objectives of this project are to build upon the
              successful construction of a Far UV spectroscopic ellipsometer and apply this
              tool to improve the PIs understanding of new materials - and of older materials
              becoming newly important. The PI intends to share the impact of this new,
              next-generation tool by collaborative research with a variety of colleagues
              from many disciplines throughout the country. The project should train at least
              one PhD student at OGI and assist the research efforts of others at many
              locations. This effort will emphasize materials of technological importance and
              concentrate upon proposed high-K gate dielectrics such as HfO2.

This system
              offers a substantially increased photon energy limit (hv < 9 eV) over
              conventional systems (hv < 6.5 eV), thereby permitting us the PI to examine
              critical point structures that would otherwise only be accessible at a
              synchrotron radiation source. This energy range especially impacts studies of
              wide band gap materials; both dielectrics such as HfO2 and wide band gap
              semiconductors such as diamond, SiC, and GaN are of immediate and urgent
              interest. This permits the PI to impact the current semiconductor industry
              search for materials with which to replace SiO2 as the gate dielectric in CMOS
              technology. It has permitted the PI to study surface damage layers on polished
              SiC surfaces, since the higher energies available also offer increased
              sensitivity to surface films. He seeks funding to continue to apply this
              instrument to such studies. He has partnerships with several groups that seek
              to strengthen his own efforts by using the information available from the
              proposed studies.

The specific area of emphasis will be on high-?
              dielectrics for future CMOS technologies. This international effort is driven
              by the fundamental limitation upon CMOS scaling that is imposed by the onset of
              tunneling through a thin barrier layer. This quantum mechanical effect appears
              to restrict the use of SiO2 based gate dielectrics, even with the addition of
              nitride layers, to greater than 1 .0 nm thickness, and will fundamentally
              impact device design and production in this decade. In fact, the 2001 editio of
              the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors envisions these
              materials being required by 2005 for low power logic chips. The PI has already
              applied his current system to the study of some of these materials and
              established that there are clear areas where he extended photon energy range
              provides new and unique information. He seeks to build a database of dielectric
              response for many of the candidate materials, and to use this database in the
              study of these films as deposited upon silicon substrates. His partnerships
              permit him to study materials deposited by e-beam, jet vapor deposition,
              molecular beam epitaxy, and atomic beam deposition. The details of these
              depositions can strongly alter the interface and the film itself - as he has
              demonstrated for HfO2 already. At the same time it is crucial to ascertain what
              impact absorption involving the d-levels of transition metal and rare earth
              elements in these candidate materials will have upon the electrical properties
              of transistors containing those materials. The PI's studies will help to
              clarify the location and properties of these energy levels.

