Title       : Intonational boundaries in sentence production and comprehension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a0218605

Award Number: 0218605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $352130             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Gibson gibson@psyche.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Edward Gibson will conduct three
              years of psycholinguistic research on relations between intonational (or
              prosodic) phrasing and syntactic structure in sentence production and
              comprehension. This research asks where people tend to place intonational
              boundaries (pauses, roughly speaking) in producing sentences, and where people
              perceive such boundaries in sentences. The working hypothesis of the production
              experiments is that the probability of producing an intonational boundary at a
              given location is proportional to the sum of (1) the number of phonological
              phrases over which the most recently processed syntactic phrase extends, and
              (2) the number of phonological phrases over which the upcoming syntactic phrase
              extends, as long as it is not an argument of the most recently processed word.
              This and related hypotheses will be tested using analyses of natural speech
              corpora and a reader-listener paradigm. Participants in the reader-listener
              paradigm say sentences that they have read in advance. Other participants
              answer comprehension questions on the sentences after they are produced. The
              research also investigates whether preferences in comprehension mirror those in
              production. Methods for investigating comprehension will include complexity
              ratings, comprehension question accuracy, and cross-modal lexical
              decision.
This project is important for several reasons. First, it will
              broaden our knowledge of the relationship between language and other aspects of
              human cognition, such as memory. The results of the work will also be of
              interest to researchers in computer speech generation and analysis, and
              language acquisition. Speech processing systems need to model human preferences
              in intonational boundary placement in order to both improve understanding of
              human speech and synthesize more natural sounding speech. With respect to
              language acquisition, it has been proposed that intonation can help learners
              acquire syntactic knowledge. Uncovering the relationship between intonational
              phrasing and syntactic structure will help to evaluate whether such claims are
              viable.

