Title       : Design and Construction of Responsive Surfaces by Means of Tethered Chain
               Nanolayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0218977

Award Number: 0218977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372195             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn S. Penn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roderic P. Quirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur W. Cammers-Goodwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1084,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lynn S. Penn, Et al, University of Kentucky

"Design and Construction of
              Responsive Surfaces by Means of Tethered Chain Nanolayers"

This project
              explores use of a tethered chain strategy to create surfaces that respond
              dynamically to their environments or other external stimuli. (A tethered chain
              is defined as a polymer molecule that is attached by a single point along its
              length to the surface of a solid.) Tethered chains are uniquely suited for
              creating responsive surfaces because, except for chain segments adjacent to the
              point of attachment, their segmental mobility is not impaired. Thus, even
              though they are attached permanently to the substrate, tethered chains can
              change conformation-- and thereby change the nature of the surface-- in
              response to an applied field or alteration in the local
              environment.

Tethered chains of the appropriate chemical structure and
              molecular architecture, and with specific chemical functionalities attached,
              can be used to construct surfaces that exhibit a wide variety of responses.
              Surfaces can be constructed to have dynamic capabilities such as reversible
              appearance of nanoscale patterns, trapping of hazardous biological or chemical
              agents, and mimicry of surface energy of contacting phases. Surfaces with these
              capabilities have applications in electronics manufacture, clean-up of
              environmental pollution, biomedical devices, adhesive bonding, sensors in
              scientific instrumentation, adhesion and wetting, and biological and chemical
              warfare defense.

In this project the investigators will gather the remaining
              experimental data needed to broaden their current mathematical model of the
              tethering process and make it versatile enough for practical use and will use
              controlled tethering to construct three demonstration surfaces that exhibit
              diverse response capabilities. The three demonstration surfaces will be able to
              1) exhibit reversible, in-plane phase separation in response to temperature
              changes, 2) trap large anionic species from a passing stream, and 3) change
              surface energy to match that of a contacting phase, respectively. Project
              activities include synthesis of large organic molecules and polymers, execution
              of tethering procedures under controlled conditions (with real time
              monitoring), and characterization of structure and function of the surfaces by
              means of a variety of techniques.

Impact:  The modification of surfaces with
              polymers to manipulate nano-surface structure and properties is technologically
              important on many fronts.  This work addresses a critical need. The training
              provided in these sophisticated techniques will enable research in this
              important nano-technology to expand.  The networking between departments and
              universities proposed in this proposal is considered to fully utilize the
              advantages of multidisciplary approaches and inculcates this approach in the
              formation of the many students involved.  If the research is successful, new
              responsive surfaces will be available for a wide variety of important
              nano-technological applications which will provide great benefit to society.

