Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: What Do Maya Pseudo-Glyphs Say? An Analysis of
               Late Classic Period Pottery from the Southern Maya Lowlands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0218426

Award Number: 0218426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Payson Sheets sheetsp@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the past 50 years, an increasingly significant part of our understanding of
              Classic Period (A.D. 250-900) Maya society has derived from the study of Maya
              hieroglyphics. Scholars now recognize that Maya scribes used a mixed phonetic
              and iconographic system of writing to record elite exploits, document royal
              lineages and inscribe artifacts with ownership statements.  Defined by
              linguists as full writing, Maya hieroglyphics represent a system of graphic
              symbols that could be used to record and convey any thought that could be
              spoken.

Deciphering the texts painted on polychrome pottery has revealed
              information regarding the function, geographic and social origin of particular
              vessels and provided insight into Maya beliefs and the nature of elite
              interactions.  In the process of examining these ceramic texts, epigraphers
              have divided the painted signs into two categories: (1) conventional
              hieroglyphs that can be phonetically read and translated into meaningful words
              or phrases, and (2) symbols described as "pseudo-glyphs" because they do not
              conform to the established canons of glyph morphology (Longyear 1944, 1952). 
              With National Science Foundation support, this study seeks to define more
              clearly the nature of literacy for members of Classic Period Maya society by
              documenting and examining a large sample of scientifically-excavated ceramics
              decorated with pseudo-glyphs.  This study will emphasize both archaeological
              context and glyphic analysis to assess the social function and significance of
              pseudo-glyph-decorated pottery.

After creating a comprehensive photographic
              database of vessels curated in Guatemala by the Museo de Antropologia e
              Ethnologia, the Ceramateca of the Instituto de Antropologia e Historia and the
              Morley Museum, and vessels from various in-process field projects, this study
              seeks to establish whether pseudo-glyphs, like conventional pottery texts, form
              a written symbol system that conveys meaning.  Statistical and comparative
              analysis of the texts should reveal what pseudo-glyphs, if any, are
              consistently employed or combined and whether pseudo-glyphs exhibit a grammar. 
              Additionally, comparing the vessels excavated from different locations may
              reveal whether pseudo-glyphs functioned stylistically to signal ethnic, gender,
              kinship, or economic identity.  For example, does pseudo-glyph embellished
              pottery appear most frequently in household or lower-status contexts? Or is
              there an indication that such pottery appears disproportionately at a
              particular site or group of sites?

By creating the first database of
              scientifically-excavated Maya ceramics that are embellished with pseudo-glyphs,
              this research will form a foundation for future interpretations of the nature
              of Maya literacy during the Classic Period.  More broadly, this analysis may be
              cross-culturally compared with the uses of writing in other societies.

