Title       : Faculty Workshop on Teaching of First Course on Power Electronics, Electric
               Drives and Power Systems Applications of Power Electronics; Arizona State
               University; January 2-4, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0218077

Award Number: 0218077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajapandian Ayyanar rayyanar@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ned Mohan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Robbins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Faculty Workshop on Teaching of First Course on Power Electronics, Electric
              Drives and Power Systems Applications of Power Electronics

It is proposed to
              organize a faculty workshop on "Teaching of First Courses on Power Electronics
              and Electric Drives and Advanced Course on Power System Applications of Power
              Electronics" during January 2-4, 2003 at the Arizona State University, Tempe. 
              This workshop is intended to promote teaching of power electronics and electric
              drives courses with the following objectives:

Provide the highest quality
              undergraduate and graduate education in this field.
Motivate and attract
              talented students.
Discuss up-to-date laboratories with digital
              control.
Facilitate teaching of these courses by EE faculty specializing in
              other fields.
Identify best practices and learn from the experiences at
              different universities.

The workshop will be organized jointly by Arizona
              State University and University of Minnesota.  At University of Minnesota, as
              well as at ASU, restructuring of power electronics related courses is being
              actively pursued since 1994.  Two NSF funded projects namely, "Innovations in
              Power Engineering Education" in 1997 and "DSP-Based Software-Reconfigurable
              Laboratory to Nationally Revitalize Electric Drives and Power Electronics
              Curricula" in 2000, provided a big impetus to these efforts at University of
              Minnesota.  In January 3-5, 2002, a workshop was organized at the Arizona State
              University, Tempe, where the new methods of teaching first courses in Power
              Electronics and Electric Drives were presented and the newly developed hardware
              laboratory setups were demonstrated.  This workshop was extremely successful
              with approximately 125 registrants from across the country.
In the proposed
              workshop in January 2003 at ASU, new significant developments in the
              undergraduate power electronics and electric drives laboratory setups will be
              demonstrated.  Teaching methods developed and the improved lecture notes based
              on suggestions at the previous workshop will be presented.  A poster session
              for interested faculty will be organized, where they will have an opportunity
              to describe their own efforts at improving the related curriculum.  A panel
              session consisting of experts from government agencies and industry will be
              arranged to discuss challenges and opportunities in these fields.
Applications
              of power electronics in power systems, made possible by the advancements in
              power semiconductor devices, represent the new frontier in the field of power
              electronics.  A course on this topic, which has important applications in
              electric power network efficiency and security, will be discussed at this
              proposed workshop. 
As a part of the workshop proceedings, copies of poster
              presentations, complete lecture notes, lecture transparencies, and the
              simulation exercises discussed during the workshop will be distributed.  Ample
              time will be provided to critique the course material and the laboratories
              developed through NSF funding.  Ways of tightly coupling lecture material to
              simulations and hardware laboratory will be discussed.  Plans to acquire
              laboratory equipment in a collaborative manner and to develop laboratory
              experiments will be discussed.  



