Title       : Konza Prairie LTER V: Long-Term Research on Grassland Dynamics and Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0218210

Award Number: 0218210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4680000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Blair jblair@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan K. Knapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Briggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Hartnett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Loretta C. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research would continue and expand a comprehensive, long-term
              program in grassland ecology at Konza Prairie. The 20-year old, broadly-based
              KNZ LTER program crosses multiple ecological levels and spatial and temporal
              scales. Since its inception, the overarching integrates fire, grazing and
              climatic variability as essential and interactive factors responsible for the
              structure and function of tallgrass prairie.  Organism-to-ecosystem processes
              and dynamics at KNZ are products of spatial and temporal variability in
              multiple limiting resources, primarily water, light and N.  The interplay of
              these three disturbances across a heterogeneous landscape leads to the high
              species diversity and complex, non-linear behavior characteristic of mesic
              grassland ecosystems.  Results from KNZ have relevance not only for
              understanding grasslands worldwide, but for broader ecological issues including
              human-caused global change.  

Specific goals for LTER V are to expand the
              strong core Konza LTER experiments on fire, grazing and climatic variability
              begun over 20 years ago, with site-based and inter-site studies and synthesis
              activities; 2) to further develop mechanistic and predictive understanding of
              grassland dynamics with particular emphasis on responses of grassland
              ecosystems to multiple global change factors; and 3) to use KNZ results to
              develop and test general ecological theory (e.g., diversity-stability
              relationships, community invasibility, top-down vs. bottom-up controls,
              soil-plant community feedback models, river continuum model).

New studies of
              the causes and consequences of land-cover change in the region will be
              initiated, incorporating both sociological and ecological perspectives. 
              Short-term experiments focused on key processes and mechanisms underlying
              responses to changing fire, grazing and climatic regimes will continue to be
              essential components.  Broader impacts of the research include training a
              future generation of ecologists, contributing to public education, and
              development of a knowledge base essential for the ecologically sound management
              of grassland ecosystems worldwide. 



