Title       : GOALI: Self-healing Polymers for Improved Fatigue Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0218863

Award Number: 0218863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304779             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy R. Sottos n-sottos@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott R. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Skipor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9102,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Self-Healing Polymers for Improved Fatigue Life


	This collaborative GOALI
              project seeks to improve the fatigue life of thermosetting polymers through the
              addition of self-healing functionality.  Thermosetting polymers are used in a
              wide variety of applications ranging from composite structures to adhesive
              joints to microelectronic packaging.  Because these polymers have low
              strain-to-failure, they are highly susceptible to damage in the form of
              cracking. Fatigue loading is particularly problematic, causing small cracks to
              initiate deep within the structure where detection is difficult and repair is
              virtually impossible. These cracks often lead to catastrophic failure of the
              material. Self-healing functionality is accomplished by incorporating a
              microencapsulated healing agent and a catalytic chemical trigger within a
              polymer matrix.  Fundamental research will be undertaken to address critical
              issues relevant to self-healing of fatigue damage.  The ability to
              autonomically heal fatigue cracks in brittle polymers has the potential to lead
              to safer, more reliable materials in microelectronics and related applications
              and represents the first step in developing materials systems that possess
              greatly extended lifetimes.  This GOALI project will enable collaborative
              efforts to explore this new technology for microelectronic applications.
              Results will lead to fundamental scientific foundations on which new design and
              production practices are based for improved fatigue performance.  The proposed
              work will result in the education and training for two graduate students and
              one undergraduate research assistant.  Moreover, several concepts from this
              project will be incorporated into a new senior undergraduate/ first year
              graduate level course entitled Autonomic Materials Systems.   


