Title       : ITR: Molecular Qubit Transformations with Phase-Shaped Femtosecond Pulses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0218731

Award Number: 0218731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Leone srl@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In this  ITR-Small project funded by the Chemistry Division, Stephen Leone of
              the University of California-Berkeley will investigate single and multiple
              qubit operations on pairs of superposition states formed among rotational,
              vibrational, and electronic degrees of freedom in diatomic molecules.  Using
              multiple pulse sequences from ultrafast lasers, phase and amplitude pulse
              shaping, and evolutionary algorithms, optimal pulses will be determined for
              single qubit transformations in molecules, such as Z-gates and Hadamard
              transformations.  The work is further extended to multiple qubit operations
              such as controlled-Z and swap gates.  Lithium dimers will be used as the
              molecular system for these studies.  The experiments in this project will
              address for the first time the use of molecular rotational states as a motional
              control qubit for controlled transformations of an electronic qubit.

This
              project focuses on exploring logic gates that may be useful for constructing a
              quantum computer.    In the course of this research students will receive
              training in quantum mechanics and the use of ultrafast lasers and pulse
              shaping.  Since these areas are already of great relevance to optical
              communications and optical computing efforts, the students will experience the
              integration of basic science and its applications in advanced information
              technology applications.  In addition, what is learned from molecular systems
              may enable the formation of qutrits (three-level systems) and multi-qubits
              (superpositions of many levels at a time) that will broaden thinking about
              potential algorithms for quantum information processing.  This research has
              other possible applications to areas such as quantum cryptography and
              code-breaking, information storage and retrieval, and faster processing with
              quantum computing.  Fields affected include fiber optic communications,
              information transmission, and data encryption.

