Title       : Continuation of a Facility: Institute for Rock Magnetism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0218384

Award Number: 0218384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1896498            (Estimated)
Investigator: Subir K. Banerjee banerjee@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Marvin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Solheid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce M. Moskowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1578      FACILITY SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0218384
Banerjee

Earth materials - rocks, sediments, soils - all contain
              magnetic minerals in trace amounts.  The properties of these minerals (chemical
              composition, grain size, concentration) are determined by the geologic
              processes and conditions under which the rocks/sediments originally formed and
              by which they have been subsequently affected. Laboratory measurements of bulk
              rock/sediment samples, under different conditions of temperature and applied
              magnetic fields, enable quantitative analysis of the trace magnetic mineral
              characteristics, and yields valuable information for reconstructing their
              history. Natural-material magnetic research has important applications over a
              broad expanse of science, including paleoclimate and paleoenvironmental
              research, paleogeographic reconstruction of the past locations of the
              continents and oceanic tectonic plates, and the history of the Earth's magnetic
              field.  

This grant provides for continued support of the Institute for Rock
              Magnetism (IRM) at the University of Minnesota over the next five years.  The
              IRM (http://www.geo.umn.edu/orgs/irm/irm.html) is the leading international
              facility for in-depth fundamental research on the magnetic properties of rocks,
              sediments and minerals. A state-of-the-art assemblage of instruments allows
              detailed magnetic characterization through measurements under widely-varying
              conditions of temperature, time and applied magnetic field. Research by
              IRM-resident scientists is complemented by that of Visiting Fellows, selected
              through a competitive proposal process from the global geoscience community. 
              The IRM also enhances the research infrastructure for Earth sciences by
              organizing technical workshops and research conferences, developing and
              maintaining a public database of magnetic properties of geomaterials, and
              providing research-related news and information through a web site and
              quarterly newsletter.
***

