Title       : Single Photon and Single Atom Sources for Quantum Information Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0218341

Award Number: 0218341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $477535             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Saffman msaffman@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thad G. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1708      REVOLUTIONARY COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,1646,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0218341
Mark Saffman 
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Single-Photon and
              single atom sources for quantum informaiton processing

This research project
               is demonstrating new ways of engineering single photon and single atom sources
              for a range of applications in quantum information science. The experimental
              approach starts with several thousand Rb atoms that are trapped at ultrahigh
              densities in a far-off-resonance optical beam. A many atom entangled state is
              then created  using the dipole blockade mechanism that arises from atom-atom
              interactions in a dense atomic vapor as proposed recently by  Lukin, et al.
              (2001).

The trapped ensemble of entangled atoms is manipulated optically to
              create novel sources at the level of single atoms and single photons. Using
              additional near-resonant laser beams  atoms are selectively ejected from the
              trap depending on their internal state. This enables deterministic loading of a
              single  atom in an optical trap, as well as "single-" or 
              "multiple-atom-on-demand" sources with optically controllable trajectories.  By
              using entanglement between atoms in  ground and excited internal states a
              single-photon source is being created that has a diffraction limited, steerable
              emission pattern. This approach is enabling  a number of novel solutions to
              manipulation of matter and fields at the level of single quantum objects with
              applications to quantum communication, cryptography, and computing. 

A key
              component of this work is the enhancement of its impact through outreach and
              educational activities. Presentations at local schools and lectures for the
              general public on quantum information and computation are allowing the
              University of Wisconsin to communicate to the local community, including the
              burgeoning photonics industry in the Madison area,  the importance and
              intellectual excitement of  this research program.

