Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Functionalized Acrylates with Tailored
               Properties and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0218222

Award Number: 0218222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lon J. Mathias lon.mathias@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5940,9150,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0218222
Mathias 

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Lon Mathias, Department of Polymer Science, University of
              Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, Mississippi and Dr. Duygu Avci, Chemistry
              Department, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey.  They plan to carry out an
              exchange of professors between the two universities for the purpose of teaching
              classes, running short courses, an exchange of scientists, graduate and
              undergraduate students for research purposes.  They also plan to establish the
              first international symposium on multifunctional acrylates involving a workshop
              and proceedings containing comprehensive overviews of the polymer chemistry,
              properties and applications of alpha-hydroxymethylacrylates and derivatives
              (RHMA's).  A novel aspect of the research in the area of multifunctional
              acrylates, a group of compounds distinguished by their unique cyclization and
              copolymerization properties, is the extensive use of computational techniques
              for modeling the chemical reaction kinetics of the molecules.

Scope:  In
              this project the collaborators plan to combine their expertise in an important
              scientific research effort, and to provide international experiences to U.S.
              graduate and undergraduate students.  Previous collaborations between the two
              teams focused on experimental design and production.  The combination of the
              proposed analytical and computational research and experimental approaches will
              contribute significantly to the advancement of new knowledge. New multimedia
              education material will be an outcome of this collaboration, focused on both
              synthetic and computational aspects of new monomer and polymer systems. These
              will build on courses taught or to be taught at University of Southern
              Mississippi and Bogazici by the collaborators.  The international
              collaborations involving students is an important feature.  This project is
              supported by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the
              Division of Materials Research.

