Title       : Toward Quantum Computing with Molecular Magnets: Studies of Spin Dynamics in a
               Radiation Field
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0218469

Award Number: 0218469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan R. Friedman jrfriedman@amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Myriam P. Sarachik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 1708      REVOLUTIONARY COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0218469
Jonathan R. Friedman
Amherst College

Toward Quantum Computing
              with Molecular Magnets; Studies of Spin Dynamics

The viability for using
              molecular magnets as qubits, the processing elements of quantum computers by
              using pulsed microwave and millimeter-wave radiation to perform quantum
              operations on the spin states of these systems are being investigated.  In the
              process, some important issues regarding the tunneling mechanism by which the
              magnetic moments of these systems reverse direction at temperatures below a few
              Kelvin are also investigated.

A series of experiments are being performed to
              measure the effect of the applied radiation on the magnetic relaxation of the
              molecular magnets. These experiments include photon-assisted relaxation, which
              occurs when the radiation helps the molecule's spin reverse direction, Rabi
              oscillations of the probability of reversal with radiation-pulse duration, and
              free-precession of a quantum superposition of spin states produced by a series
              of radiation pulses.  These experiments are aimed at providing a measure of the
              decoherence time of the excited spin state, a crucial parameter for determining
              whether the molecular magnets can be used as qubits.  The project is also
              investigating methods of mitigating inhomogeneous broadening effects due to
              dipole interactions with neighboring molecules, nuclear spins and
              defects.

The project has potential impacts for the fields of quantum
              computation and information storage. It is also promoting the education of
              undergraduate students, especially underrepresented groups like women and
              minorities.


