Title       : GOALI: Collaborative Research: Tribology of Nanocomposites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0218716

Award Number: 0218716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123891             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Schadler schadl@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1504,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: GOALI Tribology of Nanocomposites

 

This collaborative proposal
              between the University of Florida (W.G. Sawyer), Rensselaer Polytechnic
              Institute (L.S. Schadler) and Albany International (G. Toney) teams a
              tribologist and a materials scientist with a company focused on developing
              nanomaterials with improved wear behavior.

 

1.0 Intellectual Merit


              

The overall scientific goal of the project is to gain fundamental
              understanding of the wear mechanisms in filled polymers by: a) experimentally
              isolating the effects of particle size (10 nm to 10 um), particle aspect ratio
              (1 to 1000), dispersion, filler / matrix interface, and matrix properties on
              performance, b) obtaining a parametric understanding of the correlation between
              wear behavior and other mechanical properties, and c) modeling of the wear
              properties.  Polymer nanocomposites significantly improve the tribological
              performance when compared to traditional filled polymers.  It is unclear for
              non-lubricious nanoparticles what the mechanism is that lowers the coefficient
              of friction.  Finally, nanoparticle filled polymers have not been
              comprehensively explored for wear applications despite evidence suggesting
              large improvements in performance.  

 

2.0 Broader Impacts

 

The
              impact of these new materials in polymeric bearings will be broad, covering the
              spectrum from industrial applications needing dry sliding bearings, to
              orthopaedic implant materials, to self-lubricating bearings for space
              environments.  An indication of the industrial interest in this field is the
              support of Albany International for this work (~$60K).  They are supporting a
              full time graduate student at Rensselaer and have also supplied funds to
              Florida for wear testing.  They will be hiring a graduate student into a co-op
              position in order to transfer technology developed by Florida and Rensselaer
              and provide industrial experience for the student.  Students will travel
              between both Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy NY and the University of
              Florida in Gainesville FL to broaden their knowledge in the synthesizing and
              processing of nano-particles and composites and tribological testing and
              modeling, respectively.


