Title       : Modeling, Identification and Validation of Uncertain Systems; Theory and
               Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0218226

Award Number: 0218226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy Smith roy@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed work is to develop an integrated suite of tools
              and approaches for the modeling of uncertain systems for feedback control
              design purposes. Our modeling framework is based upon robust control theory,
              which is supported by several sophisticated control design methods. These
              models are in effect set descriptions, where the sets are generated by unknown
              but bounded dynamic perturbations within the model. These models allow the
              designer to capture the variety of uncertain behaviors that a physical system
              will generate. Although this is a powerful and flexible modeling framework, the
              tools available for modeling physical systems are limited. We address
              this
area in this proposal, with the ultimate goal being the development of a
              suite of modeling techniques and software tools for control system
              modeling.

Our prior work on model validation for robust control models forms
              the basis for the work proposed here. This approach has led to tools which
              allow the designer to experimentally quantify the difference between a physical
              system and the closest member of a robust control model set. 
 
In the area
              of theoretical model development we propose extending our current model
              validation approaches to describe non-linear and parametrically varying
              systems. In the experimental application area, two systems will be studied:
              control of semiconductor growth rate and composition in a metalorganic vapor
              deposition (MOCVD) reactor; control of unstable rotating magnetic bearing
              systems. Both applications have a great deal of industrial relevance, as well
              as providing challenging testbeds for the theoretical work. In the algorithmic
              development work, we propose refining structured algorithms to handle the very
              large problems that arise when applying model validation methods to data
              driven
problems.

The strong experimental component has significant wider
              benefits. The MOCVD experimental system is a nontraditional area for control
              work and fosters interaction and the exchange of ideas between the control
              theory community and semiconductor and materials scientists. The experiments
              are also integrated into engineering course work at UCSB, and are currently
              used as demonstration examples in undergraduate control courses and graduate
              level design laboratories.


