Title       : A New Approach to Optical Microscopy of Sub-Wavelength Diffraction Structures:
               Shape Reconstruction from Ellipsometric Back-Focal-Plane Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0218200

Award Number: 0218200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56638              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Yeung myeung@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed project is to use computer simulation to study the
              feasibility of a new type of optical microscope for measuring the sizes and
              shapes of three-dimensional objects whose dimensions are smaller than the
              wavelength of the light employed. Conventional optical microscope based on
              measurement of the intensity distribution on the image plane is not capable of
              resolving spatial details much smaller than about one wavelength. The proposed
              optical microscope, however, is based on ellipsometric measurements of the
              electric field scattered by an object onto the back focal plane of the
              objective lens. The ellipsometric data allow the relative phases among
              different components of the Jones matrix of the optical system to be computed.
              This phase information is then used to determine the shape of the object by
              solving an electromagnetic inverse problem.


The proposed microscope idea
              should be of great scientific interest, since the technique of using the phase
              information obtained from back-focal-plane ellipsometric measurements for
              object shape reconstruction is novel. Also, the proposed method is insensitive
              to positioning and focus errors of the sample, which is an important
              consideration if the method is to be applied to solving metrology problems in
              industry.


The proposed feasibility study will consist of using computer
              simulation to generate hypothetical data, which will then he used to test the
              convergence and robustness of various numerical algorithms for solving the
              electromagnetic inverse problem of shape reconstruction from the hypothetical
              data. In the process of carrying out the feasibility study, the graduate
              student involved will gain in-depth knowledge of optical imaging theory and
              firsthand experience with various numerical methods of electromagnetic. As
              such, the proposed project should be of great value in the education of
              graduate students interested in working in an interdisciplinary area involving
              both optics and electromagnetics. Also, if the results of the feasibility study
              appear promising, future research projects may he initiated to test the
              proposed microscope idea experimentally


