Title       : GOALI: Nonlinear Control of an Electrostatically-Actuated Spatial Light
               Modulator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0218245

Award Number: 0218245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $575000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jordan M. Berg jordan.berg@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. Holtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard O. Gale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter F. van Kessel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wijesuriya P. Dayawansa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9147,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0218245
Berg

The objective of the project described below is to dramatically
              improve the capabilities of a class of micro electromechanical (MEMS) and micro
              optoelectromechanical (MOEMS) systems of great promise in areas where
              miniaturization of optics and machines is advantageous.  Applications include
              emerging technologies such as holographic data storage for genomic and security
              databases, wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) and adaptive optics. The PI's
              propose to demonstrate, using an interesting MOEMS device, that techniques of
              nonlinear control theory will play a central role in future of this
              field.

Despite the fact that commercial applications of MOEMS are still in
              their infancy, notable successes like accelerometers in airbag deployment
              systems and digital micromirror arrays in high-end projection systems suggest a
              bright commercial future. This promise is accompanied by numerous interesting
              research problems, which are inherently cross-disciplinary.

A very promising
              device in this class is the electrostatically-actuated analog micromirror and
              micromirror array, used as a spatial light modulator (SLM). At the heart of
              these microfabricated devices is a small (<100 um square) mirror suspended by
              fixed springs and driven by applying an external voltage. While the
              micromirrors are interesting novelties, for them to reach their full commercial
              potential it is essential to control their displacements extremely
              precisely-within tens of nanometers or less. This poses a series of fascinating
              controls problems.

This proposal has four major objectives: 1. Fabricate
              micromirror SLMs, both individual and in arrays. 2. Develop control methodology
              suitable for governing micromirror actuation both with and without optical
              position feedback. This control serves both a stabilizing and tracking
              function. 3. Set up and implement optical testing and metrology capabilities
              for studying deflection properties on the subnanometer scale. 4. Actuate them
              using custom-designed on-chip electronics combined with off-chip commercial
              digital signal processors. Each of these objectives possesses several
              challenging problems in various research fields. The PI's preliminary results
              are very promising and they are confident that they can meet these objectives
              in this research program.

The team of researchers brought together under
              this proposal has the expertise necessary to carry out each of these
              objectives. Dr. Jordan Berg (Mechanical Engineering) will direct the proposal. 
              He has expertise in control theory and in microfabrication. He will be
              primarily responsible for the fabrication of the micromirror devices, and
              closely work with the controls team. Dr. W. P. Dayawansa (Mathematics) is an
              expert in control theory. He will lead these efforts, and closely interact with
              the test team. Dr. Mark Holtz (Physics) works in microfabrication and optics.
              He will lead the optical test effort. This group is critically augmented by Dr.
              Richard Gale (Electrical Engineering, beginning 5/02). For the past ten years
              Dr. Gale has directed the development and commercialization of the Texas
              Instruments Digital Light Products (DLP) device. This is the world's most
              advanced commercial MOEMS device, the only commercialized micromirror array,
              consisting of over 700,000 micromirrors 12 um square, for high-end projection
              systems. Dr. Gale will lead the electrical test and work closely with the
              optical test and fabrication groups. While the emphasis areas are noted for
              each P.I., this network of interdisciplinary researchers will
function
              together without boundaries to best achieve our proposed goals.

