Title       : Dissertation Research: The Many Varieties of the Naturalist: a life history of
               Karl Jordan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0218289

Award Number: 0218289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Farber pfarber@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In an effort to redress the dominance of the evolutionary synthesis on histories
              of natural history between 1890 and 1940, this dissertation research project
              will examine the life and work of Karl Jordan (1861-1959), a German-born
              naturalist who worked during the first half of the twentieth century as curator
              of insects for Walter Rothschild's Tring Museum, in Britain. It will
              investigate the context and influence of Jordan's contributions to the
              development of biology and the discipline of entomology, his experience as a
              German national living and working Britain during a series of tumultuous
              decades, and his constant endeavor to increase international cooperation
              between zoologists through both the International Entomological Congresses and
              the International Commission for Zoological Nomenclature. Jordan consistently
              corresponded with major entomologists for a period of six decades, organizing
              international cooperation, working on tedious insect systematics, and driving
              research into evolutionary theory. In its most general sense, this study is
              part of a broader aim to illustrate the various, dynamic contexts within which
              naturalists have worked, from the idealistic internationalism of the turn of
              the century to the post-World War world, and from the taxa-bound disciplines of
              the nineteenth century to the problem-based biology of the twentieth. In
              examining Jordan in a number of contexts, from the museum desk to the
              international stage, the research will examine the multifaceted variation in
              naturalists' activities. Research has already been completed at the  archives
              in the Eastern U.S., including the National Research Council, the Smithsonian
              Institution, and the American Philosophical Society for correspondence between
              Jordan and American entomologists. In addition entomological journals and the
              proceedings of the International Congresses of Entomology (ICE) have been
              surveyed. This funding supports archival work based predominantly in Britain
              (particularly at the Natural History Museum, London), with brief trips to
              continental Europe.

