Title       : CRCNS: Dynamics and Plasticity of a Neuromechanical System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0218386

Award Number: 0218386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eugene N. Bruce                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hillel J. Chiel hjc@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall D. Beer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Branicky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1162,9107,9139,9179,9183,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
   Some small networks of neurons are remarkable for their ability to execute
              multiple functions.  It has been a challenge to understand what the rules are
              for integrating feedback into features such as phase relationships among the
              firing patterns of active neurons, and how a small network can 'switch' from
              one characteristic behavior to another. Although research is clarifying the
              cellular and molecular mechanisms of learning, it has been more difficult to
              understand how changes in the properties of individual neurons change the
              activity of a whole neural circuit, and in turn alter an animal's overall
              behavior. This project is a collaboration using computational, theoretical and
              experimental approaches to analyze the feeding behavior of a marine mollusk,
              the sea hare Aplysia.  This animal ingests food with rhythmic rasping and
              sucking motions of a jawless buccal mass, run by a network of about 130 motor
              neurons and interneurons; if potential food is sensed by its physical
              properties as inedible, the pattern of muscle activity changes from ingestion
              to food rejection.  The overall goal is to determine how small changes in the
              properties of individual nerve cells create the large changes in feeding
              behavior that are observed after learning.  Specific Aim 1 is to construct a
              kinetic mathematical model of the buccal mass (finite-element method), its
              neural control (continuous-time recurrent neural network (CTRNN), with
              Hodgkin-Huxley models for motor and sensory neurons), and inedible food, and to
              conduct experimental studies to improve the understanding of each of these
              components of the model.  The focus of this modeling is to reproduce the
              changes in motor pattern observed during repeated encounters with inedible
              food.  Specific Aim 2 is to develop a numerically optimal controller for the
              new kinetic model, and use it to predict the effects of small changes in
              timing, phasing and intensity of neural input on the behavior generated by the
              buccal mass.  The focus here is on how the biomechanics of the periphery
              influences the design properties of the neural controller.  The models
              developed in Specific Aims 1 and 2 will be used to analyze the contributions of
              individual neurons to the shifting coalitions that stabilize the rhythmic
              behavior, and to predict the importance of local changes in synaptic strengths
              or intrinsic properties to the overall dynamics of the neural circuit both in
              isolation and when it is connected to the biomechanical model.  Under Specific
              Aim 3, experimental studies will be designed to test these predictions from
              simulation studies. These experimental studies will record neural activity in
              intact animals as they learn that food is inedible, and in reduced preparations
              (that show feeding-like movements) after perturbations of the activity of
              specific nerve cells.

 This work will have an impact beyond computational
              neuroscience and behavioral neuroscience, to invertebrate physiology,
              engineering, robotics and control systems. First, it is likely to generate
              principles for understanding the effects of localized changes in neural
              activity on an animal's overall behavior. Second, it may suggest design
              principles for devices that can persistently pursue a specific goal despite
              distracting inputs, and at the same time be remarkably flexible and change
              behavior if an appropriate stimulus occurs in the correct context. . Third,
              these principles are likely to serve as the basis for novel
              biologically-inspired robotic and control devices. In addition, students and
              collaborators will be involved together in cross-disciplinary approaches and
              techniques that will enhance training for the next generation of scientists.

