Title       : Heterotrimeric G Protein-Mediated Cellular Polarization in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0218081

Award Number: 0218081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Stone dstone@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Metodi Metodiev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1132,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Cellular polarization is essential to morphogenesis, immune response,
              neuronal development, chemotropism, and motility.  The budding yeast,
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is a well studied model eukaryote that exhibits
              numerous polarization phenomena, including signal-induced changes in cell shape
              and nuclear position.  In the life cycle of S. cerevisiae, two haploid cells of
              opposite mating type, MATa and MATa, can conjugate to form a MATa/a diploid
              cell.  Each mating type constitutively secretes a peptide mating pheromone that
              transforms vegetatively growing cells of opposite type into gametes.  To
              prepare haploids for cellular and nuclear fusion, pheromone triggers the
              induction of mating specific genes, arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle,
              polarized growth toward the mating partner, and nuclear migration to the tip of
              the mating projection.  The molecular mechanisms underlying transmission of the
              mating signal are well understood.  Communication of the signal from the plasma
              membrane to the cytoplasm is mediated by a receptor-coupled heterotrimeric G
              protein.  When occupied by ligand, the pheromone receptors activate the
              pheromone-responsive Ga protein (encoded by GPA1) via guanine nucleotide
              exchange and the concomitant dissociation of Ga?GTP from the Gbg dimer (encoded
              by STE4 and STE18).  The signal is then transmitted by Gbg to a
              mitogen?activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade.  The MAP kinase module consists
              of Ste11 (the MEKK), Ste7 (the MEK), and Fus3 (the MAPK).  In addition to
              stimulating the mating signal, Gbg serves as a positional cue.  It directs the
              dual function protein, Far1, to the growth site.  Far1 serves as a scaffold. 
              It brings together elements that stimulate polarization of the actin
              cytoskeleton.  Under physiological conditions, the Gbg-Far1 complex is presumed
              to assemble in the region of the cell surface that experiences the highest
              concentration of pheromone, and to mark this area for growth.  Thus, the cell
              orients its growth toward the source of pheromone.  This is called
              chemotropism.
	Recent results implicate the pheromone-responsive Ga protein,
              Gpa1, in control of signal-induced polarization and nuclear movement.  In cells
              responding to pheromone, Gpa1 interacts directly with the mating-specific MAP
              kinase, Fus3, and with Kar3, a kinesin-like protein that is essential for
              nuclear movement during mating.  Disruption of the Gpa1-Fus3 interaction
              confers defects in chemotropism and nuclear migration.  The goals of this
              investigation are to determine which chemotropic factors depend on the
              recruitment of Fus3 by Gpa1, and to determine how Gpa1 affects nuclear movement
              during mating.  In the work funded by NSF, the following hypothesis will be
              tested:  Gpa1 co-localizes Fus3 and Kar3 so that Fus3 can activate Kar3. 
              Because there is no precedent for regulation of kinesins by Ga proteins or MAP
              kinases, and because it is not known how kinesins are activated, this work
              promises to be of great value to those studying microtubule-associated motor
              proteins.  The broader impact of this investigation is that it will enhance our
              understanding of chemotropism and nuclear movement, two fundamental aspects of
              cellular function. Students at all levels will be involved in this
              research.


