Title       : US-Senegal Cooperative Research: Study of Interannual Variability of African
               Waves and Influence on Sahel Precipitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2002 
File        : a0218192

Award Number: 0218192
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karyn Sawyer karyn@ucar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wassila M. Thiaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              0510101   Climate Models                          
Program Ref : 1303,5928,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0218192
Sawyer & Thiaw

This award supports a three-year collaborative
              research project between Ms. Karyn Sawyer, with the University Corporation for
              Atmospheric Research (UCAR), Dr. Wassila Thiaw, with UCAR's African Desk at the
              National Center for Environmental Prediction (NCEP), and Dr. Saidou Sall, with
              the Laboratorie de Physique de l'Atmosphere of the Ecole Superieure
              Polytechnique at the University of Dakar in Senegal. They will study the
              interannual variability of African waves and influence on Sahel precipitation.
              

African waves are inherent components of the West Africa monsoon system. 
              They start from the African interior, and as they multiply and move westward
              mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) often form and develop within the waves. 
              These waves are most active during July and August.  This is also the period of
              active convective rains in the Sahel.  But little is known about the
              interannual variability of the waves or how they influence the interannual
              variability of rainfall in the  Sahel.  In order to determine the influence of
              the African waves on Sahel rainfall variability, the investigators will
              consider the relationship between the number of African waves and the amount of
              Sahel precipitation, the relationship between the number of African waves and
              the position and intensity of the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), and
              whether the African waves and the position of the ITCZ modulate Sahel rainfall.
               They will use NCEP-UCAR data, satellite imagery, and field data obtained from
              observation studies.  A convective index will be derived for each time step to
              determine the characteristics associated with the life cycle of the MCSs. 
              Statistical analyses will then be performed to investigate the relationship
              between the number of African waves and Sahel precipitation.  The results are
              expected to advance the current understanding of the West African monsoon
              system, especially the contribution of the interannual variability in the
              African waves to Sahel precipitation variability.  It should advance our
              understanding of how large scale climate systems interact with local scale
              phenomena.  It combines the international project expertise of Ms. Sawyer, with
              Dr. Thiaw's expertise in estimating rainfall and climate prediction in West
              Africa, and Dr. Sall's knowledge about convective systems.

