Title       : International Trenchless Technology Colloquium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0218862

Award Number: 0218862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjiv B. Gokhale s.gokhale@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,5914,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this International Symposium is to provide a forum for discussion of
              developments, in the GIS (Geographical Information Systems), CMMS (Computer
              Maintenance Management Systems), and IT (Information Technology) areas in the
              application of an intelligent assessment, renewal and management of underground
              municipal infrastructure. Research in this area is characterized by
              international and interdisciplinary cooperation. The proposed international
              forum by bringing together researchers from universities, municipal managers,
              and industry representatives, provides a major step towards a holistic approach
              to municipal infrastructure management.  

Research activities will help in
              advancing knowledge and understanding in the fields of assessment, monitoring &
              intelligent management of underground municipal infrastructure.  The
              development of highly automated GIS systems capable of searching, organizing,
              preserving, and interacting with large quantities of condition & maintenance
              data will provide a cost-effective tool for municipalities faced with shrinking
              budgets, growing problems and increasing regulations. 

The workshop is being
              organized in three phases. Phase I is the Trenchless Technology Research
              Colloquium, hosted by the Infrastructure Engineering and Management Research
              Center, School of Engineering, The University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
              Birmingham, UK. Phase II consists of field trips to visit the municipalities of
              Helsinki, Finland, and St. Petersburg, Russia. Phase III consists of presenting
              research findings and contributing to panel discussions at the 2002
              International NoDig Conference, Copenhagen, Denmark.

A Research Report
              containing the documentation of the research process, case studies, results of
              the data collection and analysis efforts, will be compiled by University of
              Birmingham, UK. Electronic copies will be made available through the Trenchless
              Technology Research Colloquium web site hosted by Trenchless Technology Center
              (TTC), Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, Louisiana
              (http://www.latech.edu/tech/engr/ttc/).


