Title       : GOALI: Investigating Metrology Issues in Chemical Mechanical Planarization
               Process for Microelectronics Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0218141

Award Number: 0218141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashok Kumar akumar1@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richardson O. Adebanjo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed activities under the Grant Opportunities for
              Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) with Agere Systems Inc. is to develop a
              strong well-integrated research and education program focused on the
              understanding of the mechanical and tribological properties of chemical
              mechanical planarization (CMP) processes for semiconductor manufacturing
              applications. Integration of low-k materials in the metallization structures
              creates severe problems during process integration. One of the major challenges
              in the process integration after the incorporation of low-k materials is CMP of
              these films due to the reduced modulus and cohesive strength. Due to the
              emergence of CMP as the method of choice for global planarization of dielectric
              and metal films, the frictional forces generated during the CMP process have
              assumed significant importance. Understanding the mechanical and tribological
              properties of complex stacks involving low-k dielectrics is critical for
              successful evaluation and implementation of these materials and the main goals
              of the proposed research are to obtain the fundamental understanding of the
              nature of surface planarization and identify the mechanism to control the CMP
              process.  As part of this GOALI proposal, Agere Systems Inc. will support as
              in-kind services like: a) provide CMP consumables (wafer, slurry, and pad) to
              perform the CMP experiments, b) provide engineer/scientist from the industry to
              serve as a thesis/dissertation advisor, b) provide resident workspace for a
              graduate student together with all on-site cost of materials and supplies to
              support the research, c) assign one engineer/scientist (approximately 10 % of
              their time to work and monitor the progress of the research), e) to emphasize
              technology transfer and implementation of research findings in manufacturing.
              
This GOALI proposal aims to synergize the Agere-USF partnership by providing
              opportunities for faculty, postdoctoral fellows and students to conduct
              research and gain experience with production processes in an industrial
              setting. The university-industry collaboration will provide additional
              opportunity for students to work with industrial scientists and use of their
              additional state-of-the-art equipment facilities. Apart from providing hands-on
              experience, the proposed research will provide a unique opportunity for the
              students to be involved in interdisciplinary research- a must for future
              success. Results of the project will be disseminated by paper presentation in
              regional and national conferences, and published in appropriate scientific
              journals

