Title       : Cultural Influences on Dynamic Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0218203

Award Number: 0218203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166767             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dominik Guess domgues@yahoo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              All around the world people face problems in their daily lives and need to make
              decisions. In these times of globalization, many people live and work abroad or
              work together with people from different countries and consequently need to
              make decisions and solve problems together. How does cultural background
              influence individuals' problem solving and decision making? Research in
              Cross-cultural Psychology rarely investigates these topics, whereas research in
              Cognitive Psychology rarely includes cultural variables in the investigation of
              decision making. This study will thus bridge a theoretical gap between the two
              disciplines.

The research focuses on the relationship between cultural
              values and decision making. Cultural values - more specifically,
              individualistic versus collectivist, and vertical versus horizontal value
              orientations - will be measured by means of value orientation questionnaires.
              Decision making analysis will focus on different strategies and decision making
              success. Four hundred psychology and business administration college students
              from Germany and the US (individualistic cultures), from Brazil and the
              Philippines (collectivist cultures), and from India (neither individualistic
              nor collectivist culture) will participate in the study. To analyze dynamic
              decision making, two computer simulations "WinFire" and "Coldstorage" will be
              used. In contrast to simple decision tasks, these computer simulations about
              forest fires and a broken coldstorage are more realistic and related to daily
              life. In decision-making studies, computer simulations have proved to be
              systematic, fruitful, and productive methods for data gathering. The data from
              the simulations will be collected in individual sessions, saved on computer
              files and videotapes, and then analyzed. From a theoretical model, specific
              hypotheses will be derived on how decision-making strategies will vary
              according to different cultural value orientations. The model will then be
              tested with structural equation modeling. 

Besides the theoretical merit,
              results of this study will also have relevance to the field of applied
              psychology. Findings can be incorporated in educational training programs for
              strategic thinking and dynamic decision making as well as for training programs
              in intercultural competence and sensitivity. Implications and relevance for
              research, training, and practice will be addressed.
