Title       : ITR: Optimal and Suboptimal Routing and Wavelength Assignment in Optical and
               Circuit Switched Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0218328

Award Number: 0218328
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitri P. Bertsekas dimitrib@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We propose to investigate the problem of routing and wavelength assignment (RWA)
              in optical data networks. This problem is widely viewed as critically important
              for increasing the efficiency of wavelength-routed all-optical networks.
              Mathematically, this problem contains an important special case the problem of
              routing in circuit switched networks.

We propose several novel optimization
              problem formulations that offer the promise of radical improvements over the
              existing methods, which are mainly heuristic in character. Our work aims to use
              a blend of analysis and algorithmic development to obtain a better
              understanding of RWA, and to develop efficient and practical methods for
              computing optimal or near-optimal RWA and circuit switching policies under
              realistic assumptions.

We plan to address the problem using two types of
              methodology: stochastic optimization, based on dynamic programming (DP), and
              deterministic optimization, based on linear programming (LP). There is some
              methodological coupling between the two types of methodology, because the
              deterministic methodology can be used to obtain cost-to-go approximations,
              which can in turn be used as the basis for an approximate DP method.

In the
              framework of a stochastic model, we allow a dynamic and stochastically varying
              demand of the network resources, and a decision-making mechanism that is
              forward-looking and takes into account the cost of blocking future lightpath
              requests. This resulting optimization models are of the DP type, but typically
              cannot be solved exactly because of high dimensionality. We propose to address
              such problems using approximations and neuro-dynamic programming (NDP), a
              recent methodology that has been used to address challenging DP problems.

In
              the framework of a deterministic model, we propose a new integer/linear
              programming formulation. The salient feature of our approach, which
              distinguishes it from similar approaches proposed in the literature, is that it
              does not require the time-consuming and uninsightful machinery of mixed integer
              programming. We have shown this for some practically useful ring network
              topologies, and we propose further investigation and extension of our
              methodology to more general topologies. This is a pleasantly surprising
              circumstance, and offers the promise of spectacular improvements over the
              current state of the art. We plan to investigate and develop algorithms that
              may be used during the design or reconfiguration of a network, as well as
              during its on-line operation. We also plan to explore ways to use the
              deterministic linear programming methodology in the stochastic/dynamic context
              and in combination with the NDP methodology.



