Title       : ITR: 3-D Microstructure/Property Investigations of Open-Cell Polymer Foams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0218871

Award Number: 0218871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald Seidler seidler@phys.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1686,1710,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This an Information Technology Research (ITR) award.  It is a
              computationally-intensive research program that will probe the
              microstructure/property relationships of open-cell polymer foams with
              unprecedented detail.  First, a comprehensive database of the full
              3-dimensional (3-D) microstructures of a wide range of foam materials will be
              obtained by using high-resolution synchrotron x-ray microtomography with
              integrated with 3-D image processing.  Second, these data will provide
              realistic initial conditions for supercomputer-based micromechanical
              simulations to allow isolation of key structural elements that are poorly
              understood in existing theories of foam mechanics.  Third, the microstructure
              database will be rapidly disseminated on the Internet to provide a unique
              educational and research resource in the field cellular solids.  This 3-D
              microstructure information should stimulate improvements in both materials
              processing and theories of foam mechanics.  The results should have
              applications in areas spanning consumer, medical, industrial, and aerospace
              products.  The graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project
              will receive multidisciplinary training in condensed matter physics, materials
              sciences, mechanical engineering, and information technology. 

This an
              Information Technology Research (ITR) award.  With growing frequency, the
              frontiers of materials research are marked by an intimate interplay between
              experiment, computation, and theory.  This project will apply this synergy to
              the study of polymer foam materials for the first time.  These materials have
              global applications spanning consumer, medical, industrial, and aerospace
              products.  However, lack of knowledge of their real 3-dimensional
              microstructures is constraining both the design of new materials and also the
              improvement of existing theories of foam mechanics.  A new combination of
              3-dimensional x-ray imaging, computer vision, and supercomputer-based
              simulations will be used to overcome this barrier.  These techniques will
              enable a comprehensive study of the real microstructures, and lead to a
              realistically-simulated micromechanics for a wide range of open-cell polymer
              foams.  A major output of the project will be the rapid creation of a unique
              Internet database of foam microstructures to provide a new educational resource
              and add significantly to the national materials research infrastructure.  The
              graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project will receive
              multidisciplinary training combining condensed matter physics, materials
              sciences, mechanical engineering, and information technology.

