Title       : Single-Play and Repeated-Play Decisions with Fungible and Non-Fungible Outcomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0218318

Award Number: 0218318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. DeKay dekay@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Something is fungible if one part or quantity may be replaced by another equal
              part or quantity in the satisfaction of an obligation. Oil, grain, and money
              are usually considered to be fungible.  In the context of repeated monetary
              gambles, the money won in one gamble can replace the money lost in another,
              dollar for dollar.  In other decision contexts, the outcomes of repeated trials
              may not be fungible.  Consider, for example, a medical practice guideline that
              recommends surgery for a particular ailment.  In one instance, successful
              surgery may extend the patient's life by some number of years.  In another
              instance, unsuccessful surgery may result in the patient's immediate death. 
              The life lost by the second patient cannot, in any real sense, be replaced by
              an equal quantity of life from the first patient.

Perceived fungibility is
              important because it may affect how people make decisions.  When considering
              decisions about monetary gambles, people often make different decisions when
              they can play the gamble many times instead of just once, because they realize
              that the money won in one gamble can replace the money lost in another.  For
              example, many people would decline a gamble that provides a 50% chance of a
              $200 gain and a 50% chance of a $100 loss (a single-play decision), but would
              readily accept a series of 10 or 100 plays of the same gamble (a repeated-play
              decision).  However, when outcomes are perceived to be non-fungible, as in the
              surgery example above, it is expected that people will not make different
              decisions when there are multiple patients instead of just one, because good
              outcomes do not really offset bad outcomes.

The initial experiments in this
              project will assess the extent to which people perceive outcomes to be fungible
              in many different decision situations.  In subsequent experiments, situations
              in which outcomes are perceived to be fungible or non-fungible will be used to
              determine how perceived fungibility affects single-play and repeated-play
              decisions.  In addition to other contributions to the understanding of risky
              decision making, the planned research will help to establish limits on the
              appropriateness of aggregating outcomes across multiple decisions, with
              potentially broad implications for decision making in fields as diverse as
              marketing, research and development, medicine, law, land-use planning, and
              free-trade policy.



