Title       : LTER: Long-Term Ecological Research in the Luquillo Experimental Forest 3
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0218039

Award Number: 0218039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2800000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas V. Brokaw nbrokaw@lternet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ariel E. Lugo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jess K. Zimmerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Whendee L. Silver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. McDowell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      Office of External Resources
	      PO Box 21489, San Juan, PR  009311489    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                      The Luquillo Experimental Forest LTER program (LUQ) focuses on the
              long-term dynamics of tropical forest ecosystems characterized by large-scale,
              infrequent disturbance, rapid processing of organic material, and high habitat
              and species diversity. Research by LUQ has stimulated a new appreciation of the
              significance of large-scale disturbances in tropical forested ecosystems and
              the key role of the biota in shaping the response to these events. Hurricanes
              occurring one and 10 years after the LTER program began permitted scientists to
              capitalize upon landscape-scale natural experiments which are followed closely.
              Among the most important findings from these natural experiments is that
              detrital dynamics plays a central role in forest recovery by influencing carbon
              and nutrient storage and flow. 
        The central theme proposed is that
              disturbance, through its effects on detrital dynamics, is a dominant ecosystem
              driver at LUQ. Pulses of detritus shift the flow of energy within the food web,
              modify the availability and distribution of nutrients, and feed back on the
              composition and productivity of plant and animal communities. Rapid processing
              of detritus distinguishes LUQ from other forested LTER sites, where
              decomposition takes 2-20 times as long. 
        A combination of long-term
              measurements, field experiments, simulation modeling, and cross-site
              comparisons are proposed to address five questions: (1) How do climatic
              factors, litter quality, and detritivore diversity regulate decomposition of
              detrital pulses? (2) How do terrestrial and aquatic food webs differ in
              response to detrital pulses? (3) What is the effect of disturbance frequency on
              nutrient cycling, plant community composition, and the accumulation of soil
              organic matter? (4) To what degree is the export of carbon and nutrients from
              watersheds a result of soil characteristics that are affected by detrital
              dynamics? (5) How do elevationally related changes in climate impact plant and
              detritivore communities, and how do these feed back on the quantity and quality
              of litter inputs and decomposition? 
        The research will be conducted in
              two spatial contexts. In mid-elevation tabonuco forest, LUQ will continue
              long-term measurements of ecosystem response to hurricanes, landslides, and
              anthropogenic disturbance. An experiment will be initiated to mimic increased
              frequency of hurricanes to investigate the effect of increased detrital inputs
              on nutrient cycling, community composition, and organic matter accumulation,
              along with. Manipulations of key groups of invertebrates to gain a better
              understanding of similarities in detrital processing between aquatic and
              terrestrial food webs. New plots will be established to examine the effect of
              elevationally related changes in climate, plant communities, and decomposers on
              detrital processing. Manipulative experiments will compare the relative
              importance of abiotic and biotic controls on decomposition in terrestrial and
              aquatic habitats.  
        Long-term measurements of hydrological and
              nutrient fluxes in watersheds will relate soil characteristics to stream
              nutrient and organic matter losses and provide information to gauge the effects
              of future disturbances. Simulation models of key population, community,
              biogeochemical, and landscape processes provide null-model predictions to
              inform these new observations and experiments.

