Title       : Enhanced Polymer Properties Through Controlled Melt Manipulation During
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0218182

Award Number: 0218182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360001             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Coulter john.coulter@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond A. Pearson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              An interdisciplinary research team at Lehigh University is exploring melt
              manipulation during polymer processing.  Melt manipulation is promising for the
              manufacturing of polymer-based products with enhanced properties.  Because
              property enhancements can be realized the expanded usage of recycled materials
              also becomes possible.  During melt manipulation, an otherwise conventional
              molding cycle is augmented by the application of oscillatory mechanical energy
              to the polymer melt during processing.  This affects the material orientation
              and relaxation dynamics that occur during processing and in-turn the internal
              structure and overall properties of the final product.  The project is focused
              on learning how, when, and where to apply the technique to yield beneficial
              results.  The detailed sequential cause and effect relationships that connect
              applied melt manipulation conditions to final product quality attributes are
              being explored using a coupled experimental and analytical approach. 
              

Components of the study are focusing on relationships between 1) applied
              machine processing conditions and localized processing conditions throughout
              the mold, 2) localized processing conditions and molecular orientation, 3)
              local molecular orientation and localized material response, and 4) localized
              material response and overall product performance.  To assure the relevance and
              success of the effort, significant industrial involvement and guidance is
              included.  The broad educational impact of the program is being enhanced by the
              inclusion of undergraduate students from a number of schools.  In addition, a
              target group of middle school students from an under-represented minority
              population are being exposed to the research as part of an established and
              award winning cooperative education program.

