Title       : Enabling the Next Generation of Hazard Researchers: An Education and Training
               Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0218413

Award Number: 0218413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis Wenger                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond J. Burby burby@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Time period: September 1, 2002-August 31, 2004

The initiation and eventual
              institutionalization of fields of inquiry is heavily dependent upon
              generational cohorts of scholars who not only produce new knowledge but also
              produce new generations of scholars who will continue to develop the field. The
              project responds to a serious issue in the field of research on societal
              aspects of extreme events: the lack of an adequate cohort of junior faculty to
              sustain scholarship into future generations. This education and training
              initiative addresses this issue by developing a comprehensive, creative program
              of mentoring for recently appointed junior faculty at research universities.
              The objectives of the program are to: (1) identify and recruit another cohort
              of well-trained social scientists for undertaking relevant research about
              societal aspects of extreme events; (2) engage this cohort of researchers in
              discussions about social science scholarship as it relates to research about
              extreme events; (3) enable this cohort of faculty members to undertake
              sustained research on these topics; and (4) foster an expanded network of
              social scientists undertaking research on extreme events. To accomplish these
              objectives the project will bring bright, newly appointed faculty in sustained
              contact over a one-year period with seasoned researchers from the fields of
              decision sciences, economics, geography, political science, psychology, public
              health, sociology, and urban planning. They will engage in an intense period of
              mentoring with 16 junior faculty members who will be competitively selected to
              participate as fellows. Mentoring activities include two workshops, one-on-one
              mentoring by the faculty panel, and research and writing activities by the
              faculty fellows. The field of research on societal aspects of extreme events is
              at a critical juncture. This project is arguably important to its future
              development and fulfills a central mission of the National Science Foundation
              in enabling individuals to contribute to solving the nation's problems through
              new scholarship.




