Title       : Genome Pathways Database: Functional Annotation of Biological Pathways with
               Genomic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0218061

Award Number: 0218061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1329453            (Estimated)
Investigator: Z. Meral Ozsoyoglu ozsoy@ces.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Nadeau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gultekin Ozsoyoglu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Attributing function to genes, their regulatory elements and other functional
              DNA sequences will be the next step in genomics.  This functional phase
              involves researchers from a variety of disciplines, including computer science
              and engineering.  To facilitate the use of genomic informatin in function
              studies, pathways will be used to present the information.  Pathways require
              detailed integration of diverse sources of information.  Researchers will need
              transparent access that will be provided through this project.  The project
              will integrate the data from a pathways rather than a sequence perspective,
              enabling scientists who do not do the sequencing to add functional information.
               New tools will enable users to visualize pathways data at mutiple levels of
              detail and abstraction.  The use of XML will permit dissemination of query
              outputs for control of the data.    Metabolic pathways, transcriptional
              regulation and protein synthesis pathways and signal transduction pathways will
              be the first incorporated in this web-based system.  The research provides 
              both for student support in both biology and computer science and a resource
              for the functional genomics community.
