Title       : Managing Portfolios of Projects Under Uncertainty with Application to
               Construction Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0218837

Award Number: 0218837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Nozick lkn3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Turnquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Projects are often undertaken in an environment of considerable uncertainty.
              Uncertainty may be reflected in the duration and outcomes of specific tasks, as
              well as in the effectiveness of resources applied to them.  Project and program
              managers must decide, in these uncertain conditions, how to allocate and manage
              scarce resources across many projects that have competing needs.  The
              construction industry is one in which this need is particularly acute. Today,
              project planning and scheduling is done using algorithms that either ignore the
              resource constraints and consider uncertainty in task duration, or ignore the
              uncertainty in task duration and focus on resource-constrained
              scheduling.

This research focuses on developing new computationally
              tractable modeling tools for allocating resources under uncertainty in
              realistic multi-project planning and scheduling environments.  A key aspect of
              the mathematical approach we are using is that it provides an explicit
              mechanism to evaluate the tradeoff between the planned schedule for a project
              (or portfolio of projects) and the level of risk that the schedule will become
              infeasible (as a result of uncertainties in the task durations and outcomes).
              

This research has obvious application to construction projects, as well as
              to many other industrial, commercial and public sector applications. Our
              approach will create significant new tools for use by project and program
              managers in many types of undertakings. Furthermore, since the need to work in
              the presence of uncertainty is a critical element of engineering practice, it
              is important to provide students with an exposure to project management under
              uncertainty.  To this end, we will develop cases studies and a master of
              engineering project based on the research described in this proposal.  Those
              case studies and project will support education in three programs:
              undergraduate civil engineering, and the Master of Engineering programs in
              engineering management and systems engineering.


