Title       : ITR -- Polar Satellite Remote Sensing: Toward Full On-Line Access and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0218749

Award Number: 0218749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Lubin dlubin@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,5115,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project was funded under the Information Technology Research (ITR) program,
              which enables research and education in multidisciplinary areas, focusing on
              emerging opportunities at the interfaces between information technology and
              other disciplines. The program seeks innovative projects in research and
              education that elucidate, expand and exploit information technology.  
The
              Arctic and Antarctic Research Center (AARC) at the Scripps Institution of
              Oceanography has been an important source of polar satellite remote sensing
              data and related services.  It receives direct-broadcast telemetry from
              NSF-supported satellite tracking facilities at McMurdo and Palmer Stations in
              Antarctica, and from the U.S. Coast Guard icebreakers when these ships are
              operating at high latitudes. The AARC provides specialized data distribution
              and instruction to polar researchers and expedition planners, including real
              time data access, near-real time sea ice mapping for research cruise support,
              customized data processing in support of research projects, and in-house
              training in the use of satellite remote sensing data over the polar regions. 
              The AARC, as a "regional" data center providing customized support for polar
              researchers, has a threefold operating mandate: (1) to provide satellite data
              in a timely manner at no cost to the user, (2) to provide training that
              introduces a great many polar researchers from all disciplines in the use of
              remote sensing data, and (3) to develop low-cost ways to overcome the practical
              "barriers" to satellite data access. 
This project will remove two remaining
              significant barriers to satellite data access: a tape based archive, and a
              manual system of retrieving requested images.  First, a server system that
              maintains the most recent year of satellite data on-line in three appropriate
              formats (raw binary telemetry, HDF-EOS, and high resolution JPEG imagery), with
              full internet access, will be developed.  Most AARC users request data from the
              preceding 12 months, so this is an appropriate subset of the archive with which
              to begin. The architecture will be scalable to eventually allow on-line access
              to the entire archive. Second, a comprehensive on-line educational curriculum
              will be developed that discusses all important aspects and applications of
              remote sensing to polar research and expeditionary work. The goal is that a
              researcher should be able to log onto the AARC's web site, learn in great
              detail about the data, and then select and download the required data in a
              readily usable format using an easily navigable search facility. This project
              involves research into high level on-line access to remote sensing data for the
              geophysical sciences, and can serve as a model for other institutions or
              collaborative programs that need to make satellite remote sensing data
              available to a broader research or educational community.

