Title       : Environmental Catalysis: Gas Phase Hydrodechlorination of Chlorophenols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0218591

Award Number: 0218591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309124             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Keane makeane@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal sets out a fundamental study that is  focused on probing the link
              between  catalytic  hydrodechlorination  activity/selectivity  and  catalyst 
              structure.  Previous  work by the PI has established that nano-dispersed nickel
              on amorphous silica in the presence of hydrogen is highly efficient in the
              dechlorination of concentrated chlorinated gas streams; the chlorine  that  is 
              removed  is  solely  in  the  form  of  HCl  that  is  easy  to  trap.  The 
              existing  catalyst activity/selectivity database will be extended in a
              strategic fashion, focusing on the treatment of chlorinated phenols as model
              reactants; the latter represents a class of commercially significant and highly
              toxic industrial waste. Preliminary  results have revealed that chlorobenzene 
              and chlorophenol hydrodechlorination over Ni/SiO2 is structure sensitive in
              that larger Ni particles (in the  range  1-4  nm)  exhibit  higher  specific 
              dechlorination  rates  but  are  more  susceptible  to deactivation. The issue
              of catalyst decay will be addressed through a comprehensive program of catalyst
              characterization before and after reaction. This will involve bulk structural
              studies (x-ray diffraction), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
              (TEM), analytical TEM including EDX and EELS, surface area/porosity
              measurements, chemisorption/TPD/TPO studies and  x-ray photoelectron
              spectroscopy to probe changes in Ni electronic structure. Moreover, the nature
              of the reactant(s)/product(s) interaction with the catalyst surface will be
              probed using spectroscopic (FTIR-DRIFT) and chromatographic techniques. The
              presence of chlorinated aromatics in industrial effluent is now established as
              a major source of environmental pollution.   This work may form the basis for a
              more efficient pollution prevention method.  The PI has previously worked with
              both graduate and undergraduate students in an international context.  In this
              project he will also work with chemistry students and provide training in
              engineering research.
