Title       : Signaling Pathways Regulating Synaptic Vesicle Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0218619

Award Number: 0218619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372478             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Turner TIMOTHY.TURNER@TUFTS.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1192,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Neurons communicate with one and other primarily by secreting
              chemical
neurotransmitters that influence the electrical or biochemical
              activities of
neighboring cells. These neurotransmitters are stored in small
              organelles
called synaptic vesicles that are localized to presynaptic nerve
              endings. In
order for neurotransmitter to be secreted, a synaptic vesicle must
              fuse with the
surface membrane at the nerve terminal, which allows
              neurotransmitter to diffuse
to the nearby target neurons. This tightly
              regulated fusion process is the
fundamental event in interneuronal
              communication. Recent work has revealed that
vesicle fusion is a low
              probability event related to the number of synaptic
vesicles docked with the
              active zone, the site at which fusion occurs. A dynamic
equilibrium exists
              between vesicles that are fusion-competent and the majority
of vesicles that
              are held in reserve; this equilibrium is regulated in a
Ca2+-dependent manner.
              The molecular basis for these Ca2+-dependent changes in
the brain is
              incompletely understood, in part because billions of microscopic
nerve
              terminals are distributed throughout the brain, making it difficult
              of
impossible to synchronize the activity of the nerve terminals in an
              intact
preparation. Work proposed by Dr. turner is designed to study
              the
signaling pathways that regulate synaptic vesicle dynamics using
              synaptosomes, a
preparation of isolated nerve terminals that is relatively
              uniform in
composition.  Dr. Turner's laboratory will use synaptosomes to
              measure biochemical changes in
the activities of specific signaling pathways
              that have been implicated in
regulating synaptic vesicle maturation, including
              Ca2+-regulated kinases and a
monomeric GTP-binding known as Ral. In parallel,
              the relevance
of these signaling pathways will be evaluatued by measuring the
              strength of synaptic transmission in a more intact preparation, the acute brain
              slice obtained from cerebellum.
The parallel fiber to Purkinje cell synapse
              found in this preparation is a 
well-characterized excitatory synapse that
              should be representative of
excitatory synapses found in all parts of the
              brain. Simultaneous measurements
of neurotransmitter release and the attendant
              changes in cytoplasmic signaling
pathways will advance a more detailed
              understanding of the mechanisms that underlie Ca2+-dependent changes in
              synaptic strength important to interneuronal signaling in the brain.
	The
              impact of this work will extend broadly throughout neuroscience because of the
              fundamental importance of synaptic transmission in information processing by
              the brain, for features including sensory reception, motor control, attention
              and decision, and learning and memory.  In addition, this project will help
              launch the independent career of a young investigator.




