Title       : US-Kenya Dissertation Enhancement: Aloe Secundiflora Shrubs as Facilitators in
               Semi-Arid Kenyan Rangelands, and Their Potential Use in Restoration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0218254

Award Number: 0218254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen L. Stanton mlstanton@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5991,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0218254
Stanton & King


This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US
              graduate student, Ms. Elizabeth King, working under the direction of Professor
              Maureen Stanton, in the Center for Population Biology at the University of
              California- Davis, to conduct a study in Kenya to evaluate the facilitative
              effect of the succulent shrub Aloe secundiflora on a perennial grass species,
              Cenchrus ciliaris, in degraded, semi-arid savannas.

Facilitative
              interactions between members of different plant species can impact the
              population dynamics of the interacting species and the structure of plant
              communities.  But the relationship between a facilitator and a beneficiary
              species is not constant and, depending on the life history stage of the
              species, can even become negative at certain times and under certain
              conditions. Under an array of different environmental conditions, Ms. King will
              measure the effect of transplanted aloe shrubs on each life history stage of
              the beneficiary grass in order to project the population-level consequences of
              the presence of the transplanted aloe shrubs.  She will address the following
              questions. How does the interaction vector vary under a spectrum of possible
              environmental conditions?  How does the interaction vector vary depending on
              the life history stage of the beneficiary?  How do indirect effects of
              additional species in the plant community impact the interaction vector for a
              focal beneficiary species?  When stage-specific fitness measurements are used
              in demographic models, how does the presence of a facilitator affect the
              projected population growth rate of the beneficiary?  The results will be used
              to evaluate the potential impact of the use of these transplanted succulent
              shrubs as a means to enhance the recovery of grasses in overgrazed dry
              savannas. Dr. Joshua Muasya and Ms. Emily Wabuyele at the National Museums of
              Kenya will provide guidance on this project to Ms. King.

The results of this
              study are expected to add to the current knowledge on the interactions of
              facilitator plants with a beneficiary species.  It will also contribute
              valuable information to resource managers and policy makers involved in
              curtailing environmental degradation and improving human welfare--problems that
              face arid areas in Kenya and elsewhere in the world.  This project will also
              support an international research experience very early in the career of an
              outstanding graduate student.

The Office of International Science and
              Engineering and the Division of Environmental Biology jointly support this
              award.

