Title       : Center for Research on Culture, Development and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0218159

Award Number: 0218159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine S. Tamis-LeMonda ct1@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Niobe Way  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua M. Aronson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hirokazu Yoshikawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The academic underachievement of certain ethnic minority groups in America
              continues to perplex educators, scientists, and policy makers, despite
              thousands of studies, hundreds of remedial programs, and decades of being
              considered a crisis.  Several recent trends add weight to the crisis.  First,
              within the next 50 years, people identified as ethnic "minority" will comprise
              half the U.S. population.  Second, new waves of immigrants continue to arrive,
              ensuring fundamental but unknown changes in the intercultural dynamics of
              schools and other contexts.  Third, the United States has evolved into a
              "knowledge-driven" economy, making a solid education, particularly in math and
              science, vital for an increasingly large sector of the workforce.  Finally,
              recent federal legislation calls for annual standardized assessments of school
              children, a prospect that may disadvantage certain minorities who typically
              underperform on these tests.  More than ever, a sizable proportion of our
              nation's children are at risk of academic failure, posing a serious threat to
              the current Administration's goal of "leaving no child behind."  In line with
              this national goal, the Center for Research on Culture, Development and
              Education (CRCDE), housed at New York University (NYU) will conduct research
              designed to identify pathways to academic success for all children.  Prior
              research has focused narrowly on a single context (e.g., the family, peer
              relationships, school quality, etc.) in predicting academic outcomes, or has
              investigated the roles of ethnicity, race, immigrant status, gender, or
              socioeconomic status separately.  Neither approach, however, has adequately
              addressed the ways in which multiple contexts contribute to educational success
              and/or disparities, nor how pathways vary by developmental period and culture. 
              Furthermore, an over-emphasis on group differences has resulted in the neglect
              of patterns of academic outcomes within ethnic, socioeconomic, or cultural
              groups.  Finally, studies across all of these areas have tended to utilize
              single methodologies, rarely integrating survey, ethnographic, experimental,
              and observational methods.  To address these gaps, the CRCDE will gather and
              disseminate data about the pathways that lead to successful academic engagement
              and performance among culturally diverse children and adolescents.  The
              scientific mission of the CRCDE is to use an integrative conceptual framework,
              cross-disciplinary collaboration, and multiple methods to (1) identify the
              nature of relationships that link children's experiences in five educationally
              relevant contexts, home, school, peers, caregivers' work, and media, to their
              academic engagement and performance; (2) examine whether and how these
              processes vary within and across cultural groups and across developmental
              periods; and (3) advance an understanding of how home, peers, school,
              caregivers' work, and media affect one another and jointly influence children's
              and adolescents' academic engagement and performance.  The educational mission
              of the CRCDE is to (1) train a new generation of scholars, especially those
              from underrepresented minority groups, to engage in research that advances the
              scientific mission; (2) produce instruments and methods that will strengthen
              the scientific capacity of the research community to conduct culturally
              sensitive research on academic engagement and performance; and (3) transmit
              findings to policy makers, practitioners in education, and researchers, through
              dissemination of findings and lessons for educational policy and practice.  The
              Center's location in the diverse context of New York City (NYC) is ideal for a
              center devoted to research at the confluence of culture, development, and
              education.
