Title       : Control and Modification of Electric Currents on Existing Structures for Use as
               Effective Antennas in Wireless Communications Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0218629

Award Number: 0218629
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Long long@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffery T. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0218629
Long

The proposed research is focused on an innovative approach to
              develop radiation systems for wireless networks in which the antennas are
              effectively indiscernible in their local environment.  It seeks to examine how
              both exterior and interior parts of existing buildings and structures might be
              used as transmitting and receiving systems for various wireless applications.
              The major issues that must be solved to successfully develop antenna systems
              that are essentially invisible, include understanding :

how to effectively
              excite existing structures
how to examine their basic radiation
              properties
how to predict their radiated fields
how to control their
              radiation characteristics.

In some cases minor modifications may have to be
              made to the existing structures, but the visual and structural impact of such
              actions would be minimal.  

Possible candidates for investigation include
              flashing and gutters around the tops of buildings, lightning protection
              systems, metallic window frames, building supports, power lines and supports,
              portions of existing towers and billboards, metal roofs or cupolas, portions of
              the metal structure interior to a building, and non-structural conductors such
              as door frames and ceiling tile support grids.

The initial phase of the
              proposed research program will address the following tasks:

development of
              appropriate feeding and matching techniques
evaluation of the radiation
              properties for the proposed radiation elements
investigation of the use of
              perturbing materials and modifications of the structures for
current and
              pattern control

The impact of the successful implementation of such antenna
              systems on the world of telecommunications should be most significant. The
              final results of the proposed study should provide essential information on the
              feasibility of using existing structures as effective radiators, as well as
              providing preliminary tools and procedures for the design of this new class of
              antenna systems.

