Title       : Long-Term Ecological Research at the H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest (LTER5)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0218088

Award Number: 0218088
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4680000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Harmon Mark.Harmon@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia A. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Bond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherri L. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick J. Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Harmon
0218088
The Andrews LTER program seeks to understand the long-term
              dynamics of forest and river
ecosystems of the Pacific Northwest. The Central
              Question guiding Andrews LTER research is:
How do land use, natural
              disturbances, and climate change affect three key sets of
ecosystem services:
              carbon and nutrient dynamics, biodiversity, and hydrology? These
ecosystem
              services represent scientifically and socially important, tractable variables,
              and their
responses are posited to represent different classes of ecosystem
              behavior at the landscape scale.
Climate, land use, and natural disturbances
              are the major drivers of change in the Pacific
Northwest region. The approach
              used to address this question will be multi-faceted involving
retrospective
              analysis, time series observations, experiments, and use of simulation models
              for
synthesis, extrapolation in time, and interpolation in space. The
              principal spatial scale of
inference for LTER studies is the Andrews Forest
              and adjacent upper Blue River watershed, an
area of 16,000 ha. Work associated
              with the LTER will be coordinated with studies aimed at
regional questions.
              The principal temporal extent of proposed LTER studies spans the past 500
yr
              and to several centuries projected into the future. This proposal represents
              the strategic plan of
activities designed to advance science for individual
              disciplines, integration, and cross-site
comparisons. Thus, the Andrews LTER
              is used as the core of a larger set of integrated studies.
Essential long-term
              studies will be continued and others added to increase spatial and
temporal
              overlap of scales. The standard 5 LTER core activities will be addressed by
              work in
seven component areas: (1) climate, (2) hydrology, (3) disturbance,
              (4) ecophysiology,
(5) carbon and nutrient dynamics, (6) biodiversity, and (7)
              stream-forest interactions. In this
grant cycle, studies continue to examine
              the interaction of the drivers of change and responding
processes and taxa,
              but the conceptual emphasis will be on temporal behavior, its causes, and
its
              consequences for ecosystem change. We will examine temporal behavior over time
              scales of
days to hundreds of years focusing on: (1) modulation, (2) temporal
              lags, (3) spatial coherence,
(4) path dependence, (5) hysteresis, and (6)
              alternative stable states. Exploring these aspects of
temporal behavior help
              to address the Central Question by quantifying natural temporal
variability
              and providing insights into mechanisms that control processes. A major goal
              will be
to test predictive rules (i.e., hypotheses) regulating temporal
              behaviors. Another focus of
synthesis will be small watersheds, an important
              landscape unit providing opportunity for
integration of climatic, ecosystem,
              and hydrological processes as well as knowledge of temporal
and spatial
              scaling. The ultimate goal in this integration is to create a spatially
              3-dimensional
(including subsurface and air flow) understanding of the
              temporal dynamics of the 3 states of
matter involved in biogeochemical and
              hydrologic cycles within a watershed. Past experiments,
long term records of
              climate, stream flow, nutrient exports, and vegetation change, as well
              as
modeling will enhance this integration effort. By understanding this key
              landscape unit, future
broader-scale efforts will be strengthened.
Andrews
              science and scientists continue to advance understanding and management
              of
forests and streams of the Pacific Northwest through communication with
              students, teachers,
policy makers, land managers, and the general public.
              Information management, an essential
activity for both research and education,
              emphasizes ease of use, increased accessibility, and
portability of many forms
              of information.
