Title       : Integrated Personnel Scheduling in the Service Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0218701

Award Number: 0218701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98568              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan F. Bard jbard@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The principal goal of this project is to develop an integrated decision support
              system that can be used by the service industry to better meet their long-term,
              mid-range, and day-to-day staffing needs.  At each of these levels, the
              underlying problems will be modeled as large-scale integer programs and solved
              with a combination of exact methods and heuristics.  A significant portion of
              the research is aimed at devising efficient solution algorithms.  An associated
              objective is to develop new decomposition techniques and bounding schemes. 
              Because many of the subproblems that arise at each of these levels have yet to
              be addressed by the research community, it is likely that additional modeling
              will be required to deal with qualitative issues, uncertainty, and the
              intricate nature of the constraints that inform practical applications.  The
              methodologies developed will be implemented with an eye toward computational
              efficiency and robustness in the face of uncertainty.  Expected results
              include: (1) the development of improved solution methods for personnel
              planning and scheduling in the service industry; (2) a greater understanding of
              modeling issues with respect to weekly tour generation and disruption
              management; (3) theoretical and practical characterizations of the performance
              of related algorithms; and (4) the design of an integrated decision support
              system. 

Effective personnel scheduling has become one of the primary means
              by which service enterprises remain competitive.  Unlike manufacturing where
              standard shifts and days off are the rule, service organizations operate up to
              24 hours a day, 7 days a week and face widely varying demand.  Poor staff
              schedules can lead to an oversupply of workers with too much idle time, or an
              undersupply with customer dissatisfaction and a resultant loss of business. 
              Stated alternatively, an important goal of this project is to find robust
              schedules for a nonhomogeneous workforce. The general problem faced by
              management is to meet daily staffing requirements at minimum cost without
              violating labor agreements, company policies, and government regulations.  At
              the long-term planning level, consideration must be given to issues that
              determine the size and composition of the permanent workforce.  At the weekly
              level, critical resources must be tracked and schedules updated to meet changes
              in demand.  Real-time control come into play at the day-to-day level where
              absenteeism, equipment failures, and other disruptions call for online
              rescheduling. 
