Title       : ITR: Solution of Eigenvalue Problems for Multi-Scale Phenomena by Quantum Monte
               Carlo Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0218858

Award Number: 0218858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Peter Nightingale nigh@phys.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1652,1686,1753,1765,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an award made in response to a (small) proposal submitted to the
              Information Technology Research (ITR) initiative.  The award is co-funded by
              the Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry.  The highly computational
              research concerns quantum mechanical and statistical mechanical problems in
              which a multiplicity of length or time scales renders approximate solutions
              inaccurate and exact numerical methods intractable.  The research focuses on
              problems that can be reduced to the solution of eigenvalue problems for which
              one can use and develop quantum Monte Carlo methods without uncontrolled
              approximations.

In critical phenomena, a multiplicity of scales arises from
              the divergence of the correlation length and the relaxation time.  For
              weakly-bound clusters, the quantum mechanical component of this research,
              strong anharmonicity with the attendant floppiness yields a multiplicity of
              length scales.  Here solution of the Schroedinger equation poses the
              computational challenge. 

This research will develop novel computational
              methods to obtain quantum mechanical spectra of weak-bound clusters.  In
              particular, it addresses a problem that was identified in 1997 as an important,
              unsolved problem in cluster physics, viz. the computation of energies of bound
              states of small 4He clusters.   These clusters find themselves in the vicinity
              of continuous dissociation transitions, where ground or excited state is about
              to merge with the continuous part of the spectrum, and the various length
              scales in turn go to infinity continuously.  

In the statistical mechanical
              portion of the research, the goal is to perform high accuracy computations of
              dynamical critical exponents, which in particular will be used in high
              precision tests of extended scaling relations proposed for the two-dimensional
              XY model.  The work is of theoretical interest for the field of dynamical
              critical phenomena, and has implications for the study of superconducting
              films, Josephson junction arrays, and 4He films.
%%%
This is an award made in
              response to a (small) proposal submitted to the Information Technology Research
              (ITR) initiative.  The award is co-funded by the Divisions of Materials
              Research and Chemistry.  The highly computational research concerns quantum
              mechanical and statistical mechanical problems in which a multiplicity of
              length or time scales renders approximate solutions inaccurate and exact
              numerical methods intractable.  The research focuses on problems that can be
              reduced to the solution of eigenvalue problems for which one can use and
              develop quantum Monte Carlo methods without uncontrolled approximations.

The
              research deals with two complementary projects.  In critical phenomena, a
              multiplicity of scales arises from the divergence of the correlation length and
              the relaxation time.  Here high precision calculations will be done to test
              scaling relations.  For weakly-bound clusters, the quantum mechanical component
              of this research and of great interest in chemistry, strong anharmonicity with
              the attendant floppiness yields a multiplicity of length scales.  This
              component of the research will be done in collaboration with the theoretical
              chemistry group at Berkeley.
***

