Title       : Property, Resources, and the Globalization of Legal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9310921

Award Number: 9310921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Peluso   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Vandergeest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 1577,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9310921  PELUSO  This project will investigate the links between transformations
              in  local and national property relations and the construction of  nation
              states in Southeast Asia.  The research will describe and  explain the reasons
              for similarities in outcomes which conform to  global models, the reasons for
              variation within these similarities  across the study region, and the sources
              of conflict over property  issues.  The project will focus on sites in Thailand
              (never  colonized), Malaysia (colonized by England), and Indonesia  (formerly
              under Dutch law), to provide comparisons across three  different legal
              traditions.  Major sources of variation in national  and local sociolegal
              processes include differences among pre-  colonial states, in center-periphery
              relations, in local property  relations, and in different colonial histories. 
              The research will  show how these historical differences at the state level
              produced  diverse ways of dealing with "customary" or local property  relations
              during the transition from the colonial period to nation  states and market
              economies.  The project will contribute to  empirical and theoretical
              understanding of the relationship between  local property law and practices and
              global legal and economic  processes, and particularly how this relationship
              affects the  allocation of forest and other land resources.    The project will
              employ the method of "incorporated comparison" to  assess how similarities and
              differences in local and national  sociolegal processes across the region were
              influenced by and  contributed to processes of global change.  The
              investigators will  collect data from several sources in various countries:
              cases from  both colonial legal archives and local legal systems, records of 
              changes in the natural environment, legal documents concerning land 
              administration and transactions, maps and land surveys across  historical
              periods, and interviews with local leaders and legal  practititioners.  The
              research will detail the different sequenc es  through which territorial states
              constructed private property  regimes and under what conditions these different
              sequences led to  conflicts between the state and local people and among local 
              people.  In this light, the project will describe and assess the  many
              implications of these sociolegal processes for understanding  global change.  
              ***
