Title       : SGER: Supercritical Levitation Polymerization and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1993       
File        : a9310232

Award Number: 9310232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erdogan Kiran   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In supercritical polymerization processes, polymer chains grow                 
              to molecular weights determined by their solubility under the                  
              prevailing density (or pressure and temperature) conditions of                 
              the solvent.  Further growth in the chain length results in                    
              phase separation and leads to precipitation.  In this project,                 
              polymerizations will be conducted under isopycnic conditions                   
              by adjusting the density of the solvent environment to be                      
              identical to the density of the polymer formed.  This iso-                     
              density operation is expected to insure levitation by buoyancy                 
              and prevent precipitation of the phase-separated polymer.                      
              Density adjustments are readily achievable for supercritical                   
              solvents through manipulation of either the pressure of the                    
              temperature, of the solvent composition (if mixtures are                       
              used), and isopycnic conditions for a variety of polymers and                  
              polymerization systems are possible.  This is a way to                         
              simulate the micro gravity environment of space-based                          
              processes on earth.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The objective of the research project is to make polymeric                     
              materials of precise geometries and morphologies by                            
              synthesizing them in a supercritical fluid of precisely the                    
              same density as the product polymer.  This would prevent                       
              precipitation of the polymer and permit polymerization of                      
              molecules of any desired structure to be fabricated.  The                      
              research will focus on testing his hypothesis by synthesizing                  
              polystyrene and crystallizing polyethylene in isopycnic                        
              supercritical fluid solvents.  He will explore using mixtures                  
              of fluids such as carbon dioxide or butane with fluids of                      
              higher density such as xenon or sulfur hexafloride.
