Title       : Residual Strength of Delaminated Composite Panel under Compressive Loads - Award
               in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1993        
File        : a9310960

Award Number: 9310960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna Murty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst of Science
	      
	      Bangalore, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 5919,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project provides support for                                
              collaboration between Drs. A.V. Krishna Murty                                  
              and Vijay Kumar of the Department of Aerospace                                 
              Engineering at the Indian Institute of Science                                 
              in Bangalore, India, and Dr. J.N. Reddy of the                                 
              Department of Engineering Mechanics at the                                     
              Virginia Institute of Technology and State                                     
              University in Blacksburg.  These scientists                                    
              plan to continue theoretical, analytical                                       
              studies on the behavior of laminated composite                                 
              panels under compressive loads.  Specifically,                                 
              they are seeking to develop analytical tools to                                
              describe the process of delamination in such                                   
              panels. These studies will be also useful in                                   
              determining residual strength of these plates.                                 
              The collaborative work will benefit from                                       
              experimental work being done independently by                                  
              the Indian team at the I.I.Sc.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This project provides support to extend                                
              collaborative research currently being carried                                 
              out by the same scientists under an earlier NSF                                
              grant.  The work has already provided better                                   
              understanding of the problem, and resulted in                                  
              several joint publications.  The project fits                                  
              well with the objectives of the U.S.-India                                     
              Cooperative Science Program.
