Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Image Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1993    
File        : a9310322

Award Number: 9310322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chuanshu Ji cji@stat.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research focuses on statistical aspects of two  classes of
              image models: Gibbs random fields (GRFs) on discrete  lattices (Part I) and
              deformable templates on continuous domains  (Part II).  For the first class,
              the purpose is to fit a GRF  which generates images with analytical and visual
              characteristics  similar to those of natural textures.  This includes parameter
               estimation and model selection: the former is an inference  problem of
              estimating the unknown parameter (maybe high  dimensional) contained in the
              energy function that induces the  GRF; the latter is a multiple decision
              problem of choosing an  energy function from a finite set of candidates.  Some 
              complicated issues, such as possible long-range dependence and  indirect
              observations, will also be considered.  The second class  is studied in the
              context of object detection from laser radar  sensors.  The particular objects
              considered are human faces in an  unconstrained environment.  The face
              detection is formulated as a  Bayesian inference problem, which consists of the
              prior (shape  models), the likelihood (data models) and the algorithms 
              (simulation from the posterior and inference based on the  posterior). In
              particular, the simulation will be carried out by  jump-diffusion processes and
              the inference is to identify the  number of object(s) corresponding to the
              maximal posterior  probability.       Texture is a dominant feature in
              representation of various  kinds of images.  The first part of the proposed
              research  attempts to render textures from statistical point of view.  For 
              instance, wood grain shows strong directional tendency but sand  patterns
              appear isotropic and random. Such a difference can be  represented in images
              created by computer graphics using  different parameters for the same model. 
              The second part of the  proposed research will try to answer the questions "Is
              there any  specific object in the picture?" "If yes, how many?"  Here a 
              model-based approach is taken which not only provides an swers to  those
              questions based on the observed images but also quantifies  the chance
              associated with each answer.  Therefore, we should  seek answers that are more
              likely (with greater chance) to be  correct.
