Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Analysis of the Snake Family Boidae Using
               mtDNA Sequence Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1993      
File        : a9310983

Award Number: 9310983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott K. Davis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310983 Davis          The relationships among genera comprising the family
              Boidae (Class Reptilia, Order Squamata, Suborder Serpentes) are not known. 
              This is understandable in view of the uncertainties about relationships among
              snake families and even about the origins of the suborder itself.  The family
              Boidae contains the subfamilies Boinae, Calabariinae, Erycinae, Pythoninae and
              Xenopeltinae and is defined as a monophyletic group based upon the presence of
              a supraorbital bone (Underwood 1967).  Several classifications of the Boidae
              have been proposed, but there is no agreement on member genera, generic
              assignments or relationships.  Some of the difficulties arise from enigmatic
              taxa such as    Loxocemus    and    Calabaria   , which present morphological
              characters that are subject to multiple interpretations.  This study will
              ameliorate some of these problems by utilizing mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
              sequence data collected by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification and
              nucleotide sequencing of the ND4 subunit of the NADH dehydrogenase gene.  The
              sequences will provide molecular data crucial to elucidating the evolutionary
              history of this major vertebrate group.  Available specimens allow coverage of
              95% of all genera (18 of 19) in the family Boidae, including the problematic
              taxa    Calabaria    and    Loxocemus   .  Phylogenetic relationships will be
              inferred from the sequences using the Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony
              (PAUP)version 3.0, computer program (Swofford 1991).  The ND4 gene from   
              Leptotyphlops    (Family Leptotyphlopidae), the putative sister group of the
              Boidae, has been sequenced for this proposal.  Additional outgroups include the
              moni tor lizard genus    Varanus    and the snake genera    Heterodon   
              (Colubridae),    Lampropeltis    (Colubridae),    Micrurus    (Elapidae),   
              Ungaliophis    (Tropidophidae), and    Crotalus    (Viperidae).  Data from
              members of the family Colubridae have been included in this proposal.  The
              sequences obtained from this study will provide a robust molecular data set
              whose framework will allow construction of a classification that can be
              contrasted with other schemes which are based upon more traditional characters.
               The molecular evaluation of the relationships within the Boidae will
              contribute to the conceptual understanding of this very successful evolutionary
              lineage and provide information necessary to understanding Squamate evolution.
              %%%          This project will use DNA sequencing methods to obtain data that
              will allow the investigators to address higher level relationships among
              members of the snake family Boidae.  Knowledge of these relationships will be
              of broader relevance or importance because the origins and relationships of
              snakes, in general, are unresolved and the subject of some controversy. ***    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
