Title       : Engineering Research Deployment Teaching Initiative: Plasma and Beam Induced
               Chemistry for Materials Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1993    
File        : a9310403

Award Number: 9310403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Collins collins@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cameron A. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9195,
Abstract    :
              9310403 Collins          The use of plasma and beam processing of materials is
              ibiquitous in the manufacture of semiconductors and integrated circuits. 
              Plasma processing is also continuouslu elvolving due to the changing needs of
              modern devices.  Nevertheless, plasma processing of optoelectronic, magnetic,
              and microelectronic devices is absent from the curricula of many universities. 
              An elective undergraduate or first year graduate coourse, "Plasma and Beam
              Induced Chemisty for Materials Processing will be developed".  It will
              emphasize the fundamentals of plama based processing (etchinng, deposition,
              ashing) and yet be technically current with regard to manufacturing
              applications.  The course is intended for students about to enter the high
              technology micro /optoelectronics workforce as well as for practicing
              engineers.  Dissemination and deployment of the new course to other
              universities as  well as industry will occur via the preparation of
              transportable instuctional materials including high quality lecture handout,
              videotaped lectures whih are highly correlated.  Hence, students on campus as
              well as at remote sites can easily follow the lectures.  The  pedagogy will be
              improved by 1) transforming the hard copy lecture handoutsss into a set of disk
              based notes (which can be continually updated), and 2) computer enhancement of
              the videotaped lctures to include animation, graphial display of mathermatical
              operations, and digitized video and photographs of plasma processing tools and
              results from these processes.  The fully developed course will be disseminated
              via conventional videotapes and satellite transmission through the National
              Technololgy University.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
