Title       : Effects of Environmental Taxes in the Presence of Other Taxes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9310362

Award Number: 9310362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136387             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence H. Goulder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9310362  Goulder    In recent years there has been a significant increase in
              interest  in the potential of taxes as instruments of environmental policy.  
              This interest has stimulated many simulation studies to investigate  the
              economic costs and benefits of environmental taxes.    To date, nearly all such
              studies have suffered from two important  limitations.  First, they tend to
              assume that the revenues earned  by such taxes are returned to the economy in
              lump-sum fashion.   This may lead to an overstatement of economic costs because
              it  overlooks the offsetting efficiency gains that would accrue from  using
              revenues to reduce existing distortionary taxes.  A second  limitation is the
              assumption that environmental taxes are imposed  in a system without
              pre-existing tax distortions.  Recent  analytical work indicates, however, that
              pre-existing taxes in  commodity and factor markets can importantly influence
              the costs of  newly imposed environmental taxes.    For this study the
              investigator will apply a dynamic general  equilibrium model to evaluate major
              potential environmental tax  initiatives.  The model combines a close attention
              to U.S. taxes  with attention to energy sector interactions, conversions to 
              backstop technologies, and capital adjustment dynamics.  These  features
              distinguish the model from other general equilibrium  models that examine
              energy and environmental tax initiatives and  make it particularly useful for
              evaluating revenue-neutral  environmental taxes in a second best economy.   
              This investigation includes three main tasks.  The first is to  apply the model
              to evaluate major potential environmental tax  initiatives.  These include
              carbon taxes, taxes on carbon and on  sources of other greenhouse gases,
              subsidies to carbon sinks, BTU  taxes, and gasolines taxes.  Under each tax
              several policy variants  will be considered, including alternative methods for
              revenue  replacement and alternative treatments of internationally traded 
              goods.  These policies will be examine d along many dimensions,  including
              effects on aggregate income and consumption and on  industry profits and
              output.  Policies will be compared in terms of  their costs in achieving given
              emissions reductions.    The second main task is to use the model (through
              counterfactual  simulation) to clarify and quantify the relationships between
              the  magnitudes of pre-existing taxes and the costs of achieving  emissions
              reductions.  This work is intended to generate insights  as to the comparative
              costs of revenue-neutral environmental taxes  in nations where pre-existing tax
              rates differ significantly from  those in the U.S.  The third main task is to
              perform econometric  and other work to improve the empirical foundations of the
              model.   The econometric work includes estimation of industry production 
              functions and household demand functions.  ***
