Title       : Grazing and Carbon Cycling by the Epipelagic Crustacean Zooplankton of the
               Arabian Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1998    
File        : a9310599

Award Number: 9310599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $719355             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon L. Smith ssmith@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Smith  9310599         Some of the strongest atomspheric forcing of oceanic 
              properties anywhere on our planet is observed in the Arabian  Sea where
              seasonally reversing monsoon winds drive fast-  flowing, vertically extensive
              currents, complex eddy fields,  broad-scale, open ocean upwelling, coastal
              upwelling and  pronounced mixed-layer deepening.  Cycles of production in  this
              region are seasonal oscillations.  During the southwest  monsoon season
              (June-September inclusive), primary  productivity is maximal owing to strong
              winds which not only  cause the uplift of deep water rich in nutrient, but also
               deliver aeolian dust to the surface layer of this tropical  ocean.  During the
              northeast monsoon (October-November  inclusive) and intermonsoon periods,
              primary productivity is  markedly reduced.  Biomass of zooplankton and
              secondary  productivity are also elevated during the southwest monsoon  season.
               Based upon earlier studies off Somalia, the  epipelagic zooplankton off Oman
              is hypothesized to undergo  significant changes in species composition from one
              monsoon  season to another, with biomass during the southwest monsoon 
              dominated by rapidly growing meso- and macrozooplanktonic  grazers such as
              Calanoides and Eucalanus.  These grazers  exist in reduced abundance at
              subsurface depths during other  seasons.  The seasonal appearance of relatively
              large, fast  growing grazers determines, to a  large extent, the grazing 
              impact of the zooplanktonic community on the phytoplankton  assemblage that
              develops in the Arabian Sea during the  southwest monsoon (upwelling).  The
              grazing impact in turn  modulates the flux of carbon to depth and is an
              important  factor in the spatial and temporal patterns in carbon  deposition in
              this region.  In the Arabian Sea off Oman,  carbon fluxes driven by large,
              seasonal changes in the  grazing community of the upwelling area can be studied
              in  combination with investigation of the grazing contribution  to carbon
              fluxes associated with the perennially  oligotrophi c region of the central
              Arabian Sea.  A steep  gradient in oxygen concentration located at
              approximately  150 meters acts to restrict most epipelagic grazers to a 
              surface layer above this depth.  The role of the epipelagic  meso- and
              macrozooplanktonic grazers will be studied using:  multiple opening/closing
              nets (MOCNESS) to determine  distribution and abundance with particular
              attention to the  oxic-suboxic interface  and incubation experiments to 
              determine ingestion, fecal pellet production, and growth  rates
