Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Patterns and Molecular Divergence among
               Intercontinentally Disjunct Species of Styrax (Styracaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1993     
File        : a9310979

Award Number: 9310979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Thomas Philbrick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rancho Santa Ana Bot Gdn
	      1500 North College Avenue
	      Claremont, CA  917113157    714/626-3922

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310979  Philbrick and Fritsch       Intercontinental plant disjunctions are
              ideal systems with  which to examine models of geohistorical change.  The
              flowering  plant genus Styrax provides one such system, with several species 
              of the Series Imbricatae occurring in California and in the  Mediterranean
              region.  This group plus 21 other living plant groups  sharing a similar
              distributional pattern have been proposed as  "Madrean-Tethyan" links based on
              morphological similarity: relicts  of a once widespread dry habitat-adapted
              vegetation belt stretching  from southwestern North America trans-Atlantically
              to central Asia  in the early Tertiary.  Alternative hypotheses for the
              existence of  these intercontinental disjunctions claim no evidence for a 
              Madrean-Tethyan corridor and maintain that taxa on either side of  the Atlantic
              only appear closely related, but have actually been  derived independently from
              mesic ancestors that migrated across  either the Bering or the North Atlantic
              land bridges.  The  objective of the work by graduate student Fritsch under the
               direction of Dr. Philbrick is to test the Madrean-Tethyan  continuity
              hypothesis using Styrax as a representative group by  producing independent
              lines of evidence generated from  morphological, DNA, and protein data.   %%%  
                  Genetic distance measures generated from isozyme and  chloroplast DNA
              variation within and among populations of Styrax  will estimate taxon
              divergence times, whereas phylogenetic  reconstruction of Series Imbricatae
              using morphological,  chloroplast DNA, and nuclear ribosomal DNA characters
              will test the  monophyletic status of the group.  Analysis of the data will 
              provide information indicating which model of Madrean-Tethyan  history is
              likely to be correct as well as provide a sound  classification of these plants
              for continuing taxonomic and  evolutionary studies.  ***
