Title       : REG: Engineering Research Equipment: A Mass Spectrometer with Ion Monitoring
               Capability for Measuring Ions and Molecular Species in Plasma Discharges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1993       
File        : a9310654

Award Number: 9310654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65043              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian E. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Radio-frequency plasma discharges are used in the                              
              semiconductor industry for plasma deposition and plasma                        
              etching.  In a typical reactor, a radio-frequency (RF) voltage                 
              is applied between two parallel electrodes inside a vacuum                     
              chamber at 0.01 to 10 Torr.  The electric fields created                       
              accelerate electrons to very high energy levels.  These                        
              electrons collide with molecules to produce more electrons,                    
              ions, and highly reactive neutral radical species.  These                      
              chemical species then react with each other and solid surfaces                 
              according to the particular application.  Because the                          
              resultant composition of the gas phase will affect the rates                   
              and qualities of the etching or deposition, it is useful to                    
              sample the gas composition through a small orifice to a mass                   
              analyzer.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Besides the role of neutral reactive species, the bombardment                  
              of the solid (wafer) surface by ions is also important.                        
              Because of the electrical interaction of electrons and ions in                 
              the plasma, a plasma "sheath" is formed near any solid                         
              surface.  This sheath contains an electric field that repels                   
              electrons and keeps them better contained within the center of                 
              the plasma.  The same electric field will accelerate positive                  
              ions towards the solid surface.  Therefore, the ions are                       
              directed to the surface with substantial energy (mean energies                 
              of a few eV to several hundred eV).  This directed, high-                      
              energy ion bombardment at solid surfaces produces directional                  
              etching in plasma etching applications, and it can alter film                  
              properties in plasma assisted chemical vapor deposition (CVD)                  
              of thin films.  Because of this important role of ions, the PI                 
              plans to sample this ion bombardment with subsequent analysis                  
              of the ion energy distribution and the composition of this ion                 
              stream.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Mass spectrometry is a technique to determine the composition                  
              of either of these sampled neutral species or ions.  In the                    
              case of sampling uncharged molecules, these molecules first                    
              pass through an ionizing chamber where they are bombarded by                   
              electrons with sufficient energy to ionize a substantial                       
              fraction of the molecules.  For sampling the ions directly                     
              from the plasma, this step is not needed.  Once the ions are                   
              created or sampled, they pass through a mass filter                            
              (quadrupole) that allows ions with a narrow range of atomic                    
              mass to electrical charge ration (m/q) to pass through.  The                   
              flux of ions that pass through the filter at this m/q are then                 
              collected and measured with a Faraday cage or electron                         
              multiplier.  Thus by tuning through a range of m/q, the                        
              distribution of ions with particular m/q is measured.                          
                                                                                             
              This is a Research Equipment Grant (REG) to purchase a                         
              quadrupole mass spectrometer with ion monitoring capabilities                  
              which will be used to examine the neutral molecular species                    
              and ionic species from plasma discharges and a chemical vapor                  
              deposition reactor.
