Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Examination of the Relationship Between the
               Skunks (Mephitinae) and the Rest of the Mustelidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9310553

Award Number: 9310553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Bickham  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney L. Honeycutt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry W. Dragoo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310553  Bickham and Dragoo       Although individual species of the family
              Mustelidae (weasels,  badgers, otters, and skunks) in the mammalian order
              Carnivora are  easy to recognize, taxonomic relationships among them and their 
              phylogenetic connections are problematic, with numerous conflicting  hypotheses
              based on morphological and chromosomal evidence.  The  diversity of
              morphological form, of behaviors, and of ecological  preferences among
              mustelids is thought to represent several  instances of parallel or convergent
              evolutionary change since the  Miocene.  The subfamily Mephitinae, the skunks,
              in particular is  recognized as extremely divergent and perhaps is the earliest
               evolutionary lineage in the group.  The purpose of work by graduate  student
              Dragoo under the supervision of Dr. Bickham is to acquire  new DNA nucleotide
              sequence data for comparative analysis of  mutational difference among all
              species of skunks and among  representatives in the four other subfamilies of
              Mustelidae.  Both  mitochondrial and nuclear genes are targeted for analysis,
              to  provide evidence on both maternal lineages and biparental  inheritance. 
              %%%       Conflicting interpretations of traditional morphological  characters
              in mammal taxonomy have left unresolved the phylogeny of  the family
              Mustelidae, the weasels, badgers, otters, and skunks of  the world.  An
              independent and robust dataset of DNA nucleotide  sequences from both
              mitochondrial and nuclear genes will help  resolve this problem, and in turn
              provide direction for  evolutionary analysis of biogeography, behavioral
              changes, and  ecological shifts.
