Title       : Electric Field Induced Phase Transitions of Polymer Solutions and Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1995       
File        : a9310506

Award Number: 9310506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197507             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald G. Fuller ggf@rio.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9310506  Fuller    The morphology and phase behavior of polymer mixtures can be 
              influenced by the application of external fields.  This research  examines the
              manipulation of polymer mixture morphology by the  use of electric fields. 
              Preliminary results on polymer  solutions are offered that demonstrate a
              variety of new  phenomena, such as electric field-induced de-mixing  and re- 
              mixing of polymer mixtures.  These results suggest the  possibility of
              systematically controlling the interfacial  properties of polymer blends, and
              the manipulation of their  domain structure.  Such control could be used in the
              processing  of polymer mixtures to arrive at specific bulk material  properties
              and improve interfacial mixing.    The research extends these preliminary
              results to include  polymer blends and polymer gels.  In addition, both upper
              and  lower critical solution temperature systems will be examined,  since the
              specific shape of the phase boundary is predicted to  determine whether
              application of an electric field will cause  either de-mixing (UCST systems) or
              re-mixing (LCST systems).   Finally, the project considers the simultaneous
              application of  electric and hydrodynamic fields, since real processes normally
               include the presence of flow.  Since hydrodynamic forces are  also known to
              affect the phase behavior of polymer liquids, a  nonlinear coupling  of the
              effects of electric and flow fields  would be expected.    The research
              combines experimentation and theory.  Small angle  light scattering and
              scattering dichroism are used to measure  the structure of polymer mixtures
              subject to external flow  fields  Both experiments methods provide measures of
              anisotropy  in concentration fluctuations and can be used in situ.  The 
              theoretical analysis utilizes current mean field approaches  whereby the
              dynamics of concentration fluctuations can be  expressed in terms of the
              relative importance of fluxes due to  the external fields and relaxation
              mechanisms arising from  osmotic forces.  ***
