Title       : Gender Differences in Anatomy of Non-Reproductive Brain Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1993    
File        : a9310945

Award Number: 9310945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140631             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice M. Juraska jjuraska@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
              9310945  Juraska    Dramatic neuroanatomical differences have been found between
              the  sexes in brain regions that are involved in reproductive  function. More
              recently, sex differences in neuronal organization  have been reported in parts
              of the brain that are associated with  cognitive rather than reproduction
              function.  Indeed, the  hippocampus, and the cerebral cortex, including the
              corpus  callosum, exhibit sexual dimorphisms at the cellular level.  Much 
              excitement has been generated about the possibility of sex  differences in the
              size of the corpus callosum since this  structure is the bundle of nerve fibers
              that connect the left and  right hemispheres of the brain.  While some
              laboratories report  striking sex differences in its shape and size, others
              find that  extensive individual variability hinders any meaningful 
              interpretation.  Dr. Juraska, during her previous NSF support,  reported that
              the gross size of the corpus callosum in rats did not  differ between the
              sexes, however, females have more axons in a  specific region, the splenium, of
              the corpus callosum than males.   These findings suggest that the cellular
              differences between the  sexes are more complicated that the size difference
              indicates.   Dr. Juraska also found that the number of neurons within the 
              binocular region of the visual cortex is sexually dimorphic.  She  will now
              continue her work to understand sex differences in the  neuronal organization
              and behavioral function of the largest area  of the rat brain, the cerebral
              cortex and its major interconnecting  pathway, the corpus callosum.  Dr.
              Juraska will determine whether  there is a hormonal basis for the observed sex
              differences and  the role that cell death plays as a mechanism underlying the 
              development of the observed dimorphism.  Moreover, she will  initiate a search
              for the functional significance of the  morphological sex differences.  This
              remains a controversial but  important area.  Her results will have broad
              implications for  understanding the import ance of lateralization and its 
              relationship to possible sex differences in verbal and spatial  learning
              abilities in humans.  ***
