Title       : The Cotopaxi Subsistence Project--Phase I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1993       
File        : a9310713

Award Number: 9310713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Gumerman IV   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary J. Weismantel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Occidental College
	      1600 Campus Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900413384    213/259-2500

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. George Gumerman                 
              and Mary Weismantel will conduct archaeological research in the                
              Angamarca region which is located on the western slopes of the                 
              Cordillera Occidental of Ecuador. They will examine a total area               
              of ca. 96 square kilometers which includes the important                       
              prehistoric political center of Angamarca la Vieja. The main goal              
              of this first pilot stage of what is conceived as a long-term                  
              project is to test different archaeological survey techniques                  
              both to determine the range of cultural materials and sites                    
              present and also to discover the best technique for locating                   
              sites in this tropical environment. The team will employ a                     
              stratified random sampling technique to examine three primary                  
              zones: riverine, lowland and upland. Within each zone selected                 
              areas will be surveyed. Once sites are located, their boundaries               
              will be determined, a sketch map drawn, and a fraction of the                  
              cultural materials collected for analysis. Three multicomponent                
              sites will be chosen for test excavations which will focus on                  
              recovering temporally diagnostic artifacts and subsistence                     
              remains. On this basis a tentative chronology can be constructed               
              and the first step of a subsistence reconstruction carried out.                
                                                                                             
              Although the archaeology of this region is not well known, it is               
              clear that the Inca empire, centered in Peru to the South,                     
              extended this far North. Drs. Gumerman and Weismantel are                      
              interested in how, in this fringe of the empire the Inca                       
              maintained their control and how local inhabitants adapted to                  
              their incorporation into the empire. Ultimately, they plan to                  
              study contrasting environmental zones in Ecuador and compare both              
              across regions and across time. They will establish a pre-Inca                 
              baseline and use this to determine post-Inca contact changes.                  
              They will focus on utilization of food since manipulation of this              
              essential resource can serve both as a mechanism of social                     
              control and as a marker of status. Before such issues can be                   
              addressed however, it is necessary both to determine how best to               
              work in this little known region and to develop a detailed                     
              chronology.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will shed new               
              light on how large complex societies develop and are maintained.               
              It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and                    
              develop analytic techniques which, hopefully, will be applicable               
              in many archaeological situations. It will also further the                    
              career of two young and very promising scientists.
