Title       : Workshop on Geographic Contributions to Global Change Research: Atlanta,
               Georgia; April 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1994       
File        : a9310459

Award Number: 9310459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16824              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald F. Abler rabler@aag.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc of Amer Geographers
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
                   As research on global change has evolved in recent years,                 
              the need for greater understanding of the complex interactions                 
              among human and natural systems has become increasingly apparent.              
              Because of long-standing interests and expertise in the analysis               
              of human-environmental interactions at a variety of scales,                    
              geographers have been especially well suited to play central                   
              roles in the development and conduct of research on the human and              
              other dimensions of global change.  While a significant number of              
              geographers have stepped forward and turned their scholarly                    
              attention to this important topic, many other geographers have                 
              not recognized the potential for using their conceptual                        
              frameworks and research approaches to address these important                  
              problems.  This award will provide support for a workshop on                   
              geographic contributions to global change research.  The workshop              
              will be held in Atlanta, Georgia, in early April 1993,                         
              immediately prior to the start of the Annual Meeting of the                    
              Association of American Geographers (AAG), the largest                         
              professional society of research-oriented geographers in the U.S.              
              This workshop marks a critical stage in joint work that has been               
              conducted by AAG leaders together with NSF Geography and Regional              
              Science Program officers.  Geographers who have been leading                   
              researchers on topics related to the human dimensions of global                
              environmental change will assist AAG leaders and NSF program                   
              officers in the selection of roughly 50 participants and in the                
              conduct of the conference.  The workshop will consist of a series              
              of working-group discussions interspersed among plenary sessions               
              at which all participants will meet to consider salient points                 
              raised in their group discussions.  The outcome of the conference              
              will be a number of articles in widely disseminated publications               
              of the AAG and its specialty groups.  These articles should help               
              identify important lines of inquiry to be pursued by geographers               
              in one or more of three general approaches.  Another outcome of                
              the workshop should be new knowledge by NSF program officers of                
              research needs that must be addressed in order to stimulate                    
              greater involvement of geographers in basic and applied inquiries              
              into the human and other dimensions of global change.                          
                   This workshop should facilitate the more active involvement               
              of geographers in research on global change by identifying ways                
              that current theoretical frameworks and methodological approaches              
              can be adapted to address a variety of problems.  The workshop                 
              also should assist NSF program officers in determining new                     
              strategies that the foundation might use to facilitate and                     
              support basic research by geographers and other spatially                      
              oriented scientists on this critical topic.
