Title       : The LHRH System and Reproductive Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1995       
File        : a9310267

Award Number: 9310267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328429             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan C. King jking@opal.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edythe L. Anthony  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9111,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9310267  King         Unlocking the mysteries of infertility will require a
              better  understanding of luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH), a 
              decapeptide responsible for the activation of the pituitary-gonadal  function. 
              Neurons in the brain that synthesize and release LHRH  are dispersed as
              individual cells or small clusters of cells across  broad region of the base of
              the brain which includes the preoptic  area and hypothalamus.  Dr. King
              believes that the positioning of  LHRH neurons, although diffuse, are
              exquisitely regulated to  facilitate integration of multiple internal and
              external factors to  synchronize secretion and optimize reproductive success. 
              Using a  combination of anatomical, histochemical and molecular tools, she 
              will continue to examine the heterogeneity of LHRH neuronal  subpopulations. 
              She will identify the specific groups of neurons  that are synthesizing LHRH at
              time when it is important for the  induction of ovulation.  These neurons will
              then be reconstructed  and studied in three dimensions using computer assisted
              analyses.   The results from these studies will determine if a certain group of
               brain cells are critical to ovulation and reproduction.  Dr. King  will also
              examine a dynamic model whereby non-neural or glial  elements influence the
              secretion of LHRH from ends of the nerve  cells into the blood capillaries to
              enhances its transport to the  pituitary gland.  She will evaluate LHRH
              neurons/glial interactions  in response to various hormone treatments that are
              known to  influence ovulation.  This work will significantly expand our 
              understanding of the fine-tuning mechanism involved in LHRH release  occurring
              under physiological conditions.  The outcome of these  studies should have
              critical impact on the understanding of  infertility and will serve as an
              impetus for its treatment.    ***
