Title       : Collaborative Research: A New Approach to Understanding Selection and Nutrition
               in Scyphomedusae (RUI)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1993  
File        : a9310963

Award Number: 9310963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  1993   
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120473             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Costello costello@providence.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Providence College
	      River Avenue and Eaton Street
	      Providence, RI  02918    401/865-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9310963  COSTELLO    While the importance of scyphomedusae as predators in
              planktonic  communities has ben amply demonstrated, we are not presently able 
              to clearly predict which components of planktonic populations will  be affected
              by scyphomedusan predation.  Conventional methodologies  such as laboratory
              "black box" feeding studies or gut contents from  field samples have been
              valuable but insufficient approaches to  resolve this issue because they do not
              reveal how the feeding  interactions occur.  The how is necessary to predict
              which prey  will be consumed in novel situations.    A new approach will be
              developed in this project that combines the  separate expertise of two
              investigators specializing in video and  conventional methods for the study of
              prey selection.  First,  laboratory work will quantify relationships between
              medusan body  plan, fluid motions and prey capture.  Second, field studies of 
              prey selection by gut analyses will determine congruence of an  evolving model
              with in situ selection patterns.  Third, mesocosm  studies with controlled
              predator-prey conditions will critically  evaluate the model via hypothesis
              testing.      The research will center on the ephyral through young adult 
              transition period of two abundant and cosmopolitan scyphomedusae,  Auerlia
              aurita and Cyanea capillata.  While sharing similar ephyral  morphologies, the
              adult forms diverge widely in body plan.  The  results of this work will
              contribute to our understanding of these  specific predators, the ephyral form
              shared by most scyphomedusae  and, ultimately, to the mechanics of
              predator-prey interactions in  planktonic communities.
