Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Television News and Attributions of
               Responsibility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9310043

Award Number: 9310043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6760               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Peffley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310043  Peffley    An important prerequisite of democratic government is that
              citizens  have the opportunity to hold elected officials accountable for  their
              actions.  In order for such opportunities to be effective,  however, citizens
              must base judgments of political responsibility  on accessible and relevant
              information provided by the mass media.   Since most citizens rely heavily on
              television for such  information, a growing body of research in political
              science has  begun to investigate the way the network news broadcasts often 
              prevent citizens from making the most meaningful assessments of  political
              responsibility.  Past research, however, has not examined  the importance of
              visual stimuli in affecting citizens' judgments  of who is responsible for
              various national problems.  This is  unfortunate given that television is
              primarily a visual medium  where important political information is presented
              through visual,  as opposed to textual or auditory, channels.      This
              doctoral dissertation research investigation represents one of  the first
              systematic investigations of the importance of visual  images on citizens
              assessments of political responsibility  conducted in political science.  In
              addition, while prior studies  have focused extensively upon assessments
              between individual and  societal responsibility, this research will investigate
              the  influence that the media has upon citizens' evaluations of the  president,
              and, to this date, no such studies have been conducted  concerning Congress and
              congressional incumbents.  Consequently,  this investigation will also
              investigate how coverage from the  network news media influences viewers'
              evaluations of the  institutions of the Presidency and Congress as well as the 
              respective incumbents. Specifically, the researcher conducts a  content
              analysis of network news coverage of important political  issues as well as a
              series of experiments intended to fill in these  gaps left by prior research. 
              ***
