Title       : Structure and Chemical Interactions at Model Polymer Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9310151

Award Number: 9310151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309875             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Allara dla3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1773,9161,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9310151  Allara    Correlations of structure and chemistry at molecular and
              polymer  interfaces will be generated for two types of materials systems:   1)
              flexible chain molecules and polymers adsorbed as thin films at  solid surfaces
              and 2) inorganic films, specifically metals,  deposited (in vacuo) onto
              molecular and polymer surfaces.  All  correlations will be driven to be as
              quantitative as possible by  the use of well-defined substrates prepared from
              self-assembled  monolayers with precisely controlled arrays of selected
              functional  groups and by the application of advanced, quantitative 
              characterization tools, sensitive to molecular features at the 
              monolayer-submonolayer level.  The key concept of a pinning  lattice, defined
              as the specific array of sites upon which  adsorption or nucleation takes place
              when an interface is formed,  interrelates the experiments with the above two
              systems and will  guide the course of this work.  In the case of flexible chain
               molecule adsorption, correlations will be developed which relate  the in-plane
              arrangements, dictated  by the pinning lattice, with  the chemical bonding
              (potential well depth) and the associated  dynamics of mobility of the
              adsorption (pinning) sites with the  out-of-plane structures which develop in
              the adsorbed (self-  assembled) chain assembly phases.  These correlations will
              be  unified by the development of a simple theoretical framework which  will
              focus on attempts to describe the distribution of free volume  (defect
              configurations).  In the case of the metal atom deposition  (in-vacuo),
              correlations will be developed which relate the  nucleation (pinning) site
              (functional groups) distributions and  their chemistry (metal-organic) to the
              morphology of the metal  films.  This particular effort will focus on
              experimental in-vacuo  deposition studies, monitored by insitu infrared
              spectroscopy, x-  ray photoemission and spectroscopic ellipsometry, but also
              will  include limited theoretical studies in collaboration with others.     The
              expected outcome of the above efforts is the development of a  coherent
              framework, both theoretical and experimental, for  designing widely varying,
              precisely defined functionalized  monolayers and for understanding the
              adsorption/chemisorption  properties over a wide range of adsorbates from
              near-equilibrium  molecular adsorption to highly exothermic metal atom
              chemisorption.   The research will be designed to efficiently relate these
              results  to practical materials science issues involving polymer surface and 
              interface properties such as adhesion and wetting and to  metallization of
              polymers.  ***
