Title       : Hydrothermal Synthesis of Novel Solid-State Ternary and Quaternary Metal
               Telluride Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9310431

Award Number: 9310431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jing Li jingli@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,9221,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9310431  Li    The proposed work is a Research Planning Grant for Women
              Scientists  and Engineers.  It is concerned with plans and approaches in the 
              preparation, crystallization and structure characterization of  novel
              solid-state ternary and quaternary metal telluride compounds  employing
              hydrothermal synthesis.  Initial studies will focus on  the preparation of
              precursors, largely the binary alkali-metal  polytellurides that are to be used
              both as reactants and  mineralizers.  In subsequent hydrothermal reactions,
              additional  metals or metal complexes will be selected for reaction with the 
              precursors, leading to the desired ternary or quaternary phases.   Recent work
              on the solid-state ternary transition metal tellurides  has revealed a number
              of unusual structural features leading to  interesting magnetic and electric
              behaviors exhibited by these  compounds.  Most of them adopt unique low
              dimensional (chain or  layer) structures.  Many contain extended metal networks
              with  strong metal-metal bonding.  An increasing interest in the studies  of
              the tellurides has been exhibited in the last few years, and a  great potential
              exists for synthesis of novel telluride materials  with useful properties and
              applications.    Most known solid-state telluride compounds have been prepared
              at  high temperatures, and little has been explored in the lower  temperature
              regime.  The need to develop low temperature synthetic  techniques is apparent.
               Hydrothermal synthesis has been proved to  be an important and promising
              method of relatively low-temperature  synthesis and crystal growth.  It has
              been widely used and is  finding increasing applications in solid state
              chemistry and  material science.  While numerous novel molecular and extended 
              systems, such as zeolites, quartz, transition metal phosphates,  oxides, and
              main group sulfides, have been synthesized or  crystallized utilizing this
              technique,including the recent success  in the synthesis of several early and
              late transition metal  polyselenides, vi rtually no work has been conducted on
              the solid-  state telluride compounds.  ***
