Title       : The Cultural Foundations of Industrial Revolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9310699

Award Number: 9310699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret C. Jacob   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New School Univ
	      66 West 12th Street
	      New York, NY  100118603    212/741-5600

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9310699  Jacob  The relationship between science and commerce plays a crucial
              but  little understood role in modern society.  For much of its  existence as a
              nation, for example, US entrepreneurs "imported"  scientific work from European
              nations to use in the development of  American industry.  Currently, Japanese
              entrepreneurs are said to  be taking advantage of scientific and technological
              knowledge  produced in the US and Europe.  But how do entrepreneurs take 
              advantage of scientific developments in order to establish  commercially
              profitable technological enterprises?  One way to get  at this critical
              question is to examine the historical record. This  is what Professor Margaret
              Jacob is doing.     Professor Jacob, working with six to eight graduate student
               research assistants over the three years of this grant, is  continuing her
              study of the cultural foundations of Western  industrialization.  Her goal is
              to show the dynamic interaction of  industrial culture with political and
              economic realities within  national and comparative contexts.  The nations she
              is comparing  are Britain, France, the Netherlands and Belgium (then the
              Austrian  Netherlands).  She is undertaking a study of the cultural history  of
              the Industrial Revolution that factors scientific and  technological knowledge
              into a complex picture of the values,  attitudes and beliefs that permitted
              industrialization to occur.   Her model depends upon the techniques of the
              cultural historian  trained in the history of science and technology.  The
              focus of  this research -- to be conducted in three languages in libraries  and
              archives of Wales, Birmingham, Manchester, Paris, Troyes,  Brussels, Mons,
              Rotterdam and the Hague -- is the actors in the  industrialization process:
              entrepreneurs, agents of governments,  members of scientific societies,
              scientific lecturers, and  engineers, most in their home countries, a few as
              foreign travelers  seeking to sell or buy (or steal!) skills and knowledge. 
              ***
