Title       : Analysis of Organizational Structure and Gender Stratification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1993    
File        : a9310557

Award Number: 9310557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin T. Leicht   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Fennell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310557  LEICHT  One of the most important developments in the workplace over
              the  past twenty years has been the movement of large numbers of women  into
              professional work.  This has occurred in a context of growing  dissatisfaction
              with differences in professional opportunities  available to men and women in
              bureaucratic organizations.  In spite  of the public recognition this problem
              has received, there has been  little systematic study of careers among male and
              female  professionals and little understanding of when and how the careers  of
              male and female professionals diverge.  This project will  provide answers to
              fundamental questions regarding gender  stratification among professionals,
              such as the processes that lead  male and female professionals to change jobs
              and the labor market  forces that lead them to accept positions in corporations
              with  different characteristics.  This information will be of vital  importance
              for understanding workplace discrimination in a context  of expanding
              opportunities for women in the professions.    The study examines the growth
              and divergence of opportunities for  professional men and women by studying
              career development within  corporate legal departments in large U.S.
              corporations.  The  project will be conducted in two phases.  The first phase
              will  attempt to determine what characteristics of corporations and legal 
              departments lead to high concentrations of women within certain  departments
              and job titles.  The second phase of the project will  look at factors
              affecting job changes among individual department  members, focusing on the
              effects of early career events on the  movements of male and female
              professionals.  The data for this  project will be taken from successive waves
              of the Law and Business  Directory of Corporate Counsel (1980-1992) and be
              supplemented with  corporation level information provided by other published
              sources.  ***
