Title       : Transnational Diffusion of Legal Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9310007

Award Number: 9310007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95320              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristin Ruggiero   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9310007  RUGGIERO  This project will examine the impact of European legal
              science on  the modernizing processes of Latin America.  Legal professionals 
              and legal interpretations of scientific theories about human  behavior played a
              key role in the shaping of Argentine history and  society.  Although Argentina
              was a post-colonial nation at this  time, it remained part of Europe's
              "informal empire."  Thus,  Argentina's modernizing processes, as was true of
              much of Latin  America, were greatly influenced by and intertwined with
              European  models.  The study focuses on Argentina to illuminate the complex 
              intellectual and cultural relationship that existed between Latin  America and
              Europe, and the broader international world and history  that legal science
              shared.  Its interdisciplinary approach will  result in bringing together a
              variety of published works and and  previously unstudied archival materials on
              legal science found in  both Argentina and Europe to provide a deeper insight
              into how the  transnational diffusion of scientific thought influenced lives
              and  actions.  This research will make an important contribution to our 
              empirical knowledge and theoretical understanding of transnational  processes
              in the relationship between law and society.    The investigator will examine
              three main sources:  the dossiers of  criminal court cases, the archival
              records of institutions of  detention, and published legal treatises.  The
              field research will  be conducted in Buenos Aires, London, Paris, Rome and
              Bologna.  The  investigator will produce a monograph on law and society in 
              nineteenth century Argentina and a collection of primary texts,  translated and
              edited, which document legal science in this period.  ***
