Title       : ENGINEERING RESEARCH EQUIPMENT: A Real-Time Processor and Diagnostic Equipment
               for Closed-Loop Control Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9310735

Award Number: 9310735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40792              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis S. Bernstein dsbaero@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              E. G. Gilbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luis P. Bernal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Werner J. A. Dahm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent T. Coppola  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310735  Bernstein  The Department of Aerospace Engineering at the University of
               Michigan will purchase a real-time control processor and related  diagnostic
              equipment which will be dedicated to support research  in control-system
              engineering.  The equipment will be used for  several research projects,
              including in particular:  control of  unstable plants, control with actuator
              constraints, control of  rotating spacecraft, control of acoustic vibration,
              control of  flexible structures, and control of fluids.  Control -system
              technology is an enabling technology for many  complex, high performance
              systems.  In many of these applications  the control system is so essential
              that the system simply cannot  operate without it.  On the other hand, failure
              of the control  system can have dire consequences.  Graphic examples include
              the  Chernobyl disaster and Airbus crashes.  In view of the importance  and
              risks of control-system technology, this proposal seeks  laboratory equipment
              in the form or real-time control processor  and related diagnostic equipment to
              allow researchers to carry  out a broad range of experiments in feedback
              control technology.  The proposed real-time processor is the central piece of 
              equipment needed to carry out closed-loop control experiments.   With this
              equipment, new control laws represented in a high level  language can be
              transformed into real-time assembly code for  high-speed execution.  This
              capability will allow researchers to  implement linear and nonlinear
              controllers designed for a variety  of applications.  Among the projects that
              will utilize the  equipment are two projects that focus on fundamental problems
              in  feedback technology, namely, control of unstable plants and  control with
              actuator constraints, as well as four projects that  focus on specific
              applications, namely, control of spacecraft,  acoustics, structures, and
              fluids.  ***
