Title       : A Study of the 1992 Presidential Campaign Elite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1994      
File        : a9310507

Award Number: 9310507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78376              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Herrera Richard.Herrera@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Warren E. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research investigation explores the relevant attitudes and                
              campaign activities of delegates to the 1992 Republican and                    
              Democratic party presidential nominating conventions.  The                     
              delegates are important because they are not only involved in the              
              process of selecting the presidential nominees, they also mobilize             
              and provide the resources that sustain presidential election                   
              campaigns.  They not only help elect the president, they provide               
              the context within which a new president shapes his administration.            
              They also help define the political parties and structure the                  
              political images and the institutional bases of partisan activities            
              for the party's rank and file as well as for the larger electorate.            
                                                                                             
              The activity of these partisans is usually not limited to                      
              attendance at the national nominating conventions.  They are also              
              occupied with local, county or state political affairs.  The                   
              delegates include elected public officials and party officers at               
              every level, as well as many who have no aspiration for a political            
              career.  They by no means include all of the active participants in            
              presidential electoral politics, but they do represent virtually               
              all types and categories of presidential campaign activists.                   
                                                                                             
              The study employs a mail questionnaire sent to all delegates from              
              both parties attending the nominating conventions in 1992.  It  is             
              a multi-purpose study organized around three sets of objectives.               
              The first objective is an analysis of the level of agreement                   
              between the goals of the political elite and those of the mass                 
              electorate.  Second, the investigators expand previous studies of              
              the communication networks among the individuals located at all                
              levels of presidential political activity.  Finally, they place                
              these two objectives within the context of the transitions taking              
              place in and around both parties.  The Democrats have opted for a              
              new generation of leadership, while the GOP is facing turnover in              
              its leadership.  The comparisons of the 1992 elites with their                 
              counterparts in the post-Carter and post-Reagan eras will be an                
              invaluable documentation of change in contemporary politics.  The              
              data collection will be timely because the immediate baseline for              
              monitoring changes within the parties has been established with                
              comparable data collections in 1980, 1984 and 1988.
