Title       : Problems in Gravitation (Physics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1997  
File        : a9310083

Award Number: 9310083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $736000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Matzner richard@helmholtz.ph.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9310083 Matzner          A study will be performed of relativistic systems,
              especially as applied to the interaction of black holes, cosmology and the
              formation of the elements in cosmology, and to tests of General Relativity in
              near Earth experiments.          The black hole and cosmological studies will
              be primarily numerical.  In order to predict the expected gravitational wave
              signals in the LIGO detector, the orbital dynamics and merger of astrophysical
              black holes will be numerically simulated.  A number of techniques, including
              adaptive multigrid finite differencing will be employed (Adaptive multigrid
              permits arbitrarily fine resolution at important points in the simulation). 
              Obtaining useful signal predictions from black hole evolution requires
              extremely high accuracy in the numerical development.  The codes will be
              implemented on massively parallel computers (such as the Thinking Machine CM 5)
              which have the memory and the computing power to handle these large scale
              simulations.  The end product will be a catalog of wave forms, relevant to
              producing appropriate detection algorithms for LIGO.  This waveform catalog in
              particular will allow extraction of binary orbital information as well as of
              the black hole characteristics before and after merger of the two holes.       
                Cosmological studies will concentrate on the formation of elements in the
              early universe, particularly in maintaining and upgrading existing computer
              codes at Texas.  Areas to be emphasized will be newly measured nuclear reaction
              rates, the extension of nuclear reaction chains to include heavier elements,
              the refinement of numerical techniques in these codes, and the porti ng of the
              nucleosynthesis codes to large parallel machines.  Other aspects of cosmology
              to be studied include the formation of structure in the early universe and the
              implementation of computer codes accurately describing it; and the statistics
              of gravitational lensing, (multiple images of distant QSOs caused by an
              intervening cluster of galaxies), and models of gravitational lenses. ***      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
