Title       : Turbulent Fluxes and their Relation to Surface Heterogeneity and Transient
               Mesoscale Motions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9310576

Award Number: 9310576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316446             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry J. Mahrt mahrt@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9310576  Mahrt         The objective of this work is to analyze several new and 
              existing data sets toward the goal of improving our understanding  of the
              response of boundary-layer flow to heterogeneous surfaces  ranging from
              multiple, well defined, discontinuities to more  complex surface heterogeneity.
               The new data include aircraft,  tower and limited remote sensing observations
              and allow examination  of classes of heterogeneity in detail not previously
              considered.         One of the goals is to examine the main influences on the
              area  averaged surface fluxes.  These influences include:  1) enhancement  of
              the momentum flux associated with pressure drag induced by  scatter trees,
              forest edges and other obstacles, 2) non-equilibrium  effects in transition
              zones downstream from changes of surface  conditions, 3) extra Reynolds terms
              associated with spatial  variability and the nonlinear relationship between
              fluxes and  gradients and 4) direct transport by mesoscale motions.  To 
              approach this problem, the flow observed by repeated aircraft runs  over the
              same track is formally decomposed into turbulence,  transient mesoscale motions
              and stationary mesoscale motions  (primarily associated with surface
              heterogeneity).  The modulation  of the turbulence flux by the two mesoscale
              components will be  considered in detail.         From a more practical point
              of view, the above influences on  the area averaged flux will be implicitly
              incorporated into  calculation of effective roughness lengths and exchange 
              coefficients corresponding to the area averaged fluxes.  These  calculations
              will be preceded by an analysis of flux sampling  errors which will include
              some research on the techniques for  estimating flux errors.  Proposed
              theoretical work will be limited  to interpretation of the mesoscale
              circulations over heterogeneous  terrain in terms of several existing linear
              and nonlinear  predictions.  ***
