Title       : SunRISE Proposal: Precision Solar Disk Photometry--A Tool for Understanding
               Changes in the Sun's Luminosity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1995       
File        : a9310148

Award Number: 9310148
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194136             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Libbrecht kgl@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal will continue an ongoing effort to precisely                
              measure large-scale solar surface brightness variations across the             
              solar disk.  A unique and specialized instrument to make these                 
              measurements has been constructed at Big Bear Solar Observatory,               
              and preliminary data have been acquired.  With a timeseries of                 
              precision photometric data, the PI will conduct a number of                    
              investigations: 1)  The PI will compare measured latitude- and                 
              time-dependent brightness variations with time-dependent solar                 
              constant measurements.  The more complete spatial information                  
              gotten from the photometer will be used to better understand the               
              physical mechanisms responsible for short- and long-term solar                 
              luminosity variations.  For example, measured average latitude- and            
              -dependent brightness structure (here  is the usual heliocentric             
              angle), together with the measured facular contrast function, can              
              be used to directly measure the contribution of faculae to solar               
              luminosity changes.  Further, if the Sun's luminosity variations               
              are determined (using our photometric data) to be confined to the              
              active latitudes, then precision ground-based measurements such as             
              those proposed here could make an excellent substitute for space-              
              based solar constant measurements, when the latter are unavailable.            
              2)  The PI will make a better measurement of the pole-equator                  
              temperature difference, making some effort to separate the cycle-              
              dependent magnetic signals from the presumably time-independent)               
              differential rotation signal.  Such a measurement will constrain               
              models of the Sun's differential rotation.  3)  The PI will                    
              accurately measure brightness variations near the solar pole, in               
              order to get a better understanding of the polar magnetic fields               
              and polar faculae.                                                             
                   Making precision measurements of the large-scale brightness               
              structure of the Sun is to date a largely unexplored area of                   
              research.  The data set of measurements could contribute                       
              significantly to the understanding and monitoring of the Sun's                 
              luminosity variations.                                                         
              #
