Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometry of Characteristic Classes and Non-Abelian
               Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1993  
File        : a9310433

Award Number: 9310433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis A. McLaughlin dennis@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310433  McLaughlin       In his work on algebraic K-theory, Beilinson
              introduced  characteristic classes for holomorphic bundles, which refine the 
              usual Chern classes.  At present, they cannot be constructed  directly from a
              given bundle and are poorly understood.   McLaughlin will attempt to remedy
              this by finding explicit  formulae for the Beilinson classes.  This work will
              lead to a new  interpretation of polylogarithms in terms of multicategories. 
              He  also expects to shed new light on Bloch's conjecture concerning 
              characteristic classes of flat bundles.  His methods are inspired  by the
              degree three non-abelian cohomology recently defined by  Breen.  This geometric
              technique will also be used to attack some  "classical" problems in topology,
              e.g., lifting group actions in  bundles with non-abelian structure group.      
              This research project has important implications for  several areas of
              mathematics and physics.  In number theory,  there is the two hundred-year-old
              problem of finding the values  of Riemann's zeta function at odd whole numbers.
               Some of these  unknown values are related to the Beilinson classes, and this 
              project will lead to a better understanding of the subject.   Furthermore, the
              research provides a framework for understanding  the emerging area of
              non-abelian geometry.  This encompasses such  diverse areas as the
              classification of three-dimensional spaces  (a problem known as the Poincare
              conjecture) and even quantum  physics (in particular, string theory).  The
              project's unifying  approach has already yielded new insights, and there is the
               promise of more to come.  ***
