Title       : Targeted Disruption of L-Proline Transporter Gene by Homolgous Recombination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1993     
File        : a9310965

Award Number: 9310965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Comer                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48555              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Fremeau, Jr. RTF@CanCtr.MC.Duke.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Many of the most exciting technical advances in neurobiology have              
              come from the field of genetic engineering.  It is now possible to             
              selectively "knock out" single genes and examine their effect on               
              behavior.  Knock-out mice, as they are called, have been used to               
              probe the circuits underlying learning and memory, temperature                 
              adaptation, and many other behaviors.  They provide highly                     
              selective probes for elucidating the long mysterious connection                
              between genes and behavior.  Dr. Fremeau has recently cloned the               
              gene for a high-affinity membrane transporter for proline.  The                
              fact that these uptake systems for proline are found in selective              
              populations of glutaminergic nerve terminals suggests that proline             
              is a novel neurotransmitter which modifies glutaminergic                       
              transmission in some way.  Since glutamate is a major transmitter              
              in cerebral cortex and involved in mechanisms of neuroplasticity,              
              it is obviously of great interest to determine proline's role in               
              glutaminergic function.  This NSF small grant for exploratory                  
              research (SGER) will give Dr. Fremeau the chance to use genetic                
              engineering techniques to solve this problem.  He will attempt the             
              high-risk/high gain task of producing a knock out mouse that lacks             
              this membrane component.  If he succeeds it will be possible to                
              determine the role that proline neurotransmission plays in the                 
              development of behavior.  This is the kind of research for which               
              the SGER was designed for there are few other funding mechanisms               
              for supporting research that does not have a fairly assured                    
              payoff.***//
