Title       : Social Organization and Social Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9310276

Award Number: 9310276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81227              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Blume   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310276  Blume    Traditional models of strategic interaction assume that a 
              population of highly rational players interacts with one another in  a
              non-cooperative fashion to determine a collective outcome.  While  these models
              improve our understanding of centralized socialized  interaction such as that
              seen in well-organized financial asset  markets, they do not address the kind
              of decentralized non-  cooperative competition that arises in labor markets,
              markets for  retail services, and many non-market social settings.    Such
              phenomena are best modeled as games with a spatial structure.   Players live at
              given locations.  Each player competes (or, more  generally, interacts) only
              with his near neighbors.  Nonetheless  the choice of distant players has an
              indirect effect through a  string of players who share neighbors who share
              neighbors, etc.   Social interaction through this decentralized spatial or
              geographic  structure stands in contrast to centralized social interaction 
              wherein everyone interacts directly with everyone else.    This research will
              investigate how strategic choice evolves over  time when interaction is
              decentralized.  Preliminary research has  shown that the sharp rationality
              hypotheses of traditional game  theory are not necessary to understand how
              competition evolves and  what outcomes are ultimately achieved.  Consequently
              the  investigation will study the consequences of abandoning the  traditional
              models of hyper-rationality in favor of looser  strictures on individual
              behavior, and study how the spatial  structure of the player population
              enhances or inhibits the  organization of play (e.g., the evolution of
              cooperation in so-  called "coordination games").  Another theme of the project
              is the  contrast between social outcomes that can be reached through 
              centralized social interaction and those that are achieved with  decentralized
              interaction.  Finally, the project will study the  ramifications of different
              "interaction technologies," such as  random matching and  fixed partners, for
              the evolution of collective  choice.    ***
