Title       : Organized Interests and the Mobilization of Bias in Congress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1993    
File        : a9310247

Award Number: 9310247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Hall rlhall@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis W. Wayman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310247  Hall    Critics of American political institutions have long lamented
              the  infuence of organized "factions" in national policy making.  The 
              proliferation of Washington lobbyists and the growth of political  action
              committees have intensified the charge that Congress is the  province of
              "special" interests in general and private business  interests in particular. 
              Federal agencies and commissions,  likewise, are often said to be "captives" of
              the industries they  were established to regulate, and various accounts suggest
              that  Congressional actors conspire in such arrangements.    An important
              counterweight to this view is the notion that the  public interest groups play
              an important and healthy role in the  politics of American pluralism.  Such
              organizations vary  considerably in the purposes to which they aspire, but a 
              significant number of them seek to influence public policy,  especially on
              issues where important public goods are at stake.   While a few of these have
              formidable PACs, such groups tend to rely  far more heavily on lobbying and
              informational efforts than they do  campaign contributions to achieve their
              legislative purposes.  What  counterweight, if any, do the efforts of such
              organizations  provide?  More generally, what influence do the advocacy efforts
              of  public interest groups have relative to the more numerous, more  moneyed,
              more studied, and more maligned private groups or business  associations?   
              The investigators examine this question by assessing the role of  public and
              private interest groups on a diverse set of issues where  actors from the two
              sectors compete in congressional policy making  and, indirectly, in agency
              rule-making.  They first elaborate a  theory of legislative mobilization which
              lays out the conditions  under which one might expect both the lobbying and
              campaign  contribution efforts of each (or both) to pay off.  Second, they 
              undertake a broad empirical study, including samples of cases from  the energy,
              environment, human resources, a nd foreign policy  domains.  The study will
              employ interview and archival data, and  the analysis will be multi-method.   
              This study should enhance substantially our understanding of public  advocacy
              groups and private interests in Congressional law-making  and Congressional
              intervention in agency rule-making.  ***
