Title       : Dissertation Research: Prehistoric Subsistence and Settlement Change in the Ohio
               Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9310137

Award Number: 9310137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Dunnell Dunnell@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310137  Dunnell    Under the direction of Dr. Robert Dunnell, Ms. Diana
              Greenlee will  collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Her research
              focusses  on the period between AD 400 - 1650 in the central and upper Ohio 
              River Valley and she will analyze skeletal material from a series  of relevant
              sites. During this interval settlement in the region  changed from dispersed to
              nucleated with the establishment of  clearly defined villages. Ms. Greenlee
              wishes to understand the  reasons for this and postulates that a shift to maize
              cultivation  and a reliance on this staple resulted in a subsistence adaptation
               which permitted population aggregation. She will examine this  hypothesis
              through utilization of bone chemistry. Foods vary in  composition and some
              leave chemical signatures in the bones of  consumers. Extensive research has
              shown that maize has a ratio of  carbon isotopes which is different from almost
              all naturally  occurring plant foods in the Midwest region. Through analysis 
              therefore of this ratio in a series of skeletal remains which span  the AD 400
              - 1650 time interval it will be possible to determine  if, when, and to what
              degree reliance on this cultigen increased.  Through analysis of elements such
              as strongium it is also possible  to estimate the amount of meat in the diet.  
               Many archaeologists have noted the pattern towards nucleated  settlement which
              developed over time both in the Midwest as well as  in other parts of the
              world. This change is associated with the  development of social complexity and
              extensive and centrally  organized political systems. However the processes
              responsible for  this change are still not well understood. Archaeologists
              believe  that changes in diet and subsistence strategy may, in large part be 
              responsible and Ms. Greenlee will focus directly on this question.    This
              research is important for several reasons. It will shed new  light on the
              prehistory of the United States and Native Americans.  It will increase our
              understanding of how soci al complexity  developed and will assist in the
              training of a promising young  scientist.  ***
