Title       : The Structure and Function of Synapse-Specific, Extracellular Matrix Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9310385

Award Number: 9310385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Susan F. Volman                     
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249221             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlene Chiu achiu@smtplink.coh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beckman Res Inst Cty Hope
	      1500 E. Duarte Road
	      Duarte, CA  910103000    /   -

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9161,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9310385  Chiu    Information is relayed between nerve cells or a nerve cell and
              a muscle cell by a specialized connection called a synapse. The formation of
              synapses occurs during development, but little is currently known about the
              mechanisms responsible for this developmental process.  This project will study
              this process in the neuromuscular junction, the connection between nerve and
              muscle cells. The formation of this synapse appears to be regulated by rare
              molecules located within the extracellular matrix (ECM) within the synapse. One
              such molecule may be s-laminin, a recently described form of the well
              characterized molecule, laminin.  Laminin is present in the ECM surrounding the
              muscle cells and promotes axon growth from neurons. In contrast, s-laminin is
              only present at the neuromuscular junction and appears to abrogate the
              growth-promoting activity of laminin.  This raises the possibility that during
              development, laminin promotes and guides neurons toward potential target cells,
              while s-laminin may act to terminate growth and initiate synapse formation.  To
              elucidate the function of s-laminin requires large quantities of purified
              molecule, as well as an understanding of its structure.  However, because
              s-laminin is restricted to synaptic sites, this molecule is present in very
              small amounts around developing muscle cells.  Recently, this laboratory found
              that a cancer cell line, maintained in the laboratory, produced and released
              large amount of this rare molecule.  In addition, this cell line also released
              a second synaptic ECM molecule that may be related to another ubiquitous ECM
              component, entactin.  The  aim of this project is to better characterize
              s-laminin and the novel form of entactin isolated from the cell line.  Most
              importantly, the role of these molecules in the formation and function of the
              neuromuscular junction will be studied.  ***    Q          =Q          l       
                  sw                                   A wwwwwww KÕ            Y             
                                                        9310385  Chiu    Information is
              relayed between nerve cells or a nerve cell and a muscle cell by a specialized
              connection called                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                !         !  
                         F                             f             f                       
                       8    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial  " Univers (WN)       d   d   
                   d           "             h     L  %M  E      "       b         8       
              Steve McLoon, IBN William Proctor, IBN                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
