Title       : Dissertation Research: A Case Study of the Relationship Between Ontogeny and
               Phylogeny: The Phylogenetic Relationships of Sepsidae (Diptera)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1993      
File        : a9310600

Award Number: 9310600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Quentin D. Wheeler qdw1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310600 Wheeler          A phylogenetic analysis of the family Sepsidae
              (Insecta: Diptera) is proposed.  The analysis will comprise three largely
              independent data sets consisting of egg, larval and adult morphological
              characters.  The larval characters will be used to test the "ontogenetic
              criterion" for determining the polarity of character transformation series.
              Hennig's (1966) traditional version based on character precedence will be
              compared with Nelson's (1978) rule based on generality.  The independent data
              set composed of egg and adult characters will be used to judge whether the
              ontogenetic criterion or outgroup comparison makes more accurate predictions
              about character polarity.          Species ontogenies will be mapped onto the
              cladogram derived from egg and adult characters, allowing the direct study of
              changes in ontogeny over phylogenetic time, and the prevalence of widely
              discussed phenomena like insertions, substitutions, and deletions of states.   
                    A study of mating behavior and sperm competition in Sepsidae is under way
              at the University of Arizona; resulting characters will be mapped onto the
              cladogram in order to gain an understanding of why precopulatory guarding
              apparently evolved several times independently within the Sepsidae. %%%        
               The Sepsidae are a family of flies with many of its members ovipositing and
              developing in cow dung as well as other decaying materials.  This project will
              utilize independent data sets of egg, larval and adult characters to analyze
              relationships among all of the genera and about half of the species in the
              family.  The resulting framework will be used to address the origins of
              interesting behaviors such  a male guarding of females at the oviposition
              sites. ***                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
