Title       : Dissertation Research: The Consequences of Selection for Increased and Decreased
               Glucosinolate Production in Brassica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1993    
File        : a9310992

Award Number: 9310992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Marquis robert_marquis@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310992  Marquis    Models that predict the optimal defense 'strategy' that
              plants should evolve to combat potential herbivores have assumed a cost of
              defense.  However, there is no general agreement as to whether costs of defense
              exist or in what form they may be manifested.  This research will document the
              presence or absence of costs associated with the production of a specific group
              of defensive chemicals (glucosinolates or mustard oils) in Brassica rapa.  This
              will be done using artificial selection experiments.  By selecting populations
              of B. rapa for glucosinolate content, costs of defense and the form in which
              they are manifested can be documented by examining the effects of this
              selection on other,  non-selected characters.  Potential costs will be looked
              for in the form of reduced plant survival, growth, and reproduction, leaf
              tannin content, leaf hairiness, and ability to tolerate herbivore damage. 
              Further, the consequences this selection has for realized resistance against a
              specialist (Pieris rapae) and a generalist (Trichoplusia ni) herbivore will
              also be examined.  %%%  Elucidation of the costs associated with defense is
              important to basic science in that it will help us to determine how and when
              the evolutionary response of plants to selection imposed by herbivores may be
              constrained.  In addition it is important to applied science, because
              herbivores are major pests of agriculture, forestry and horticulture.  The most
              common method used to control their damage is the application of chemical
              pesticides, which can have serious environmental consequences.  Understanding
              the evolution of defenses in plant s can help us determine when breeding
              herbivore resistant plants is economically practical, thereby decreasing our
              reliance on chemical pesticides.  ***    F G H I J K L M N O P Q   S T U V W X 
                   \     _ ` a b c d   f g h i j k   m n o p q r s t u v w x y z {           
                                                                                             
                                                             9310992  Marquis    Models that
              predict the optimal defense 'strategy' that plants should evolve to combat
              potential herbivores     A   I   J   N                   w   }   ~             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                !         !         !f       
              !              F                                                               
                           (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                           
                   "             h     +  e+  e                        X    Abstract
              Dissertation Research   Elizabeth M. Behrens Elizabeth M. Behrens              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
