Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Analysis and Computation ofInvariant Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1993     
File        : a9107612

Award Number: 9107612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74220              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jens Lorenz lorenz@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator undertakes the analysis and                    
              implementation of numerical methods for the computation of                     
              invariant manifolds of dynamical systems and of invariant curves               
              of maps.  A feature of this work is to implement certain                       
              coordinate changes that will greatly extend the applicability of               
              the algorithms.  In most applications, the dynamical systems                   
              depend on one or more parameters; then the determination of                    
              suitable coordinates will be combined with the idea of path                    
              following.  As long as the manifolds deform smoothly when system               
              parameters change, the proposed methods will permit following the              
              manifolds computationally.  A longer-term goal is to study                     
              bifurcations of invariant manifolds numerically, in particular                 
              the breakdown of tori.  It is expected that the region of                      
              breakdown will be characterized numerically by several turning                 
              points of the discrete solution branch, and that the number of                 
              turning points increases as the meshsize is refined.  The                      
              proposed research will point the way towards the development of                
              efficient algorithms for the computations of invariant manifolds,              
              and will provide a valuable tool for the study of dynamical                    
              systems.                                                                       
                   Nonlinear dynamical systems play an important role in many                
              areas of the applied sciences and of engineering and technology.               
              For example, they are used to model flows around airplanes and                 
              submarines, vibrations of engines, currents in electrical                      
              networks, and blood flow in the heart.  All these systems                      
              depend on parameters, which can partially be controlled or                     
              monitored.  A practical problem of main importance is to predict               
              the critical values of parameters, for which qualitative changes               
              of the dynamical systems occur.  These changes are called                      
              bifurcations.  For example, a long-outstanding problem is                      
              to predict the transition from laminar to turbulent flow.                      
              Similarly, a vibrating structure can bifurcate from quasiperiodic              
              to chaotic motion; the latter is unpredictable and might lead to               
              the breakdown of the structure.  The behavior of a dynamical                   
              system is often characterized by its properties on an                          
              invariant manifold.  This project will develop numerical software              
              to compute invariant manifolds and to follow them computationally              
              as system parameters change. Important cases are given by                      
              invariant tori, which correspond to quasiperiodic (predictable)                
              motion;  breakdown of the tori corresponds to the transition                   
              to chaotic (unpredictable) motion.  With algorithms developed in               
              this work, one will be able to compute values for bifurcation                  
              parameters, i.e., one can predict parameter values for which                   
              major qualitative changes of the dynamical system will occur.                  
              The algorithms will be tested on systems of coupled                            
              oscillators and vibrating mechanical structures, but they will                 
              apply to other areas of the applied sciences where dynamical                   
              systems are used for modelling.
