Title       : A Laser Based Quartz Micropipette Puller
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1990  
File        : a9060655

Award Number: 9060655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49648              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale G. Flaming   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sutter Instrument Corp
	      40 Leveroni Court
	      Novato, CA  949495746    415/883-0128

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1186,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Glass micropipettes are of fundamental importance in cell                      
              physiology with profound applications in neurophysiology.  The                 
              ability to access the cell's interior and monitor the electrical               
              characteristic of the cell has lead to new information about                   
              neuronal behavior.  Micropipette pullers that are currently                    
              available, utilize metal heating filaments and are limited to                  
              working with low melting point glasses such as borosilicate and                
              aluminosilicate.  High melting point glasses, such as quartz,                  
              possess superior material properties for electrophysiological                  
              research but are rarely used because their melting points exceed               
              those of conventional heating elements.                                        
                                                                                             
              The Sutter Instrument Corporation, under the direction of Dr.                  
              Dale Fleming, will develop a laser based micropipette puller for               
              making pipettes from quartz glasses.  The heating source for the               
              micropipette puller will be a carbon dioxide laser which produces              
              a well-controlled light beam that can be focused precisely onto a              
              small area.  In addition to the laser's ability to melt quartz,                
              the laser delivers heat directly to the glass and does not leave               
              deposits on the pipette, unlike metal filaments.  The mechanical               
              and electrical properties of quartz pipettes have the potential                
              of expanding several areas of research in neurophysiological                   
              sciences, that will result in an increased ability to obtain                   
              information from cells.  Additionally, quartz micropipettes would              
              be valuable in the emerging technology of molecular exciton                    
              microscopy.
