Title       : Examination of Automated Problem Structuring Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1990  
File        : a9060164

Award Number: 9060164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis M. Buede   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Paradigm Dev Group Ltd
	      3701 Sumter Court
	      Fairfax, VA  220331440    703/860-3678

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 1321,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Paradigm Development Group, Ltd. has developed a                          
              software package that incorporates the most successful and                     
              widely accepted techniques of structured decision making.                      
              This software uses an integrative graphical model, which is                    
              intially expanded (problem structuring) and then contracted                    
              (analytical structuring) prior to analysis via quantitative                    
              models.  This decision aiding process will logically and                       
              rationally assist the decision-maker in examining all aspects                  
              of complex, ill-structured or partially defined problems.                      
                   This research will test the problem structuring elements                  
              of this package by presenting it, in various forms, to four                    
              groups of small business people.  These business people share                  
              a common complex problem and need to develop strategic and                     
              operational plans to address this problem.  One group will                     
              receive the basic problem definition capability of the                         
              software (textual queries and compilation of problem                           
              constructs).  A second group will receive brainstorming                        
              support in addition to the problem definition support.                         
              Cognitive mapping and related queries (e.g., repertory grid)                   
              plus problem definition support will be provided to the third                  
              group.  The fourth group will complete the task with pencil                    
              and paper.  The results will be based on a weighted                            
              evaluation of the number of options generated by each group.                   
              Previous research has shown that the value of such support                     
              depends on its content and format.  The results of this                        
              research will be useful to Paradigm Development Group and all                  
              other researchers in devising decision support softwware.                      
              This prototype research will lead to a refined problem                         
              structuring software package available for the personal                        
              computer.  This product will provide the small business                        
              person and individual decision maker in industry and                           
              government with a competitive advantage in the marketplace.
