Title       : Isolation of Fatty Acid Biosynthetic Genes from Arabidopsis - A First Step in
               Plant Oil Content Modification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1991   
File        : a9060022

Award Number: 9060022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49692              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugo K. Dooner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DNA Plant Technologies
	      6701 San Pablo Avenue
	      Oakland, CA  94608    510/547-2395

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,
Abstract    :
              The fatty acid (FA) composition of oilseed crops is an economically            
              important trait amenable to modification by genetic engineering.               
              For example, it should be possible to engineer a canola (rapeseed)             
              oil with a lower content of linolenic acid, an undesirable                     
              component that causes rancidity.  Transposon tagging provides a                
              powerful genetic approach to isolate genes encoding enzymes that               
              are difficult to purify, such as those involved in FA biosynthesis.            
              The small model plant Arabidopsis thaliana is a close relative of              
              rapeseed.  We propose to isolate the fad3 gene, responsible for the            
              formation of linolenic acid in Arabidopsis, as a first step towards            
              the modification of the FA composition in canola.  We will use our             
              engineered streptomycin resistance assay (SPT) to visually detect              
              transposition of the maize transposon Activator (Ac) in                        
              Arabidopsis.  Somatic excision of Ac from an SPT::Ac gene produces             
              green spots on the white cotyledons of seedlings germinated on                 
              streptomycin and germinal transposition results in green revertant             
              seedlings in the same assay.  Therefore, the SPT::Ac system allows             
              us to select plants that have undergone transposition.  By                     
              selecting green revertants from plants that carry Ac closely linked            
              to fad3, and selfing them, we should be able to identify tagged                
              fad3 mutations and clone them by homology to Ac.  The analogous                
              gene can be cloned from canola by homology to the Arabidopsis gene             
              and subsequently modified and reintroduced to the oilseed crop.
