Title       : Decision Analysis Convergence Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1990  
File        : a9060241

Award Number: 9060241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49959              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis M. Buede   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Paradigm Dev Group Ltd
	      3701 Sumter Court
	      Fairfax, VA  220331440    703/860-3678

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 1321,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Paradigm Development Group Ltd. is developing a software                  
              package for individual decision support that provides an                       
              integrative graphical model, which is initially expanded                       
              (problem structuring) and then contracted (analytical                          
              structuring) prior to analysis via quantitative models.  This                  
              process can be characterized as having three phases:                           
              divergence, convergence, and analysis.  These phases may be                    
              repeated iteratively or may be stopped early, depending on                     
              the needs of the user.  This software uses graphical models                    
              to move the user through the structuring and analysis phases.                  
              Problem structuring is a combination of text-based queries                     
              and the construction of a cognitive map, a directed graph.                     
              The software will then aid the user in reducing the                            
              cognitive map to an analytically tractable influence diagram                   
              during the analytical structuring (convergence) phase.                         
              Analytical support for elicitation, sensitivity analysis and                   
              interpretation will be provided during the last phase.                         
                   This research focuses on the convergence phase.  The                      
              divergence and analytical phases are well understood and have                  
              been automated.  The ability to do the convergence phase well                  
              is the primary distinction between professional and novice                     
              analysts, and has not been examined systematically in the                      
              literature.  This research will identify, classify and test                    
              sufficient convergence techniques to aid the user in                           
              winnowing a large cognitive map down to a reasonably sized                     
              influence diagram for analysis.  The results will form the                     
              basis for future empirical work on the usefulness of the                       
              techniques for real decision makers.  The same research area                   
              is a great concern to Group Decision Support System                            
              developers.  The research will lead to commercial decision                     
              support software and techniques that can be used in a wide                     
              range of research and development for decision aiding                          
              systems.
