Title       : Application of Model-Based Predictive Control to Fossil Power Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1990   
File        : a9060634

Award Number: 9060634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce P. Gibbs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coleman Res Corp
	      5950 Lakehurst Drive
	      Orlando, FL  328198343    407/352-3700

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1452,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the research is development of                                
              practical, multivariate model predictive control (MPC)                         
              for fossil power plants.  The approach used here                               
              involves the development of a generic, reduced-order                           
              model (ROM) which captures the dominate static and                             
              dynamic characteristics of power plants.  This model is                        
              necessary in order to predict the plant behavior.  Since                       
              the model will not exactly match the true plant                                
              structure, the parameters of the model must be                                 
              estimated using prediction error methods or nonlinear                          
              least squares.  This model will then be used in a                              
              Kalman filter to estimate process states in real-time.                         
              These estimated states used for prediction, enabling the                       
              computation of the optimal control sequence.                                   
                                                                                             
              The research builds on the results of a preliminary                            
              study which attempted to demonstrate feasibility of the                        
              approach.  The results were encouraging but much                               
              more work is needed to make the approach practical.                            
              In particular, the current structure of the ROM does                           
              not adequately model the behavior of a plant and thus                          
              more modeling work is required.  Another problem is                            
              the computational burden, which currently precludes                            
              real-time operation on a microcomputer.  Several                               
              approximation techniques can potentially reduce the                            
              burden by a factor of ten.  Finally, parameters of the                         
              MPC algorithm (weighting and control step size) must                           
              be evaluated to achieve the best performance.  The                             
              successful application of the method will enable                               
              increased efficiency and availability, and reduced                             
              maintenance and pollution.
