Title       : Functionalized Rigid Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1994  
File        : a9201003

Award Number: 9201003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308000             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. K. Kwei jrodrigu@duke.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yoshiyuki Okamoto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1039,1773,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The sparing solubility of a rigid aromatic polyamide, poly(p-                  
              phenylene terephthalamide), PPTA, can be improved by introducing               
              functional groups to the polymer, for example through the                      
              attachment of the sulfonic acid group (or its alkaline salt) to the            
              aromatic ring, or by N-substitution with aligo (oxyethylene).  The             
              lithium or sodium salt of the sulfonic acid substituted polyamide,             
              PPTS, form dilute aqueous gels which are birefringent and exhibit              
              morphologies characteristic of nematic liquid crystalline                      
              structures.  The order-disorder transition in these rigid                      
              polyelectrolyte gels will be studied by monitoring the evolution of            
              the aggregated structures by light-scattering measurements and by              
              microscopy using digital image analysis.  These investigations will            
              be supplemented by NMR experiments to detect changes in the                    
              relaxation rates of the polymer as the solution is cooled (or the              
              gel is Heated) through the transition region.  The enthalpy change             
              associated with the transition will also be determined.                        
                                                                                             
              The response of the rigid polyelectrolyte gels to electric                     
              stimulation is the second topic of this study, because the                     
              mechanochemical and chemical valve actions produced by electric                
              stimulus find analogies in biological responses.  It is also                   
              planned to study the miscibility of PPTS or its salts with flexible            
              polymers.  Poly(oxyethylene) PEO is a particularly interesting                 
              candidate because the Li-PPTS/PEO/LiClO4 system shows sufficiently             
              high ion conductivity to warrant a systematic study.  PPTA grafted             
              at the N-position with oligo (oxyethylene) will be blended with                
              PEO, poly(methyl methacrylate) or poly(acrylic acid).  Since it is             
              known that PEO is miscible with PMMA and forms complexes with PAA,             
              it is likely that the PPTA-g-PEO polymer can be dispersed on a                 
              molecular level in PEO, PPMA, or PAA.  Aside from using the graft              
              copolymer to demonstrate the feasibility of this approach to                   
              molecular composites, the copolymer-PEO system will be evaluated as            
              a potential ion conducting material.                                           
                                                                                             
              This research involves the study of novel solutions, gels, and                 
              polymer mixtures of potential interest as biomolecular materials               
              and ionic conductors.
