Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Scattering and Stability of NonlinearWaves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1992     
File        : a9201717

Award Number: 9201717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Weinstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work on this mathematics project is grouped into three main               
              areas: (a) nonlinear scattering and orbital asymptotic stability               
              in infinite dimensional Hamiltonian systems, (b) transitions to                
              instability and (c) vector Zakharov and nonlinear Schrodinger                  
              equations.  The first class of problems is concerned with the                  
              long-time behavior of solutions of nonlinear dispersive systems                
              in terms of a nonlinear bound state channel (modeling nondecaying              
              behavior) and a dispersive radiation field.  The governing                     
              equations have the structure of a finite dimensional dynamical                 
              system which is coupled to the infinite dimensional dispersive                 
              radiation field. In the second, a new theory for a class of                    
              eigenvalue problems will be applied to nonlinear equations                     
              modeling long wave propagation in dispersive media.  An advanced               
              formulation is being developed which is independent of the                     
              dynamical systems framework.  Applications to nonlocal equations               
              arising in the study of fluids and plasmas will be sought. The                 
              third goal is to study the existence and properties of nonlinear               
              bound states of the vector Zakharov and Schrodinger equations.                 
              These systems are a better approximation of the physics of waves               
              in a collisionless plasma.  Associated with these equations are                
              believed to be phenomena not present in scalar systems, such as                
              non-isotropic ground states, which may participate in the                      
              dynamics of singularity formation.                                             
                   Differential equations form the backbone of mathematical                  
              modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which involve                    
              continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials and                   
              energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                        
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              to state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative                 
              and quantitative meaning from them.
