Title       : Generation and Evaluation of Machining Alternatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1992 
File        : a9201779

Award Number: 9201779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: F. Hank Grant                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana S. Nau nau@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guangming Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   Decisions made during the design of a machined part can                   
              significantly affect the product's cost, quality, and lead time.               
              Thus, it is important to evaluate the machinability of the design,             
              providing feedback so that the designer can change the design to               
              improve its machinability.  For machining purposes, a part is often            
              considered to be a collection of machinable features.  However,                
              often there can be several different interpretations of the same               
              part as different collections of machinable features.  Each                    
              interpretation corresponds to a different set of machining                     
              operations, in a different order, with different machinability.                
                   To determine the machinability of the part, all of these                  
              alternatives should be generated and their machinability evaluated.            
              This research will develop ways to do this automatically.  For                 
              generating the alternative feature interpretations, the                        
              investigator's will use an algebraic approach, in which new                    
              interpretations will be produced via algebraic operations on old               
              interpretations.  For evaluating the machinability of each feature,            
              the researchers will take into account the feature geometry,                   
              tolerance requirements, surface finish requirements, and                       
              statistical variations in the process capabilities.  The                       
              information provided by such an analysis can be used in several                
              ways: (1) To provide information to the manufacturing engineer                 
              about alternative ways in which the part might be machined.  This              
              information can be useful in developing process planning                       
              alternatives depending on machine tool availability.  (2) To                   
              provide feedback to the designer identifying problems that may                 
              arise with the machining.  By comparing the best achievable                    
              tolerances with the designer's tolerance requirements,                         
              investigator's should be able to suggest small changes in the                  
              design that will significantly improve the machinability.
