Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Conformal Mapping, Riemann Surfaces, and Circle Packings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9201747

Award Number: 9201747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Burton Rodin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project combines the mathematics of classical geometric              
              function theory with newly discovered applications of circle                   
              packing.  The source of this connection lies in a conjecture of                
              W. Thurston in 1985 that one should be able to obtain good                     
              approximations to the Riemann map of a simply connection planar                
              domain through a circle packing of the domain following by a                   
              mapping of the circles by a prescribed algorithm.  This turned                 
              out to be the case and is now known as the Finite Riemann Mapping              
              Theorem.  The proof spawned a new line of investigation within                 
              the field of complex analysis: what type of theorems can be                    
              proved by circle packing and, more importantly, what                           
              new discoveries are opened up by means of this new technique?                  
              Work now continues as the breadth of possibilities broadens.                   
              Topics to be investigated include hexagonal packing and the                    
              asymptotics and the ratios of maximum and minimum radii, the                   
              classical problem of canonical conformal maps of multiply                      
              connected regions - whether arbitrary domains are conformally                  
              equivalent to domains with boundary components of circles or                   
              line.  Work will also be done in extending results on osculating               
              Mobius transformations of a circle packing which are known to                  
              converge and give the first and second derivatives of the Riemann              
              map.  The question of whether higher order derivatives can also                
              be approximated will be examined.                                              
                   Complex function theory encompasses the study of                          
              differentiable functions of a complex variable and related                     
              classes of functions such as harmonic functions and                            
              quasiconformal mappings.  The subject is highly geometric; many                
              of the problems concern the properties of various sets under                   
              transform by functions from one of the above classes.                          
              Applications to potential theory and fluid dynamics is now                     
              standard in engineering circles.
