Title       : Bayesian Methods and Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9201210

Award Number: 9201210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malay Ghosh ghoshm@stat.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,1333,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    This research concentrates on several theoretical                        
              investigations and applications of Bayesian methods to small area              
              estimation,  as well as the study of Bayesian robustness in finite             
              population sampling ,  and Bayesian information.                               
                                                                                             
                    Recently the use of small area estimation has been increasing            
              in survey sampling.  Agencies of the Federal Government have been              
              involved in obtaining estimates of unemployment rates,  per capita             
              income,  crop yields,  and so forth,  for state and local                      
              government areas.  In typical instances,  only a few samples are               
              available from an individual area,  and an estimate of a certain               
              area mean,  or simultaneous estimates of several area means,  can              
              be improved by incorporating information from similar neighboring              
              areas.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                    Empirical and hierarchical Bayes methods are  particularly               
              well-suited to meet this need of "borrowing strength"  from related            
              small areas.  The principal investigator,  over the years,   has               
              developed general univariate Bayesian methods with applications to             
              small area estimation.  The present research is concerned with the             
              extension of such methods to multivariate small area estimation                
              problems and with the analysis of repeated survey data,  which                 
              amounts to time series analysis.  Specific applications will be                
              made to the study of undercount adjustment in the 1990 census,                 
              estimation of median incomes of three-, four-, and five-person                 
              families as needed by the Department of Health and Human Services,             
              and the estimation of all employee totals in non-agricultural                  
              industrial establishments as needed by the Bureau of Labor                     
              Statistics.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                    The principal theoretical investigation will consist of the              
              robustness study of Bayesian procedures,  that is,  how robust a               
              Bayesian procedure is against departures from the assumed prior.               
              Specific applications of these robustness ideas will be made in                
              the context of finite population sampling.  The final theoretical              
              investigation will consist of an analytical study of the                       
              information content in different priors through a pure posterior               
              analysis.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                    Profession Ghosh is well equipped to perform the proposed                
              research.  His past work in this area has had substantial impacts              
              and the present quartet of projects should yield  both important               
              methodological and applied results.
