Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1994      
File        : a9201225

Award Number: 9201225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $760000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Peter May may@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This project deals with a wide range of topics in topology                
              and related areas of algebra, algebraic K-thoery and algebraic                 
              geometry. Weinberger studies the surgery theory of stratified                  
              spaces, using analytic as well as topological techniques.                      
              Rothenberg studies equivariant surgery theory and other aspects                
              of discrete group actions on manifolds.  The visitor, Madsen, is               
              collaborating on this project.  May studies various areas of                   
              equivariant algebraic topology and, with Kriz, has begun work on               
              motives in algebraic geometry.  Swan works on problems connected               
              with K-thoery and the  study of algebraic and topological vector               
              bundles,  Kriz has moved from the general areas of combinatorics               
              and is now studying various problems in algebraic topology,                    
              including an algebraic approach to mod p homotopy theory.                      
                   The details of these various projects vary, but all are                   
              concerned in one way or another with reducing geometric                        
              information to a subject for calculation.  The nature of the                   
              geometric information involved is the crux of the problem.  While              
              questions about lengths, areas, angles, volumes, and so forth                  
              virtually cry out to be reduced to calculations, it is far                     
              different with what are known as topological properties of                     
              geometric objects.  These are properties such as connectedness                 
              (being all in one piece), knottedness, having no holes, and so                 
              forth.  All systematic study of such properties, for example, how              
              to tell whether two geometric objects really differ in respect to              
              one of these properties or are only superficially different, or                
              how to classify the variety of differences that can occur, all                 
              these have only truly been comprehended and mastered when they                 
              have been reduced to matters of calculation.  Modern algebra                   
              furnishes many of the tools and the attitudes toward the tools                 
              that are needed, but the interplay between the algebra and the                 
              topology remains a fascinating subject. It has in turn shed light              
              on subtle problems in modern physics, and this has recently been               
              repaid when physics provided a novel and fruitful way to look at               
              the topology.
