Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Structure of Codimension one Foliations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1994  
File        : a9201213

Award Number: 9201213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72900              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Cantwell cantwelljc@slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project continues joint research with Lawrence W. Conlon             
              (Washington University in St. Louis) on the structure of                       
              codimension-one foliations, work begun in 1975.  They have shown               
              that every open surface can occur as a leaf of some foliation and              
              ask what quasi-isometry types of surfaces can occur as leaves.                 
              Markov-exceptional local minimal sets are well-behaved, and the                
              question arises whether every exceptional minimal set is in some               
              sense essentially a Markov one or, if not, at least has many of the            
              properties of a Markov one.  In a remarkable series of papers,                 
              Gabai has studied foliations of knot-complements, but much remains             
              to be done in this area.  For example, the principal investigator              
              intends to construct foliations of knot-complements that are easier            
              to visualize and then to use the Thurston ball of a certain second             
              homology group to describe all taut foliations of certain knot-                
              complements.                                                                   
                   A foliation of a manifold is a way of filling the manifold                
              with lower dimensional pieces.  In the case of a codimension-one               
              foliation, these pieces are of dimension one less than that of the             
              given manifold.  Think of an onion or an artichoke.  The topology              
              of a manifold is strongly related to the kind of foliation which it            
              will support, and in skillful hands this relation has been forged              
              into a powerful tool for investigating the topology of manifolds.              
              It is an unintuitive fact that the major algebraic tools for                   
              investigating the topology of manifolds work best in the case of               
              high dimensional manifolds.  The geometric tool afforded by                    
              foliations is thus particularly welcome in the case of low                     
              dimensional manifolds.  A major instance of this is the                        
              investigation of the complement of a knot in the three-dimensional             
              sphere, which turns out to be an important way to gain information             
              about the knot itself.
