Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Sociology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1992   
File        : a9201121

Award Number: 9201121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Suchman  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The birth of an industry represents a period of both                      
              opportunity and uncertainty.  Frequently, the success of an infant             
              industry depends on how quickly participants recognize that they               
              are engaged in a common enterprise.  Once businesses become aware              
              of their similarities, they can begin to develop generally-accepted            
              role structures and consensual normative outlooks.  As such                    
              behavioral models spread, the industry comes to look less like a               
              random collection of unrelated organizations and more like a true              
              community.  This doctoral dissertation will investigate the role               
              of law firms and venture capital funds in the development of high-             
              technology industries in Silicon Valley from 1975 to 1990.                     
              Focusing on how entrepreneurs, lawyers and venture capitalists                 
              formulated solutions to recurrent business problems, and how such              
              guidelines shaped the Valley's distinctive business style and                  
              strategic outlook, a series of semi-structured interviews with                 
              lawyers, entrepreneurs and venture capitalists who were active in              
              Silicon Valley during these formative years will be conducted.                 
              Also, a set of quantitative analyses examining the effects of                  
              various law firms and venture capitalists on the propagation of                
              organizational structures and strategies during this period will               
              be performed.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                   This project integrates theories from the sociology of                    
              organizations and the sociology of law in order to arrive at a                 
              better understanding of the role of corporate lawyers in such                  
              emerging organizational communities.  Silicon Valley offers a rare             
              opportunity to examine the mechanics of organizational birth and               
              community development and to link these to the activities of                   
              concrete entities struggling to survive in a turbulent environment.            
              This project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a                  
              promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research            
              skills.
