Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Waves and Chaotic Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9201581

Award Number: 9201581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Glimm glimm@ams.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Grove  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,9218,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The main purpose of this research project is to understand                
              the interactions in multiple space dimensions of nonlinear fluid               
              waves.  Shock waves, turbulent mixing zones, flame fronts,                     
              solidification fronts, and fluid and material interfaces provide               
              examples of the types of waves considered here.  The                           
              investigators analyze first the regular case, in which a small                 
              number of waves meet at a point and propagate in a self-similar                
              fashion, as a traveling wave with definite velocity and with                   
              definite relativeangles.  This problem is related to, but more                 
              difficult than, the one-dimensional Riemann problem, with which                
              the investigators and coworkers have prior experience.  Secondly,              
              they consider the case of chaotic higher dimensional wave                      
              interactions, characterized by unstable interfaces, mixing                     
              regions, and sensitive dependence on initial conditions.  In this              
              chaotic case, they identify elementary modes, which interact to                
              form an effective statistical ensemble.  The study of the chaotic              
              case depends upon the renormalization group, and methods to                    
              reduce the number of effective degrees of freedom.  Fixed points               
              of the renormalization group found by the investigators and                    
              coworkers to characterize chaotic mixing regimes suggest                       
              directions for research.                                                       
              One of the most difficult aspects of the study of wave                         
              propagation is the computation of nonlinear wave interactions.                 
              This project is to study the mathematical structure of such                    
              interactions and to use this analysis to improve computer                      
              programs that model flows where wave interactions are important.               
              Flows of this type occur in a wide variety of industrial,                      
              military, and scientific applications, including supersonic                    
              flight, sheet metal forming and die pressing, weather prediction,              
              fluid turbulence, projectile penetration of armor, blast waves,                
              and astrophysics.  All of these areas are characterized by                     
              sensitive dependence on the detailed structures produced by the                
              nonlinear interaction of waves, and thus share many common                     
              mathematical aspects.  Knowledge gained in studying the abstract               
              properties of wave interactions can be applied to all of these                 
              areas, and will lead to improved computer simulations and a                    
              better understanding of the processes occurring during strong                  
              wave interactions.
