Title       : Numerical Studies of Magnetospheric Dynamics and Related Space Plasma Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1995    
File        : a9201662

Award Number: 9201662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $539717             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Dawson dawson@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cheng-chin Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles F. Kennel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip L. Pritchett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal is for numerical studies of the magnetosphere               
              with a focus on the properties of intermediate shock waves, the                
              dynamics of the magnetosheath and magnetopause, reconnection and               
              convection in the geomagnetic tail, and auroral electron                       
              acceleration by lower-hybrid wave turbulence.  Scaling behavior of             
              intermediate shocks will be handled through magnetohydrodynamics               
              (MHD) followed by hybrid simulations extended to the high ion beta             
              case (beta is the ratio of plasma to field energy density). MHD                
              studies of the magnetopause will be pursued along with hybrid                  
              models to study magnetopause structure.  3D global simulations will            
              be done including all the large-scale dynamics of the magnetosphere            
              to test the effects of magnetosheath and magnetopause boundary                 
              conditions.  Response of the magnetosphere to these inputs will be             
              analyzed through studies of collisionless reconnection in the near-            
              Earth plasma sheet, extended to cover more general aspects of                  
              convection and to consider the structure and stability of more                 
              distant parts of the tail current sheet.  A new high beta drift-               
              kinetic simulation code will be developed including some kinetic               
              effects for the electrons as well as ions.  This code will be used             
              to test the hypothesis that chaotization of electron orbits can                
              restore the universal ion tearing mode - a fundamental question for            
              the reconnection process in space plasmas.  Resonant electron                  
              acceleration by ion wave turbulence will be studied and the results            
              compared with observations of auroral electron spectra and the                 
              structure of auroral arcs.
