Title       : IHETS Data Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9201910

Award Number: 9201910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George O. Strawn                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377178             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Lindeman lindeman@ucs.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              The Indiana Higher Education Telecommunication System (IHETS) on               
              behalf of its member institutions, proposes to establish an IHETS              
              Data Network.  The proposal requests partial funding for                       
              participation in NSFNET through a connection with CICNET, the                  
              regional network attaching to NSFNET in the Indiana Area as well as            
              partial start-up funds for the necessary routers, circuits, and                
              operating support to facilitate the fullest possible participation.            
              The educational institutions that will participate include:                    
              Anderson University, Ball State Univ., Butler Univ., DePauw Univ.,             
              Earlham College, Franklin College, Hanover College, Manchester                 
              College, St. Joseph College, Taylor Univ., Univ. of Evansville,                
              Univ. of Indianapolis, Univ. of Southern Indiana, Valparaiso Univ.,            
              Vincennes Univ., Vincennes Univ., and Wabash College.  The network             
              will provide a consistent statewide architecture for NSFNET access             
              for a broad variety of entities engaged in education and research.             
              This cooperative network will provide gateways to regional,                    
              national, and international networks and will be consistent with               
              their standards.  It will further the institutions' work in                    
              enhancing the state's economic development through a well-educated             
              workforce, accessible training opportunities, and research and                 
              development partnerships.  Another goal of the network is to                   
              facilitate collaborative projects and sharing of resources between             
              institutions, including those outside the state.  The universities             
              need greater functionality and network speed to be able to access              
              supercomputers, libraries, and make file transfers along with being            
              able to implement a more reliable mail system. Students and faculty            
              research will benefit from the link.  This is also a unique                    
              opportunity for the schools to explore innovative educational                  
              resources.
