Title       : Chemically Mediated Interactions in a Sedimentary Assemblage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1993      
File        : a9201857

Award Number: 9201857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah A. Woodin woodin@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Lincoln  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Lovell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The interplay between the chemical environment and the dynamics of             
              species is of fundamental importance to ecosystems.  Recruitment,              
              predation, and biotic disturbance, for example, are commonly                   
              mediated by specific biogenic chemicals whose alteration can                   
              profoundly affect the dynamics of the community.  This project will            
              study the coupling between the presence of biogenic brominated                 
              aromatics and the dynamics of members of three trophic levels in a             
              marine sedimentary assemblage.  The project utilized the production            
              of bromoaromatics by a worm and its contamination of the                       
              surrounding habitat as a model system for examining the following              
              questions: 1. How does the presence of these compounds affect rates            
              of predation and disturbance? and 2. How important are bacteria in             
              controlling the level of sediment contamination?  Based on the PI's            
              prior research it is known that recruitment of some species is                 
              radically reduced in the presence of these bromoaromatics. However,            
              there is a lack of information on the effects of these compounds on            
              the major disturbance forces in the system, sediment-biting and                
              digging predators, and on the processes that maintain the level of             
              these toxic brominated phenols in the sediment.  Using a variety of            
              laboratory and field experiments, this research project will                   
              investigate the effects of the biogenic bromoaromatics on these                
              processes.  Given the global abundance in marine sedimentary                   
              habitats of taxa producing brominated aromatics, these compounds               
              may be very important as structuring forces in marine sedimentary              
              communities.
