Title       : Japan Long-Term Research Visit: Picosecond Time-Resolved Spectroscopy of Laser
               Plumes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9201118

Award Number: 9201118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice Cassidy                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89778              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Q. Brewster   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1406,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a long-term visit of nine months by                    
              Professor M. Quinn Brewster, Department of Mechanical and                      
              Industrial Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-                      
              Champaign, to Japan for a cooperative research project with                    
              Professor Yukio Yamada at the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory                
              (MEL), Agency for Industrial Science and Technology, Ministry of               
              International Trade and Industry.  The research will include a                 
              study of the picosecond time-resolved spectroscopy of laser                    
              plumes.  A major problem associated with laser material                        
              processing is achieving efficient coupling of laser energy into                
              the workplace.  This coupling is governed by complicated, non-                 
              linear mechanisms at the target and above the target surface in a              
              plume/plasma/shock wave generated by laser-material interaction.               
              Various studies have shown sharp decreases in the transmissivity               
              and/or thermal coupling coefficients associated with plume                     
              formation.  Characteristics of the plume are largely unknown, but              
              are known to depend upon incident laser flux level.  This                      
              research addresses the difficult problem of shedding more light                
              on the structure of, and heat transfer mechanisms in, the plume                
              formed above Al targets when irradiated by high power lasers.                  
              This research supports a companion NSF-sponsored study which has               
              as a primary objective the development of techniques which can be              
              used to determine the relative importance of plume absorption,                 
              scattering, and emission on coupling of laser energy into metal                
              targets.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Results of the research have the potential of optimizing and                   
              expanding the use of lasers in materials processing.  The                      
              facilities at MEL are state-of-the-art and include high power                  
              processing lasers, rapid scan spectrometers, and picosecond,                   
              pulsed dye lasers and photo-oscilloscopes.  This type of                       
              equipment is found in only a few laboratories in the world.  The               
              combination of modern experimental facilities and experience in                
              application of picosecond time-resolved spectroscopy on the part               
              of the Japanese host researcher and experience in high-power                   
              laser-material interaction on the part of the U.S. principal                   
              investigator offers a unique opportunity to expand the knowledge-              
              base of a technology which is of critical importance to U.S.                   
              industrial competitiveness.
