Title       : Regional Settlement Systems in Southwest Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1993  
File        : a9201023

Award Number: 9201023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Jochim jochim@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Jochim and his                   
              colleagues will initiate a long term archaeological study of a 40              
              x 100 kilometer region which extends from the Danube River to the              
              Alps in Southern Germany.  In this first phase they will conduct               
              three projects.  First, they will synthesize the available site                
              data for the period extending from the Aurignacian, ca. 35,000                 
              years ago, through the Neolithic period when agriculture and                   
              stock raising was introduced.  Material will be collated from                  
              museum collections and archaeological site reports.  Secondly,                 
              the team will develop a GIS data bank which includes information               
              on geomorphology and vegetation.  It will also incorporate data                
              on archeological sites.  Finally, the group will conduct an                    
              archaeological survey of plowed fields in a subregion within this              
              broader area.  The results should provide detailed information on              
              both the archaeological sequence and the density of sites.                     
                                                                                             
              Archaeological work to date indicates that this region in                      
              Southern Germany contains a wealth of archaeological data with                 
              sites which extend from the early Upper Paleolithic through the                
              Mesolithic and into Neolithic times.  Therefore, this region                   
              provides insight into how humans at a hunting and gathering level              
              of subsistence adapted to a harsh and highly variable Ice Age                  
              environment.  It also documents the change at the end of the Ice               
              Age to more temperate conditions as well as the succeeding shift               
              to a more settled Neolithic way of life.  However, the data are                
              spotty and have never been analyzed within a single dichronic                  
              environmental perspective.  Therefore, it is difficult to                      
              understand the processes which underlay the human adaptation and               
              change. In this the first stage of a long term project, Dr.                    
              Jochim and his colleagues will establish the framework to make                 
              such a comprehensive analysis possible.                                        
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to a large number of archaeologists.  It will                 
              also increase our understanding of how humans adapt at a simple                
              level of technology.
