Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational Algorithms in Chaotic Dynamical Systems and
               Homoclinic Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1996 
File        : a9201951

Award Number: 9201951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Palmer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Huseyin Kocak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigators introduce new mathematically rigorous                   
              experiments to compute dynamical entities of chaotic systems, and              
              they consider the rigorous reliability of commonly used                        
              algorithms.  In particular, they construct suitable algorithms to              
              compute orbits of chaotic ordinary differential equations, such                
              as the Lorenz equations, and derive rigorous estimates of the                  
              shadowing error in such numerically computed orbits; determine                 
              general conditions under which an attractor of a differential                  
              equation is well-approximated by an attractor of the discretized               
              system resulting from a one-step method; and devise a rigorous                 
              numerical algorithm to test for hyperbolicity in specific                      
              dynamical systems.  They also study homoclinic phenomena, which                
              play an essential role in the analysis of chaotic behavior.  More              
              specifically, they estimate the intervals of the parameter on a                
              dense subset of which a one-parameter family of dissipative                    
              planar diffeomorphisms has homoclinic tangencies, and establish                
              the presence of transversal homoclinic points in slowly varying                
              systems.                                                                       
                   Some of the more noteworthy discoveries in dynamical systems              
              have largely been based on numerical experiments.  It is                       
              important to devise such experiments whose reliability can be                  
              rigorously verified.  Most of this project is concerned with                   
              chaotic systems.  In recent years it has been realized that much               
              of nature behaves chaotically.  For example, small changes on a                
              given day in weather parameters such as temperature and                        
              barometric pressure can lead to large fluctuations in weather                  
              patterns a few days later.  A mathematical model that describes a              
              chaotic system in nature will almost inevitably behave                         
              chaotically also.  Because these mathematical models can rarely                
              be solved exactly, knowledge of their behavior relies greatly on               
              computer simulations.  The main object of this project is to                   
              develop tests that will tell how close a computer simulation of a              
              chaotic system is to a true behavior of the system.
