Title       : Multidimensional Problems In Dynamic Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9201034

Award Number: 9201034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daljit S. Ahluwalia                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333973             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Schaeffer dgs@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl L. Gardner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tomasz A. Hueckel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Behringer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Trangenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,9162,9216,9263,AMPP,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The central goal of this interdisciplinary, continuing                    
              project is to develop fundamental understanding of phenomena                   
              involving the slow flow of dry granular materials.  Part I of the              
              research, the first of two parts, focuses on a biaxial                         
              constitutive test with two additional, innovative, features: (i)               
              the capacity to continuously measure the speed of sound in                     
              deforming granular material as a function of the accummulated                  
              deformation in the sample and the direction of propagation of the              
              waves and (ii) the capacity of continuously measure density                    
              changes and particle velocities with sophisticated X-ray imaging               
              equipment.  The goals of Part I include (i) experimentally, to                 
              construct and operate the apparatus and (ii) computationally, to               
              simulate deformation of a sample in the apparatus, including                   
              superimposed acoustic waves, up to and beyond the formation of                 
              shear bands.  Mathematical analysis has a major supporting role                
              to play in extracting constitutive information from the                        
              experimental data and in developing an appropriate numerical                   
              scheme.                                                                        
                   Part II of the research consists of several subprojects                   
              which probe more deeply phenomena discovered in the previous                   
              grant period.  These include (i) to study the flutter instability              
              as a possible cause of vibrations in silos, (ii) to further                    
              investigate experimentally and to understand analytically                      
              porosity waves in a discharging silo, (iii) to characterize more               
              fully and to explain the power spectra of time-dependent stresses              
              in a discharging silo, and (iv) to explore "scale-invariant"                   
              initial value problems as a possible paradigm problem in                       
              elastoplasticity (analogous to the Riemann problem in gas                      
              dynamics).                                                                     
                   Regarding applications, this project has been most closely                
              associated with the flow of granular materials inside silos.                   
              However, there are many geophysical occurrences of granular                    
              materials, and the rich supply of constitutive information on                  
              sound propagatioyn to be gathered from this project will be                    
              relevant for these.  Moreover, the simulation of shear banding                 
              has implications far beyond this project - mathematically because              
              shear banding involves PDE which change type and scientifically                
              because shear banding is a widespread mechanism leading to                     
              failure in many materials.
