Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Phase Transitions, Defects and Nonconvex Variational
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1994      
File        : a9201215

Award Number: 9201215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daljit S. Ahluwalia                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene Fonseca fonseca@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The general objective of this project is to study material                
              instabilities, such as phase transitions for fluids and elastic                
              solids and metastable equilibrium states for crystals with                     
              defects, in a Continuum Mechanics framework.  The theoretical                  
              tools involved in this program are continuum mechanics, geometric              
              measure theory, partial differential equations,                                
              thermoelastodynamics and the calculus of variations.                           
                   Relaxation and lower semicontinuity properties of nonconvex               
              bulk and interfacial energies will be obtained and singular                    
              perturbation methods will be used in nonlinear elasticity to                   
              resolve nonuniqueness of equilibria.  These results will help us               
              understand and predict the surface structures and geometries of                
              crystals subjected to thermal or mechanical treatments.                        
                   When the minimum energy is not attained, the role played by               
              the surface tension in stabilizing the oscillations, and the                   
              dynamical creation of the microstructure and its evolution within              
              the framework of generalized measure-valued solutions, will be                 
              studied.  Thermochemical equilibria for coherent two-phase alloys              
              when physical variables, such as composition, are taken into                   
              account will be considered.  This study will enable predicting                 
              the dependence of equilibrium phase composition on the overall                 
              composition and volume fraction.                                               
                   Models to analyze defect interaction, dislocations,                       
              different types and arrangements of domains and global effects of              
              defects will be addressed.  In particular, variational                         
              formulations for metastable equilibria of elastoplastic crystals               
              with defects will be analyzed.                                                 
                   The mathematical problems addressed in this project -- phase              
              transitions for fluids and alloys, equilibrium states for                      
              crystals with defects, defect interaction and global effects of                
              defects -- are areas of intense work in contemporary material                  
              science.  Only recently they have been addressed mathematically                
              in a systematic way.  The questions involved escape the framework              
              of classical mathematical theories.  Therefore, accomplishing                  
              these goals will require manipulation of some very recent                      
              mathematical tools and possibly the introduction of new ones.                  
              Addressing such issues may have a significant impact in the                    
              industry and technology as it will help to predict the surface                 
              structures and geometries of crystals subjected to thermal or                  
              mechanical treatments and, in general, it will promote a better                
              understanding of smart materials.
