Title       : Numerical Solution of Eigenvalue Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1994       
File        : a9201612

Award Number: 9201612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196755             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse L. Barlow barlow@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research concerns the improvement of the accuracy of                      
              methods to solve two particular eignenvalue problems.                          
                                                                                             
              The first is the classical symmetric eigenvalue problem.                       
              Recent results have shown that there is a large class of                       
              symmetric eigenvalue problems for which small structured                       
              perturbations result in small changes in the eigenvalues in                    
              the relative sense.  This class of matrices is called "well-                   
              behaved".  The problem of finding a neccessary and sufficent                   
              condition for a matrix to be "well-behaved" will be                            
              investigated.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Another concern is that only a few algorithms have been shown                  
              to achieve relative accuracy on a subset of the set of "well-                  
              behaved" matrices.  The investigation will try to discover if                  
              that set of algorithms can be expanded.  The divide and                        
              conquer approaches of Cuppen, Dongarra, Jessup, Sorensen, and                  
              Tang are considered.  Good absolute error bounds on these                      
              algorithms have already been established and it remains to                     
              show tighter relative error bounds for diagonal dominant                       
              problems and for the singular value decomposition.                             
                                                                                             
              The other large problem area concerns the eigenvector problem                  
              for non-symmetric matrices.  The problem arises in the                         
              numerical solution of Markov modeling problems.  Accurate                      
              general bounds on Gaussian elimination have been proven.                       
              These allow for the straighforward application of standard                     
              sparse matrix techniques to this problem.  However, better                     
              structured perturbation bounds need to be proved for the                       
              nearly uncoupled case.
