Title       : End-User Programming for Scientific Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1997      
File        : a9201652

Award Number: 9201652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Berlyn mary.berlyn@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley I. Letovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9129,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop an end-user oriented tool for                        
              constructing scientific databases. The purpose of the tool is to               
              radically reduce the time and expense of designing, implementing               
              and maintaining complex scientific databases by generating database            
              and user-interface software automatically from declarative, easily             
              understood high-level specifications. Specifically, the tool will              
              generate SYBASE databases with X-Window interfaces written in C++              
              code.  The tool will be developed in two stages: an initial kernel             
              and an advanced stage. The kernel will support the development and             
              maintenance of database designs and the automatic generation of                
              implementations from them. This phase will focus on automating the             
              development of a generic type of database application with a number            
              of features specifically oriented towards scientific needs,                    
              including the ability to annotate facts with references or                     
              authorities, facilities for handling synonyms and technical                    
              thesauri, and self-documenting data models.  The kernel will be                
              adapted and generalized from software developed previously by the              
              authors of this proposal for scientific database applications,                 
              including a prototype application generator of the type proposed.              
              In the second phase we will use the kernel as a framework in which             
              to investigate more advanced problems, specifically, how to expand             
              the scope of the applications which can easily be generated using              
              the tool.  In this phase we will identify specific classes of                  
              functionality not currently supported and develop extensions to                
              support them. We expect that these extensions will involve the                 
              incorporation of restricted languages for specifying fragments of              
              functionality, such as rules for constructing names or default                 
              values.  Finally we will attempt to circulate the tool among                   
              those segments of the biological community involved in database                
              development, and incorporate their feedback into the design.
