Title       : Some Bayesian Methods for Sequences of Discrete Observationsand for Finite
               Population Sampling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1993     
File        : a9201718

Award Number: 9201718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen D. Meeden glen@stat.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Vardeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This proposal considers two essentially unrelated problems in             
              Bayesian statistics.  In the first,  a problem of long standing,               
              finding tractable non-Gaussian analogs of the Kalman model and                 
              filtering algorithm,  is studied.  Here a promising probability                
              structure is introduced that seems to produce sensible recursive               
              filtering algorithms for discrete data.  The proposed work involves            
              the development and implementation of this model.  In the second,              
              the problem of finding improved interval estimates of a finite                 
              population mean or median is considered.  It is well-known that                
              under simple random sampling without replacement with a moderate               
              sample from a skewed population,  the usual interval estimates                 
              perform poorly.  The same can be true in stratified random sampling            
              when the sample sizes within the strata are small.  Here a                     
              noninformative Bayesian approach,  which is based on a                         
              generalization of the 'Polya posterior',  is suggested as a method             
              for generating improved interval estimates.                                    
                                                                                             
                   The principal investigator is an expert in the theory of                  
              finite sampling. His continued use of the Bayesian approach to                 
              problems in this area and in the development of filtering                      
              algorithms for discrete data is well worth pursuing.  The                      
              theoretical concepts have great potential for extension to other               
              estimation problems in finite sampling and the results should                  
              receive considerable attention.
