Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Proximal-like Methods in Optimizationand Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1992       
File        : a9201297

Award Number: 9201297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: DATA NOT AVAILABLE   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will focus on approximation methods for a broad              
              class of nonlinear optimization problems.  Central to this study               
              will be the construction of regularization schemes based on                    
              proximal type methods which play an important role in the                      
              development of numerical schemes based on duality and                          
              decomposition techniques for large scale problems.  A new class                
              of proximal-like mappings associated with closed convex functions              
              is introduced, where the usual quadratic term is replaced by                   
              entropy-like distances.  When applied to the dual of an                        
              optimization problem, this gives rise to a wide variety of new                 
              augmented Lagrangian methods which have many attractive                        
              properties, not present in the classical quadratic augmented                   
              Lagrangian.  The main thrust of the proposed research is to                    
              follow this approach with an attempt to develop new mathematical               
              tools for the computational and theoretical analysis of                        
              optimization problems.  Properties of the optimal sets of the                  
              regularized problems, the construction of iterative schemes for                
              approximating primal and dual solutions and convergence analysis               
              issues will be studied.  Duality methods and decomposition                     
              techniques will be used to support the development of efficient                
              computational schemes for convex as well as nonconvex and                      
              nondifferentiable problems, by taking advantage of the problem                 
              structure that is present in most nonlinear applied problems.                  
              Such development will be significant for applying our results to               
              a variety of concrete problems arising from applied sciences and               
              engineering.                                                                   
                   Proximal methods play an important role in the development                
              of computational methods based on duality theory and of                        
              decomposition techniques leading to parallel algorithms.                       
              Decomposition of large scale problems is an important and                      
              classical topic in applied mathematics and optimization.  Recent               
              advances in computer technology have motivated the search for                  
              constructing new algorithms for large scale problems, by taking                
              full advantage of certain structures that many nonlinear applied               
              problems may possess.  Such problems arise, for example, as a                  
              result of a discretization of infinite dimensional optimization                
              and optimal control problems.  They arise in a wide range of                   
              applications such as optimal shape design, structural                          
              optimization, and image reconstruction problems.
