Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Study of Strongly Chaotic Thermal Convection in the
               Earth's Mantle: Analytical, Computational and Visualization Perspectives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1993     
File        : a9201042

Award Number: 9201042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39999              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Balachandar s-bala@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Yuen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The main thrust of this collaborative effort between applied              
              mathematics (fluid dynamics) and geophysics (geophysical Fluid                 
              dynamics) is a focussed study of strongly chaotic                              
              three-dimensional convection as applied to the Earth's mantle,                 
              using analytical, numerical and visualization techniques.  The                 
              investigator and his colleague David Yuen extend the usual                     
              canonical formulation of constant property simulation to include               
              realistic depth-dependent thermal expansivity and viscosity                    
              thermal conductivity along with multiple internal  phase                       
              transitions and internal heat generation.  The presence of a                   
              triple point in the phase diagram and a more  accurate                         
              temperature-dependent viscosity are also incorporated into the                 
              mathematical formulation.  The investigators use the newly                     
              developed proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) and linear                     
              stochastic estimation (LSE) techniques to compress the enormous                
              amount of data resulting from large-scale three-dimensional                    
              numerical simulations.  The POD and LSE techniques are also used               
              to characterize and understand the spatio-temporal dynamics of                 
              the relevant coherent structures, such as hot rising thermal                   
              plumes and cold sinking sheets.  The investigators study relevant              
              geophysical problems such as the underlying causes of large-scale              
              circulation in the mantle, the relative stationarity of                        
              upwellings from depth-dependent material properties,                           
              gravitational instabilities caused by multiple phase transitions               
              and the effect of temperature dependent viscosity on the mantle                
              dynamics.  They also conduct simulations with an imposed                       
              time-dependent boundary condition at the bottom to account for                 
              the cooling of the core, in order to study the thermal history by              
              starting at very high Rayleigh number, like 10**8, and slowly                  
              lowering the Rayleigh number via cooling.                                      
                   The investigators use modern mathematical theories and                    
              numerical techniques to study the three-dimensional dynamics of                
              the Earth's interior.  An important issue arising in the last                  
              year is the possibility for gravitational instabilities to                     
              develop in the mantle due to phase transitions.  This instability              
              results in periodic eruption of superplumes and associated                     
              intense volcanic activity.  The collaborators are among the first              
              groups to model this phenomenon in three dimensions.  They plan                
              to study this further by incorporating more realistic flow laws                
              and thermodynamics.  There are still many aspects in this                      
              phenomenon of gravitational instability to explore, as increasing              
              evidence from the correlation between past trench sites and the                
              cold anomalies in the lower mantle, inferred from seismic                      
              tomography, suggests that such mantle instabilities could have                 
              occurred in the past 100 million years.  Recognition of these                  
              instabilities may change traditional views of the role of                      
              steady-state processes.  They also investigate the nature of                   
              coherent large-scale flow structures in the lower mantle as                    
              revealed by seismology, and what effects these instabilities have              
              on the long-term thermal evolution of the Earth and Earth-like                 
              planets.  It was only a few years ago that the idea of a thermal               
              attractor from the collisions of plumes was introduced in                      
              geophysics.  They expect that work on large-scale coherent                     
              structures maintained dynamically by mantle convection may also                
              affect traditional views of geophysical behavior.
