Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Parallel, Block and Two-Stage Iterative Methods for
               Linear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9201728

Award Number: 9201728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Szyld szyld@euclid.math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator studies iterative methods to solve linear                
              algebraic systems of equations efficiently on both sequential and              
              parallel computers.  In a large class of iterative methods, each               
              iteration consists of a solution of another system of equations.               
              If that system is in turn solved by an iterative method, it is                 
              called a two-stage iterative method.  Among the questions to be                
              investigated are criteria to determine the optimal or                          
              near-optimal number of inner iterations to guarantee overall                   
              convergence of the two-stage method.  When a matrix is                         
              appropriately partitioned by blocks, and its diagonal blocks are               
              nonsingular, many of the classical iterative methods can be                    
              generalized to treat each submatrix as a component.  On a MIMD                 
              parallel computer (a computer that executes multiple streams of                
              instructions on multiple streams of data), each diagonal block                 
              can be solved by a different processor, using components of                    
              previous iterations as soon as they are available.  These are                  
              chaotic or asynchronous parallel block iterative methods.  Their               
              convergence properties as well as implementation details will be               
              studied.  Iterative methods for the solution of the general                    
              eigenvalue problem will also be studied.  Experiments with these               
              methods will be performed on different parallel architectures.                 
                   A large class of problems in science and enginering is                    
              described by linear systems of equations.  These are equations in              
              which the unknown quantities appear in a simple way.  An example               
              of a linear system is the description of the forces on a building              
              structure.  These forces need to be calculated to design the                   
              building materials.  The quantities to be calculated, called the               
              variables or unknowns, are the forces on particular points of the              
              structure.  To describe a big structure, such as a high-rise                   
              building or a bridge, many hundreds or thousands of equations are              
              needed, but because the forces on each point come only from a few              
              neighboring points, the equations are relatively simple.  A                    
              simple iterative method to solve such equations, that is, to find              
              the values of the unknowns, consists in giving an initial                      
              approximation for the values of some unknowns, and then computing              
              the values of the resulting forces on the other points of the                  
              structure.  Parallel computers are simply a collection of                      
              computers or processors that communicate with each other.  In the              
              method just described, different processors can compute the value              
              of the forces on different points simultaneously, using the                    
              information already computed by the other processors.  This is                 
              repeated until all values satisfy all equations.  This situation,              
              if attained, is called convergence. Not all iterative methods                  
              attain convergence.  In this project, the iterative methods for                
              which convergence can be guaranteed will be studied.  Experiments              
              will be carried out to test them.
