Title       : Dissertation Research: Obsidian Hydration Dating: Testing the Underlying
               Assumptions of Temperature Measurements in Archaeological Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1993 
File        : a9201588

Award Number: 9201588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8694               (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Meltzer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rosanna I. Ridings  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. David Meltzer, Ms Rosanna Ridings will              
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation.  The goal of her work              
              is to increase the accuracy of obsidian hydration dating and to                
              accomplish this she will analyze carefully excavated and well                  
              controlled samples of obsidian tools from the site of Pot Creek                
              Pueblo which is located near the northern Rio Grande, New Mexico.              
              Obsidian (volcanic glass) because it is easy to flake and holds a              
              sharp edge was a widely prized material used to manufacture stone              
              tools.  Because freshly flaked surfaces develop a measurable                   
              hydration rind and because the depth of the rind is time                       
              dependent, many scientists have attempted to use rind thickness                
              to determine age of tool manufacture.  However, it is also known               
              that rind development is temperature dependent and that this                   
              second independent variable must also be taken into account.                   
              Since climate and therefore temperature fluctuate over time,                   
              archaeometrists have not determined how temperature measurements               
              should be taken and how subsequent analysis should proceed.                    
                                                                                             
              Ms Ridings' work will help to resolve this issue.  First, she                  
              will conduct a systematic comparison of the three methods                      
              currently used for measuring and estimating effective hydration                
              temperatures in archaeological sites.  She will then compare the               
              results.  Secondly, climate of Pot Creek Pueblo will be                        
              determined over the last 850 years using both tree ring width and              
              isotopic composition.  The Southwest in unique because of the                  
              tree ring data which is available.  Finally, she will model the                
              depositional history of the artifacts to integrate the change in               
              effective hydration temperature over time.  She will then use                  
              these data to analyze the obsidian artifacts themselves.  Given                
              past work at the site, the age of these materials can be                       
              independently determined.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will help to               
              develop and refine an important archaeological dating technique                
              which is employed in many parts of the world.  It will also                    
              assist in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.
