Title       : Vascular Plants of the Intermountain Region (U.S.A.)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9201099

Award Number: 9201099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel H. Holmgren   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   An illustrated vascular flora of the Intermountain Region of              
              western United State is being prepared with descriptions, full                 
              synonymy, and commentary as necessary.  The Intermountain Flora                
              is a six-volume series treating the natural floristic region                   
              consisting of Utah, nearly all of Nevada, Southern Idaho,                      
              Southeastern Oregon, and small parts of Wyoming, California, and               
              Arizona.  Five volumes have been completed.  The final volume has              
              been begun and will be completed in the proposed three years.                  
              Preparation of the Flora entails extensive study of the plants in              
              the field as well as in the herbarium, and also requires a                     
              thorough bibliographic inquiry.                                                
                   Aside from its intrinsic scientific interest, Intermountain               
              Flora is of fundamental importance in the preparation of                       
              environmental impact statements in connection with possible                    
              mining or other industrial development in the region, and is a                 
              source of information on threatened and endangered species.  Land              
              managers working for the Forest Service, Bureau of Land                        
              Management, Fish and Wildlife Service, and National Park Service               
              also find Intermountain Flora indispensable.
