Title       : Variation in Propagule Supply and its Role in Kelp-Forest Regeneration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1994       
File        : a9201682

Award Number: 9201682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288334             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Reed reed@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred W. Ebeling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Brzezinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   Kelp forests, dominant of subtidal temperate reefs worldwide,             
              often undergo relatively frequent and unpredictable local                      
              extinctions and recolonization. This investigation is a                        
              continuation of long-term research on the causal mechanisms                    
              producing widespread loss and regeneration of subtidal kelp                    
              communities.  While the causes for the rapid decline of kelp                   
              populations are becoming clear, the mechanisms that allow for their            
              rapid recovery following severe disturbance remain poorly                      
              understood.  The research will use laboratory and field experiments            
              to examine various aspects of propagule supply that promote                    
              recolonization following widespread forest loss. The major areas of            
              study will involve determining patterns and environmental causes of            
              variation in (1) the number of spores produced by adult plants, (2)            
              the timing of spore release, (3) spore quality, and (4) the                    
              longevity of spore supply.  The research will focus on two species             
              of kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera and Pterygophora california) that                
              form much of the biogenic structure of subtidal reef communities of            
              central and southern California.  The research is important because            
              it explores the supply side of the regenerative process which has              
              largely been ignored in studies of patch dynamics.  It will fill an            
              important gap in our knowledge of the complicated processes leading            
              to successful recruitment.  Such a comprehensive approach is a                 
              necessary (but rarely taken) step towards gaining a thorough                   
              understanding of the mechanisms that regulate marine communities.
