Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Knot Theory: New Invariants and TheirTopology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1994      
File        : a9201091

Award Number: 9201091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao-Song Lin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Lin will study various new knot invariants and related                    
              topology.  In the first part of this project, he intends to put the            
              knot signature into the framework of instanton invariants of 3-                
              manifolds.  Considered in the context of an equivariant Floer                  
              theory, the signature invariant is expected to provide a new                   
              insight into some old problems in knot theory, e.g., the estimate              
              of the unknotting number.  In the second part, he will explore the             
              relationship established between knot polynomials and Vassiliev's              
              knot invariants.  He anticipates finding a combinatorial                       
              construction of knot invariants from Vassiliev's initial data.                 
              These knot invariants determine essentially all generalized Jones              
              polynomials derived via quantum groups.  He also hopes to get some             
              information about the outstanding problem of finding non-trivial               
              knots with trivial Jones polynomials from Vassiliev's knot                     
              invariants.                                                                    
                   Knots are rather elementary geometric objects whose really                
              interesting properties are topological.  By this we mean that two              
              geometric knots do not differ in an interesting way if one of them             
              can be transformed to look just like the other without cutting or              
              untying it, just by pushing its string about to rearrange the                  
              crossings.  Topologists say that they are two different geometric              
              realizations of the same topological knot.  Nevertheless, it is not            
              a trivial matter to recognize when one complicated geometric knot              
              is topologically different from another, rather than just a                    
              different geometric realization.  This problem can be addressed by             
              computing certain numbers or polynomials which are called                      
              "topological invariants," meaning that they always have the same               
              value for different geometric realizations of the same topological             
              knot.  The problem would be reduced to pure algebra if there were              
              one invariant which also always had different values for geometric             
              realizations of different topological knots, but life is not so                
              simple -- no single invariant achieves this ideal, nor even all the            
              known invariants taken together.  It is therefore valuable to                  
              investigate new invariants, some of the most useful being those                
              inspired in recent years by ideas from quantum physics. In                     
              particular, applications of knot theory to the biology of long                 
              strands of DNA have drawn upon knowledge of these newer invariants.
