Title       : Institutionalization of Innovative and Effective Instructional Reform at the
               University of Michigan-Dearborn
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a9652061

Award Number: 9652061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlotte A. Otto   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brooks B. Hull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margret H. Hoft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Moyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is addressing the issue of how to disseminate successful reforms in
              instruction throughout the university and then to other similar urban
              universities.  Traditionally, useful techniques tend to remain with one
              instructor instead of finding application in other courses.  The project
              institutes a process for institutionalizing effective, innovative instructional
              changes originating in mathematics at the University of Michigan-Dearborn, as
              well as for institutionalizing other reforms.  The process includes
              establishment of a "Pedagogy Forum" for all faculty and support of faculty as
              they adopt/adapt new pedagogical methods ranging from non-technical changes
              such as use of cooperative learning and group projects to technical use of
              computer software for in-class demonstrations and "real-life" homework. 
              Leadership that has been provided in terms of "Commuter 26", a forum for
              public, urban, universities which typically have high minority enrollments, and
              MDAMP, a metropolitan Detroit Alliance for Minority Participation created with
              the support of NSF, is extended to this project.  The specific changes being
              promulgated include integration of the software program Mathematica into the
              sciences beginning with chemistry and physics, adoption of cooperative learning
              strategies throughout the sciences, creation of a computer based statistics
              course in economics followed by a similar course for science majors, and
              development of a constructivist, hands-on sequence of laboratory experiences
              for non-science concentrators which, with the addition of more material in the
              earth science, is being converted to a three semester sequence of science
              courses for future K-12 teachers.  An opportunity is being created for talented
              undergraduate students to serve as facilitators of learning in introductory
              course recitation sections.
