Title       : The New Science Project: An Introductory Science Reform Effort
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1998   
File        : a9652147

Award Number: 9652147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196883             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Swartz lyons@grinnell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Duke  (Principal Investigator former)
              Charles H. Jepsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clark A. Lindgren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The New Science Project was developed by a team of faculty and administrators in
              response to the recognition that too large a number of students from
              traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences were entering Grinnell
              stating a desire to have science majors, but ultimately leaving science. These
              students were academically talented; they graduated, but not in science. There
              was also strong advisory support in developing and encouraging these efforts
              from the Trustees and a special Presidential advisory committee of alumni. This
              group of Trustees and alumni, who are science graduates, have actively
              supported these activities by coming to Grinnell and speaking with students, as
              well as with financial support. A clear indicator of the support received by
              the Trustees is their decision to go forward with the $15.3 million renovation
              and the expansion of Grinnell's science facilities, which they agreed was
              necessary in order to physically accommodate the curricular and pedagogical
              changes in the science division.    The New Science Project is an integral part
              of a larger division-wide reform effort by Grinnell's science faculty and
              administration which includes making significant changes in teaching
              methodologies and the curriculum, coupled with the renovation and expansion of
              the science facilities. The larger science program reforms promote
              collaborative learning and foster the communication and the interchange of
              ideas central to a vital community of learners. In order to achieve this
              Grinnell's science faculty are introducing significant change in both pedagogy
              and in content. By coupling creative thought with experimentation, we hope to
              make the study of science an intrinsic part of the liberal arts education at
              Grinnell. The New Science Project seeks to make the study of science accessible
              to all students and to increase their chances of success. While the reforms
              which the Project has and will introduce are options/services available to all
              students, we have targeted those students who  are traditionally
              underrepresented in the sciences. To encourage these students, we have
              developed a multi-disciplinary program that includes curricular reform
              experiments in all five science departments, a pre-orientation program for
              invited students prior to their freshman year, and opportunities for early
              research experiences. Curricular reforms consisted primarily of one-credit
              workshop/laboratory courses parallel to the four-credit introductory courses.
              Now in its third full year of operation, assessment of the program has
              identified directions for further improvement. Workshops and seminars in
              Biology, Chemistry, and Mathematics were definitely needed, but were not
              affecting enough students, and needed better coordination with the introductory
              course; and students needing extra assistance in introductory courses had
              limited resources. Curricular reform projects, have emerged to meet these
              curricular needs and supplementary student assistance resources will be
              provided.    This proposal to the NSF seeks support for the second generation
              of reforms as part of Grinnell College's New Science Project. We propose
              development of completely revised introductory courses in Biology, Chemistry,
              and Math. The Physics Workshop series, introduced under the first phase of the
              New Science Project, will continue throughout the project. We also propose the
              coordination and expansion of student tutoring and mentoring services through a
              new Science Learning Center.
