Title       : Decision Making and Technology: A Case Study Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1996  
File        : a9652889

Award Number: 9652889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266210             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence I. Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This course is designed to make fundamental changes in chemical education and
              address chronic problems involving science reasoning, understanding the impact
              of chemistry in our society and retention of science majors. A curriculum and
              instructional materials (text, and most importantly, case study modules) are
              being designed for science, pre-med/pharmacy and engineering majors, dealing
              with contemporary chemical technology.  The curriculum has a decision-making
              orientation and uses the case study method that has been successfully employed
              in business and law schools. The subject matter is chemical innovations,
              namely, the process of taking an idea in the research laboratory through to
              commercialization. The course teaches chemical concepts while addressing the
              competitive advantages of materials, environmental constraints, toxicology
              issues, intellectual property rights and economic considerations using products
              familiar to students where innovation has been driven by technical, market and
              environmental issues. The curriculum highlights the major hurdles facing the
              inventor(s) in translating a research idea into commercial reality.  The course
              includes a laboratory component and provides an alternative to a second
              semester of general chemistry.  The curriculum and course materials being
              developed can be tailored to the specific interests of any class through
              selective use of case study modules containing sufficient tutorials in
              chemistry to assure comprehension by students having as little as one semester
              of college chemistry.  The course brings to the classroom, through case studies
              and video tapes, culturally representative role models who can provide
              inspiration and career direction to aspiring science and engineering majors.
