Title       : A New Course: "The Social Dimensions of Science"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9652983

Award Number: 9652983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dorothy L. Stout                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51843              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Crease   (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Marburger  (Principal Investigator former)
              Wendy Katkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                    This proposal seeks to develop and implement an innovative,
              introductory-level (second year) multidisciplinary course on The Social
              Dimensions of Science geared specifically for prospective SEM researchers and
              teachers who have strong science and math backgrounds. The course will be
              designed to accomplish two primary objectives: 1) help students become aware
              that science does not occur within a vacuum, but operates within a context that
              is shaped by a complex array of factors relating to societal, cultural,
              political, economic and personal aspects; and 2) provide this awareness through
              a curriculum that provides traditional academic instruction and a "field
              experience" in which students relate these factors to work by active
              scientists, as well as to the scientists' personal experiences. The course will
              involve an interdisciplinary examination of various aspects, as well as a field
              project in which students link the academic content with the real, going
              scientific/technological practice of scientists at Brookhaven National
              Laboratory. Through such linkage, they will gain an appreciation of how science
              operates in a "real world" context and be more effectively prepared for the
              scientific and technical environments of the future.  The Social Dimensions
              course seeks to address the limitations of typical undergraduate SEM curricula,
              which seek primarily to impart a disciplinary-based foundation and technical
              skills, but do not prepare students for the real world in which science has a
              history, functions in relation to society's values and activities, derives its
              support from patrons who perceive its product as beneficial, and is carried out
              by individual human beings who are absorbed and preoccupied by their work and
              who operate within or against socially-mediated "paradigms." While most
              universities, including Stony Brook, have general education requirements
              intended to broaden students' perspectives, they tend to offer a spectrum of
              choices from which science students rarely find courses tha t fill their need
              to understand their own discipline. The proposed course seeks to fill this gap.
              The course is innovative in its establishment of partnerships with scientists
              outside of the university to serve as teachers and role models. In its emphasis
              on social issues, its should be especially beneficial to women and minority
              members. Moreover, since all of the BNL scientists are women, the students will
              gain insight into the unique position of women in SEM environments and into
              ways successful women have responded or accommodated themselves to these
              environments.   Other related objects are: 1) to train a cadre of Stony Brook
              faculty and BNL scientists in key disciplines (SEM, Philosophy, Political
              Science, Sociology, History) who endorse the interdisciplinary thrust of the
              proposed course, are knowledgeable of the issues being addressed by it, and are
              capable and committed to teaching it; 2) to foster and facilitate ongoing
              collaborative teaching and mentoring arrangements with scientists at BNL and
              other regional research/development establishments in ways that use their
              unique perspectives and personal histories and enrich the scientists'
              experiences as well as those of the students; and 3) to create a model, using a
              multidisciplinary and collaborative approach, that can be readily integrated
              into the regular Stony Brook SEM curriculum and replicated or adapted for SEM
              students at other universities.
