Title       : Learning to Teach School Mathematics with Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1996  
File        : a9652810

Award Number: 9652810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dwayne E. Channell dwayne.channell@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Flanders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Learning to Teach School Mathematics with Technology (LTSMT) is a project to
              develop a combined methods and content course for preservice teachers focusing
              on the use of computer and calculator technology in secondary school
              mathematics. Goals of the LTSMT project for the preservice teacher are a) to
              develop confidence and ability in the use of commonly available mathematics
              software; b) to build an understanding of the importance of providing
              Accessibility to software for students as a matter of equity, of developing
              meaningful conceptual understanding, and of promoting mathematical power in
              all; and c) to develop a reflective attitude that brings about a serious
              examination, in light of available software, of beliefs about what mathematics
              is, what topics belong in the curriculum, and what roles the teacher and
              learner should play in classroom interaction. LTSMT materials will contain a
              rich mix of mathematics content and methods consistent with the NCTM Standards
              and other reform recommendations. Seven modules organized by content area will
              involve students in individual and cooperative-group investigations.  Students
              will use a function grapher, a data analysis package, a dynamic geometry
              program, a programming language, and a symbolic manipulator. In order for LTSMT
              students to be exposed to the latest in mathematics content and reform-oriented
              curriculum projects, problems and investigations from recent NSF-funded middle
              and high school curriculum development projects will be incorporated into the
              materials, coordinated with a systematic examination of their pedagogical
              implications. The three-year project will create, pilot, and evaluate these
              materials, with the goal of publishing the results for use in preservice
              programs throughout the U.S. The flexible, modular design of the materials will
              allow teacher educators to customize their use in a variety of course formats,
              hardware and software configurations, and personal inclinations toward
              mathematics content.
