Title       : Liberal Education in a Technological Age: The Education of
               aScientifically-Literate Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1996       
File        : a9652145

Award Number: 9652145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198110             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Green wmsg@db1.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian A. Walmsley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack G. Mottley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank L. H. Wolfs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Lambropoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recently adopted changes in the curriculum at the University of Rochester
              requires every Humanities and Social Science major to take at least three
              cohesively related courses in the Natural Science / Engineering / Mathematics
              area (a Cluster). It presents the University with an opportunity to examine the
              educational experience of non-majors in this area and to change the way the
              Sciences, Engineering, and Mathematics are presented to non majors. This
              proposal has brought together a cross-disciplinary group of Natural Science /
              Engineering / Mathematics faculty to explore the development of a new
              curriculum that can produce an institution-wide reform in undergraduate science
              education.    This proposal is a natural extension of significant changes in
              undergraduate science education for science majors that were achieved with the
              introduction of Quest Courses. The funds requested will be used to initiate
              similar changes in the science curriculum for non-science majors. The courses
              that will be developed as part of this program will apply an inquiry-based
              approach in which students will be exposed to the scientific method. They will
              address the larger view of science, by exploring what constitutes a scientific
              theory, by providing students with the opportunity to engage in scientific
              hypothesis testing in the laboratory, and by examining the writings of
              scientists and their humanist contemporaries about the worldview that science
              provides. Rather than "show and tell'' we will focus on the process of
              discovery. This process will not only be used to teach the basic principles of
              science, but will also be studied from a historical perspective.    Most of the
              funds requested for the development of these courses will be used to provide
              teaching relief for the faculty involved, providing them with an opportunity to
              focus on course development for one semester. In addition, we will create
              study/writing groups to support the students taking these courses, and to carry
              out an in-depth assessment of the succe ss of the envisioned innovations. The
              courses developed will be offered for at least three consecutive years and
              workshops will be organized at the end of each year to evaluate the success of
              our innovations.    Computer technology will be used extensively in several of
              the proposed courses, and the University will provide matching funds for the
              purchase of the required equipment. These funds,  and the waiver of indirect
              cost recovery, combined with the  funds that were invested by the University in
              the Quest Program clearly indicates the commitment of the University to
              institution-wide reform of undergraduate education.
