Title       : Community and Ecosystem Dynamics of a Northern Temperate Forest Exposed to
               Elevated CO2 and O3 in a FACE System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1996  
File        : a9652675

Award Number: 9652675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $588406             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Karnosky karnosky@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. G. Isebrands  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Kubiske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Hendrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt S. Pregitzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Dickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1095,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9652675  Karnosky    The  greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide (CO2) and ozone 
              (O3),  are  increasing  globally and are closely tracking population  growth. 
              Little  is  known  about how these two gases will  impact  forest  communities,
              as, until now, studies with these gases were done in  artificial environments
              created by exposure chambers.   In  this,  project  we are using a
              state-of-the-art Free-Air Carbon  Dioxide  Enrichment  (FACE) facility to
              facilitate long-term exposures  of  regenerating forest stands to elevated CO2
              and O3, alone  and  in  combination.  The facility is being constructed on
              United  States  Forest    Service   land   near   Rhinelander,   Wisconsin.    
              A  multidisciplinary team of scientists will examine mechanisms  and  responses
               in trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides), sugar  maple  (Acer  saccharum) and
              paper birch (Betula papyrifera) in  various  competitive combinations.  Of
              particular interest are:  (1)  tree  physiology,  growth, survival, and
              productivity; (2)  competitive  interactions  among  genotypes and species; (3)
               tree  and  stand  carbon and nitrogen allocation; (4) pest and stress
              tolerance  as  regulated  by  foliar  defense  compounds;  and  (5)  carbon 
              and  nitrogen  cycling and ecosystem carbon storage.  Three  replicate  FACE 
              rings are being established for a factorial combination  of  treatments
              (control, CO2, O3, CO2, + O3) in a randomized complete  block  design.   Our 
              research  strategy  will  include  parallel  experimentation  and modeling. 
              Thus, response  data  from  these  treatment combinations will be used to
              parameterize and refine an  existing   whole-tree  and  stand  level  process  
              model.    Our  experimental design will allow us to address specific 
              hypotheses  using species of contrasting life-histories, while also affording 
              the    largest   possible   scope   of   inference   for    model 
              parameterization.
