Title       : The CSUF Undergraduate Reform Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2001    
File        : a9652129

Award Number: 9652129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Milton A. Gordon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia C. Wan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ephraim D. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Rocke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kolf O. Jayaweera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andy R. Bazar  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Mary K. Tetreault  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The CSUF Undergraduate Reform Initiative will address infrastructure issues
              relating to the academic needs of three undergraduate populations at California
              State University, Fullerton: lower- division majors in science, mathematics and
              engineering (SME); upper-division SME majors; and students not majoring in
              those fields. Specifically, it will address the need to retain greater numbers
              of lower-division majors in science and engineering; to produce more
              scientifically literate graduates from all majors and to give future teachers
              more confidence in science and mathematics; and to provide graduates the skills
              they need for successful careers. The initiative focuses on three areas:
              foundation courses, general education and teacher preparation, and
              interdisciplinary enhancements for majors. Three interdisciplinary faculty
              teams will lead the initiative, participating in retreats and meeting during
              the academic year to plan and pilot specific curricula and projects. The
              foundation courses team will explore ways to teach mathematics so it is more
              relevant to science and engineering, to introduce technology-based instruction
              into the classroom; and to improve academic advisement. The general education
              and teacher preparation team will explore the feasibility of an integrated
              lower-division communication course tailored to the needs of SME majors and
              examine ways to align science and mathematics content with national standards
              and to encourage SME majors to consider teaching careers. The interdisciplinary
              enhancements team will explore ways for SME majors to study business and
              communication and will expand opportunities for experiential learning. The
              initiative will create an infrastructure designed to produce students who are
              more literate in science, mathematics and technology and better-prepared for
              their careers and their responsibilities as citizens. It will direct the
              university away from rigid, discipline-driven departmentalization and toward a
              more seamless curriculum. Finally, it will help transform the campus culture,
              helping faculty to become more receptive to change and to embrace connections
              with other disciplines.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
