Title       : A Team Approach to the Reform and Standardization of Core Courses in Science and
               Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9652170

Award Number: 9652170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Constance L. Churchill connie@oakton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry N. Trobec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tingxiu Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakton Community College
	      1600 East Golf Road
	      Des Plaines, IL  600161234    312/635-1600

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1526,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET) faculty of Oakton
              Community College are seeking solutions to four problems:  (a) approximately
              one third of students enrolled in core SMET courses do not complete the first
              semester; (b) pedagogy is not always sensitive to the needs of an increasingly
              diverse student audience; (c) effective strategies and resources are not always
              institutionalized; and (d) core courses are frequently taught using traditional
              approaches with limited use of multimedia or group activities.  The project is
              building on successes in the humanities, nursing, and honors courses.    Oakton
              is developing a team approach to examine, revise, identify, and develop
              objectives, resources, activities, teaching strategies, and assessment tools
              for core courses in chemistry, biology, and mathematics. Each sequence of
              courses is being studied by an interdisciplinary team of 7 to 11 members
              comprised of full and part time faculty and assisted by students, business
              representatives, alumni, and students. The team approach to curriculum
              development is establishing an institutional process to extend course reform
              across multiple sections taught by diverse faculty. The new pedagogy includes
              more attention to the interdisciplinary nature of science, the needs of
              traditionally underrepresented groups, the use of technology, discover
              approaches to learning, critical thinking, and problem solving skills. The
              teams are each preparing a core sequence Guide that defines the reformed
              courses. Team members are implementing the reforms and then fine-tuning the
              Guides. They then serve as mentors, working with other faculty members to
              implement the reforms.    This project is resulting in improved core courses in
              science and mathematics. Because the problems being addressed are widespread,
              particularly in the community college sector, the project is significantly
              impacting the way science and mathematics is taught at Oakton and serving as a
              national model.
