Title       : Development, Deployment, and Evaluation of an Interdisciplinary Undergraduate
               Curriculum Development Testbed (UCDT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9652117

Award Number: 9652117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy L. Killeen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A team of professors from six schools and eight departments at the University of
              Michigan (UM) proposes to build an Undergraduate Curriculum Development Testbed
              (UCDT) to foster institution-wide reform of undergraduate education. The
              Testbed will bring together innovative curricular elements already developed by
              members of the proposing team. Specifically, the UCDT will build on the
              previous experience and success in the design of interdisciplinary
              undergraduate lecture courses and laboratory modules in the field of earth
              system science and global change.      The overall goal of the proposed work is
              to establish improved methodologies for the infusion of interdisciplinary
              courses and materials into the undergraduate programs of major research
              universities. Interdisciplinary courses, and particularly those involving
              global environmental issues, will be an integral part of undergraduate
              education for the next century. The development of such a reformed curriculum
              faces significant obstacles that need to be identified clearly and overcome -
              this is a major objective for the UCDT.      The project will provide the
              following:  1) further development of an interdisciplinary courses in global
              change; 2) development and evaluation of  generalizable tools and templates for
              interdisciplinary courses; 3) will promote more widespread deployment of
              interdisciplinary courses on and off campus; 4) will assess the viability of
              new teaching credit schemes for interdisciplinary undergraduate teaching. 
              Additionally, two focused course development activities will be completed. The
              first pertains to the introductory sequence "Introduction to Global Change".
              These courses will be improved through the accelerated development of
              computerized, multimedia laboratory modules, Internet resources, and other
              lecture materials.  The second involves  efforts that will involve the upgrade
              of the new NSF-sponsored "Global Change Laboratory" to provide well-structured
              opportunities for hands-on experimental and data analysis ex periences for
              undergraduates. This work will involve the development and documentation of
              specific experiments to be conducted as part of formal undergraduate course
              requirements, or as part of summer undergraduate research opportunity programs.
                   New teaching credit schemes within departments and schools will be
              explored as means to provide effective incentives for improved
              interdisciplinary teaching. These will be worked out with the direct
              involvement of three UM deans.  The Testbed activity will be subject to a
              continuous evaluation carried out by the UM's School of Education.
