Title       : Tectonica Interactive: A Guided Interactive Hypermedia Tutoring System For Plate
               Tectonics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9652993

Award Number: 9652993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher D. Condit ccondit@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Many of the critical problems facing our society, including limited resources,
              global climate and environmental change, and natural disasters, can only be
              addressed by leadership and a population that has a good grasp of the
              fundamental scientific concepts involved, all of which are addressed in an
              integrated and interdisciplinary manner in geology. Yet geology education is
              far from what it should be. In this age of increasing technological
              sophistication, rapidly evolving information, and the need for more global
              awareness, innovative approaches to teaching geology are needed. We propose to
              develop a computer-based exploration and learning system which will focus on
              plate tectonics, the uniting paradigm of geology. The PI's include a geologist
              with experience publishing interactive multimedia software for geology, and a
              computer scientist with experience developing intelligent tutorials. The
              system, which we call "Tectonica Interactive" (TI), will include adaptive
              ("intelligent") tutorials, guided hypermedia exploration, interactive
              simulations, and visually rich animations, graphics, and 3-D animation. The
              content in the program will have two primary per- spectives: locations and
              phenomena. Locations are actual geographic locations, and Phenomena are
              geologic principles, processes, and conceptual models. TI's hyperlinks and
              navigation guid- ance will make it easy for students to explore phenomena
              associated with a location, and locations which exemplify phenomena. Several
              learning modes will be available, ranging from more directed tutorials to
              student-controlled exploration. Because we store a model of student progress
              and mastery, the program will be able to accommodate users at many levels, from
              intermediate school earth science students through those in introductory
              college-level courses, and make intelli- gent decisions regarding hints,
              explanations, etc. Evaluation will occur at a number of university and high
              school sites, and distribution of the software will be by CD-ROM and the Worl d
              Wide Web. We anticipate that TI will be included by textbook publishers along
              uith the text.
