Title       : Sustaining Economics Education at Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9652931

Award Number: 9652931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27439              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Frazier pfrazier@vger.nsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Norfolk State University
	      700 Park Avenue
	      Norfolk, VA  235043907    757/823-8600

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1320,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         The long-term supply of African-American economist is threatened by
              the latest national decline in enrollments in economics and the longer
              established decline in enrollments at Historically Black Colleges and
              Universities (HBCUs). Recent research suggests that course content and pedagogy
              changes must be implemented to reverse these trends. However, since most of
              this research has been conducted in majority university environments, it is
              desirable to know if the reported successes can be duplicated in the HBCU
              environment which differs considerably because of mission, resource
              constraints, and diversity of student abilities.  Improvements in the
              undergraduate economics curricula have the potential of increasing enrollments
              and the pool of graduates in these latter institutions, and thus contributing
              to the long-term supply of African-American economists.      The overall
              objective of this proposal is to improve economics education at all HBCUs. The
              specific objectives are twofold: (1) to determine the current status of
              economics programs at HBCUs, and (2) to evaluate the effectiveness of an
              alternative teaching strategy in an HBCU environment.      The first objective
              will be accomplished by conducting a survey of HBCUs with the primary purpose
              of determining instructional methods used, the use of computer technology in
              instruction, and other relevant curriculum content and pedagogy concerns. 
              Secondly, to evaluate the effectiveness or computer assisted instruction (CAI)
              in improving student performance, understanding, and reception towards
              economics, introductory courses will be used to compare this methodology with
              the traditional lecture course.  CAI is defined here to include various
              supplemental teaching techniques as well as micro-computer simulations and
              activities.
