Title       : Earth System Sciences (ESS) - An Example of Critical Thinking Across
               Mathematical and Scientific Disciplines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9652102

Award Number: 9652102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise Stephenson-Hawk dhawk@cau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ayo O. Abatan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cass D. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melvin R. Webb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander H. Fluellen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark Atlanta University
	      223 James P. Brawley Dr. S.W.
	      Atlanta, GA  303144358    404/880-8000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Clark Atlanta University (CAU) will continue to build its comprehensive
              academic, research, and outreach program in Earth System Science (ESS) through
              enhancement of its curriculum for undergraduate students. The overall objective
              of the ESS program at CAU is to expose a large segment of the University's
              faculty and students to the interdisciplinary nature of the interactions among
              the geosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere and biosphere and their impact on
              policy. Once this objective is achieved, it is envisioned that Clark Atlanta
              University will, simultaneously, enhance the ability all students to critically
              think across academic disciplines and increase the number of minority students
              pursuing graduate degrees and careers in ESS and related areas.    The proposed
              program has four main elements. These are (1) faculty development in the
              interdisciplinary area of Earth System Science, (2) a post freshman summer
              research program, (3) the inclusion of interdisciplinary case studies in all
              freshman orientation classes and (4) further development and enhancement of two
              Earth System Science courses. Faculty members from the School of Arts and
              Sciences, the School of Education, and the School of Business have and will
              continue to collaborate regarding the development and implementation of the ESS
              program. When the plans for the ESS program are finalized and fully
              implemented, Clark Atlanta University will be assured of not only sustaining
              its program but developing a more scientifically literate population prepared
              to be full participants in a technology driven world.
