Title       : ThermoNet: Interactive Internet Resources for Introductory Engineering
               Thermodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9652803

Award Number: 9652803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99832              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ofodike A. Ezekoye dezekoye@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip S. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Faculty from the Colleges of Engineering and Education will collaborate to
              produce and evaluate interactive multimedia learning resources deliverable over
              the Internet for instruction in introductory engineering thermodynamics.  The
              project will create two related resources: a site on the World Wide Web and a
              UseNet newsgroup.  Using the Web home page, students will branch from a list of
              Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ's) to various learning modules, each of which
              will combine text and graphics to explain conceptual points that are common
              points of confusion in thermodynamics. The Web site will also include a "hot
              link" to the newsgroup.      A moderated newsgroup will be established in which
              thermodynamics students can post questions or comments and obtain help from one
              another and from instructors.  In addition to providing a dynamic resource of
              "virtual consulting" on thermodynamics questions and problems, the newsgroup
              will be a valuable source of instantaneous and continuous feedback to the
              project team in identifying common points of confusion among students for
              development of future learning modules.    The project will build on a large
              archive of video, sound, animation and still graphics of thermodynamic subject
              matter which has been compiled in a previous NSF- sponsored project.  Newly
              developed Internet delivery tools such as Java and Shock wave will be used to
              provide true interactive multimedia capabilities that have hitherto been too
              cumbersome to effectively deliver on-line.
