Title       : Efficacy of Active Learning in Remediating Misconceptions in Undergraduate
               Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9652782

Award Number: 9652782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59331              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold I. Modell modell@locke.hs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat'l Res for Computers
	      P.O. Box 51187
	      Seattle, WA  981151184    206/522-6045

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               How can physiology faculty best help undergraduate students correct
              misconceptions and master physiology?  This one-year pilot project is the first
              step in a broader research program that involves faculty at 11 institutions and
              is designed to examine three elements critical to answering this question: 1)
              the entry state (i.e., misconceptions held and the knowledge and skills base of
              entering students); 2) methods that promote active learning (i.e., help
              students test and modify their mental models); and 3) the definition of
              mastery.  This pilot project is examining the entry state and the active
              learning environment of the student laboratory.  The context, respiratory
              physiology, is a subject known to be difficult for students.  Our undergraduate
              student population is science and non-science majors taking introductory
              physiology at 2- and 4-year institutions. To study the entry state, we are: 1)
              determining the actual knowledge and skills that entering students have and
              examining how these match faculty expectations; 2) identifying common
              misconceptions and determining their prevalence among entering students; and 3)
              determining the extent to which students view physiology from a teleological
              perspective.  We will also determine if the design of student laboratory
              protocols is important in helping students correct misconceptions and adopt a
              mechanistic approach to physiology.  Students will participate in a traditional
              "wet lab", in which they do spirometry on one another, or in a computer
              laboratory, in which they manipulate a mathematical model of respiratory
              function.  For each lab format, students will follow either the common "observe
              and record" type of protocol or one requiring them to predict the results of a
              perturbation before conducting the experiment.  Our hypothesis is that the
              "prediction" design will be more effective than the "observe and record"
              design.  This project will yield essential information about the actual entry
              state of students in a prototypical science course and w ill provide
              information about the most effective way to remediate misconceptions and
              teleological thinking in a student laboratory setting.
