Title       : A New Model Course in Quantum Mechanics for Scientists and Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9652877

Award Number: 9652877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305126             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward F. Redish redish@physics.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard N. Steinberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Understanding quantum mechanics (QM) is of growing importance to engineers,
              chemists, and biologists, as well as to physicists of all disciplines. Fields
              where this understanding is of particular importance include mesoscopic
              systems, photonics, molecular genetics, and medical diagnostics. However, QM is
              a difficult and abstract subject and there has been little success in teaching
              it at all levels.    In response to this situation, we are conducting
              systematic investigations into student understanding of QM and develop
              instructional materials based on this research for courses.  While most
              research is being conducted in a course for scientists and engineers meant to
              follow introductory caluclus-based physics, we are also interacting with
              projects at Kansas State (Zollman) and Boston University (Garik).  These
              collaborations allow us to investigate the understanding of fundamental quantum
              concepts by students in college courses on QM for non-scientists and in high
              school.  The keys to our instructional strategies are:    1. The iterative
              process of physics education research, curriculum development, and instruction
              will be employed. This model of curriculum reform is becoming increasingly
              valued. However, it has not been applied to QM and no detailed investigations
              of student understanding of the subject have been conducted.  Research is being
              conducted into student understanding of QM and into student understanding of
              prerequisite topics such as mechanical waves and physical optics.    2.
              Materials that enable students to work constructively in small groups will be
              developed. Numerous studies in physics education have pointed to the need for
              students to work with one another in a context where they can construct an
              understanding of important fundamental principles instead of listening
              passively.  Much work is needed in extending this mode of instruction to QM. We
              hope to continue with successes we have already had developing such materials. 
                3. Instructional strategies will employ advances in  educational technology.
              Modern technology has dramatically increased the resources we have in physics
              education. Simulations allow students to "observe" phenomena and probe the
              effect of different parameters in ways not otherwise possible.  Computer
              assisted data acquisition provides students with direct kinesthetic learning
              experiences. Inexpensive simple quantum devices such as solar cells and LED's
              are readily available. Although we will not develop any software ourselves, we
              are developing lessons for using the software developed at Kansas State and
              Boston University and will test its effectiveness for improving student
              understanding of the subject.    The products of this project will include
              insights into student difficulties learning QM and a series of 12 lessons
              (tutorials) on fundamental concepts.  We will also develop assessment tools for
              QM classes (interview protocols, open-ended questions, and a multiple-choice
              concept inventory) and evaluate relevant educational software.  Once they are
              vetted by research, our lessons and assessment tools will be distributed on the
              World Wide Web.    We expect that the impact of both the research and the
              curriculum development will be substantial from the introductory to the
              advanced level, for physicists, engineers, and other scientists. We also
              suspect that the student-centered nature of the work will aid in reaching a
              more diverse population than those that traditionally succeed in these fields.
