Title       : Inverse Problems: A Curricular Resource for the First Two Years of Mathematical
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a9652834

Award Number: 9652834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64037              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Groetsch groetsch@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Curricular materials are being developed that complement mathematics courses in
              the first two years at colleges and universities throughout the nation. The
              unifying theme of these materials is the subject of inverse problems in the
              mathematical sciences. All materials are designed to integrate scientific
              knowledge with mathematical analysis and basic modeling and the units will
              exploit graphing calculators and modern mathematical software when appropriate.
              The aim is to provide a seamless blending of mathematical analysis and basic
              physical principles. The curriculum guide has the goal of providing instructors
              with tools for kindling physical intuition, fostering model building,
              encouraging conjecturing, stimulating the application of basic mathematical
              analysis, and generally promoting critical thinking by their students. The
              courseware is classified by mathematics course level and cross-indexed by
              application area and mathematical tools used. It consists of modules of related
              exercises, projects, and computational experiences, all inspired by (but not
              necessarily strictly limited to) inverse problems. In addition, software
              programs are provided in some modules. The material will be widely disseminated
              in print and electronic forms. A network of undergraduate teachers who took
              part in the Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement Workshop on the Mathematics of
              Inverse Problems, the regional Mathematical Association of America special
              session on Inverse Problems in the Undergraduate Curriculum, or the
              Mathematical Association of America's Mini-course on Inverse Problems in the
              Undergraduate Classroom will form the core group for initial distribution and
              testing of the materials.
