Title       : Making the Connection: Science, Math, and the Public Interest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1996      
File        : a9652127

Award Number: 9652127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147437             (Estimated)
Investigator: James I. Lankford jil@tartan.sapc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Flowers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St. Andrew Presbyterian
	      1700 Dogwood Mile
	      Laurinburg, NC  283525521    919/276-3652

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Traditional teaching of math and science to non-majors through disciplinary
              breadth courses does not address new realities.  These courses lack
              connectivity and fail to cover a broad scope of relevant scientific issues or
              to adequately educate students, particularly the significant population of
              average students, in the analytical and quantitative skills needed to function
              competently in a technological world.  These critical parts of general
              education should be totally reformulated with courses specifically designed to
              provide basic but broad scientific, technical and quantitative skills to a
              diverse student body.  St. Andrews, with a highly regarded interdisciplinary
              general education program and a strong math/science program, has designed and
              is pilot testing the concepts of a visionary two-course sequence that combines
              quantitative skills with scientific and technological  material of public
              interest selected from the natural and social sciences.  Pedagogy capitalizes
              on the enormous potential of technology including networked computers and
              Internet.  Math/science majors will participate in the courses as student
              assistants/mentors.  The goal is to have the program institution-wide by Fall
              1998.  Pembroke State University will work jointly with St. Andrews on the
              project.  Over 500 students and 23 faculty will be directly involved in the
              project (800+ students/yr beyond).  Intensive and objective assessment will
              measure student learning outcomes to compare with results from traditional
              breadth courses.  Such pervasive changes require substantial faculty
              development to deliver the curricula effectively since faculty are not prepared
              to each the multi-disciplines needed.  NSF funding would catalyze faculty
              training and reallocation necessary for institution-wide reform.  A private
              liberal arts and sciences college collaborating with a large public university
              will provide a broad base for assessment and dissemination of the program.
