Title       : A New Integrative Model for Undergraduate Education: Achieving General Education
               Through the Major
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9652110

Award Number: 9652110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard Voland   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea Leskes  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many of the problems identified in undergraduate science
              education--fragmentation of knowledge, overspecialization, inadequate emphasis
              on student learning--parallel those in other disciplines. Some, such as the
              inability to communicate well, result from deficiencies in what is
              traditionally called `general education.` Yet the very separation of gen-ed
              from specialization in the major creates fragmented learning. Nowhere is this
              problem more intractable than in large universities like Northeastern
              University (NU), where independent colleges offer a wide array of programs to
              students with differing expectations.    NU proposes a new model for
              undergraduate education that, by fully integrating gen-ed and the major and
              placing responsibility for the former with the faculty charged with the latter,
              holds transformational promise for all of undergraduate education.    Through a
              consultative process, the NU community has identified the shared general
              education goals that will undergird the new model. Applicable to all our
              programs, they include a set of skills, contexts, perspectives, and
              connections, translatable by departmental faculty into field-specific
              objectives. Students will achieve the goals in a cumulative manner by following
              pathways designed by the major department faculty using disciplinary and
              liberal arts courses, modules, and non-classroom experiences (e.g. cooperative
              education).   Within the project's goal and broad objectives, the principal
              specific objectives for the two grant years include:  1. Launching
              implementation of the new model in the Colleges of Engineering and Computer
              Science, the School of Engineering Technology, and the science departments
              within the College of Arts & Sciences.  2. Advancing implementation of the
              science-related shared goals (information literacy, quantitative reasoning, and
              an understanding of the natural world) in the non-science units.  Evaluation
              and assessment, both of student learning and of programmatic success have been
              built into the project from the outset.    Northeastern requests $200,000 over
              a two-year period from the NSF to support predominantly faculty development (in
              competency-based education, teaching gen-ed skills in disciplinary contexts,
              assessment, and the use of interactive pedagogies) and released time/stipends
              for curricular modification in the science and technology areas of the project.
              The model should be of particular interest to other complex universities and NU
              intends to continue sharing widely its experiences.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
