Title       : Engineering Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9652861

Award Number: 9652861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry J. Shuman shuman@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia J. Atman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norman P. Hummon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Byron S. Gottfried  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Our goal is to better prepare engineering and business undergraduates for the
              highly technical professional challenges of the 21st century. We wish to
              instill, from the start, a broad-based understanding of the profession they are
              about to enter, a spirit of entrepreneurship, and an ability to adapt to a
              world where intense competition will require changing career paths. We will do
              this by developing a two integrated courses which focus on engineering's
              interfaces with society and the professional workplace. These courses will
              utilize active learning methods and will be broken into modules to facilitate
              export.    These courses will both fill gaps in the engineering curriculum and
              provide students from other disciplines with the core of technically oriented
              concentrations which should serve them well in future endeavors. They are in
              response to deficiencies that we and others have identified and which parallel
              needs laid out in recent landmark reports on engineering education's future by
              the ASEE, NRC and NSF, and which are epitomized in ABET 2000. We build upon our
              prior NSF sponsored projects, augmented by the results of other NSF funded
              studies to:    1. Develop Engineering Interface Courses:            a. The
              Essence of Engineering: The Relationship between Analysis and Design: In this
              first year course, students will learn how to apply the principles of
              engineering analysis to engineering design problems. Each design problem will
              be practical in nature and require substantial analysis to resolve.        b.
              Balancing Cost, Schedule and Risk: This third year course will provide an
              appreciation of risk and ethics in order to resolve trade-offs among technical
              effort, time and risk. An emphasis will be placed on examining well-known
              engineering failures to understand why they occurred and how future potential
              malfunctions might be avoided.    2. Assess and Evaluate: Conduct a rigorous
              assessment and evaluation of these courses through development, pilot and
              implementation stages, with particula r attention devoted to reducing attrition
              by better meeting students' expectations of educational value, relevance, and
              quality.    3. Disseminate: A primary form of dissemination will be the
              preparation of text books and materials which to facilitate export and adaption
              at other engineering settings. Material will also be disseminated via
              conference presentations and the internet.
