Title       : Creating a Research-Rich Curriculum: A Model for Lifelong and Continuous
               Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9652063

Award Number: 9652063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Czaja czajaja@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Rauckhorst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcia Baxter-Magolda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Miami University proposes a systemic project to convert current research-based
              educational initiatives into an expanded and comprehensive model program of
              `research-rich`' undergraduate education at the University.  The proposed
              project is part of the national undergraduate research movement, and will
              contribute important concrete outcomes to the growing base of that movement. 
              Specifically, the project will produce:  1) a model science curriculum in which
              research-rich inquiry-based learning permeates the curriculum, and in which
              students are encouraged in a mode of learning appropriate for their lifelong
              learning, 2) a model infrastructure in which students and faculty are carefully
              prepared for, and supported within, a variety of undergraduate research
              experiences, and 3) an expanded set of undergraduate research opportunities,
              including interdisciplinary group projects.  These aspects of a model program
              will be disseminated to other institutions through presentations at national
              meetings and publications.  In addition, the project will initiate an ambitious
              longitudinal study of student research participants' development as independent
              learners.  We propose to measure the latter development, and believe that the
              results will be of national importance and interest.  This project builds upon
              significant research-intensive educational undertakings at the University,
              namely:  1) a distinctive new undergraduate research initiative, the Miami
              Undergraduate Summer Scholars Program; 2) an academic-year undergraduate
              research grant program; 3) numerous inquiry-based learning projects; 4) honors
              program thesis projects; 5) `capstone experiences` required by our new liberal
              education program; and 6) summer research participation funded by the Howard
              Hughes Medical Institute and NSF.  In the Undergraduate Summer Scholars
              Program, one hundred students from twenty-five departments participated in
              full-time summer (1995) research with faculty mentors.  An evaluation has shown
              that the program produced educational experiences which were rated
              overwhelmingly by participants as `more significant than other educational
              experiences`.  This proposal to the NSF would enhance and evaluate
              research-intensive education throughout the science curriculum within the
              Departments of Physics, Chemistry, Microbiology, Botany, Zoology, Psychology,
              and Geology.  In view of the centrality of the project to the University's
              mission, substantial cost sharing is committed.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
