Title       : Infusing Quantitative Reasoning Across the Disciplines: An Integrated Approach
               to Numeracy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9652095

Award Number: 9652095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank A. Cerreto   (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melaku Lakew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Mattlage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Renganathan Iyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R Stockton Coll of NJ
	      PO Box 195
	      Pomona, NJ  08240    609/652-1776

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The need for increased numeracy among American undergraduates is well
              documented.  Students enrolled in mathematics courses rarely see the
              connections between the quantitative principles they are studying and issues
              which arise in the other disciplines.  In Fall 1995, after a two-year planning
              effort, the Richard Stockton College of New Jersey initiated a program designed
              to address these problems.  Building on the success of our
              writing-across-the-curriculum program, the current project infuses quantitative
              reasoning across the disciplines.    Project objectives concern students,
              faculty, curriculum, and research. Students  develop strong quantitative
              skills, understand the important role quantitative reasoning plays in a variety
              of disciplines, and learn mechanisms to overcome mathematics anxiety and
              avoidance. Faculty members from throughout the college become familiar with
              current research in mathematics education, enrich their own mathematical
              backgrounds, deepen their understandings of the connections between
              quantitative reasoning and other disciplines, and develop classroom materials
              which promote student construction of meaningful mathematics. New and revamped
              courses which emphasize the significance of quantitative reasoning to the
              disciplines are added to the curriculum.  Faculty members conduct research
              studies at the individual, classroom, and institutional level.    In order to
              achieve these objectives, a diverse group of 24 faculty participate in a series
              of course development and research seminars, beginning with a series of
              sessions during the summer of 1996. From this group, four smaller disciplinary
              teams (each augmented by a student)  develop and test curricular materials and
              approaches during the subsequent academic year. After summary sessions in May,
              the project culminates with a regional conference on infusing quantitative
              reasoning across the curriculum, hosted by Stockton in August, 1997.    Besides
              preparing graduates to be capable members of the work force and informe d
              citizens and consumers, this project will contribute to a clearer understanding
              of the relationship between mathematical ideas and the contexts to which they
              are applied. In addition, the project serves as a model for other institutions
              who wish to integrate quantitative reasoning throughout the curriculum.
