Title       : Creating a Modern Physics Course: Visualization and Computation for
               Undergraduate Physics Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1999  
File        : a9652888

Award Number: 9652888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean A. Zollman dzollman@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Science and engineering majors first encounter a serious study of Twentieth
              Century physics, frequently called Modern Physics, in their third semester. The
              Modern Physics course has a unique role in the education of future scientists
              and engineers. Physics students begin their study of topics of interest to
              contemporary physicists; engineering and other science majors have their only
              opportunity to study physics related to micro-and nano-technology - areas which
              will be of importance to their careers. Yet, the present course has changed
              little to reflect knowledge about student learning, computational technology,
              or recent research advances in fundamental quantum physics.      We are
              building on existing work (primarily Visual Quantum Mechanics) to create a new
              Modern Physics course. This modern Modern Physics course will utilize
              contemporary teaching-learning methods which are based on research into how
              students learn physics, computational and visualization techniques, and recent
              fundamental research results. Included in the materials to be developed are
              tools which will help students visualize the concepts of quantum physics,
              simple hands-on activities, and templates for computational tools. Many of
              these materials will be expansions of Visual Quantum Mechanics materials. By
              beginning with these existing quantum teaching-learning materials the project
              will be able to complete this effort at a relatively low cost.      The project
              will receive advice and direction from an advisory committee whose members have
              been selected for their knowledge and previous work in teaching modern physics.
               Before the materials are released for commercial distribution extensive
              testing will be completed by field testers who will use the materials in
              classes throughout the country.       The result will be a set of modern
              learning materials which provide the opportunity for science and engineering
              students to learn about contemporary physics.
