Title       : Improving the Gateway Courses in Chemistry, Mathematics, and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9652071

Award Number: 9652071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Buford Price bprice@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Calvin C. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger W. Falcone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert L. Strauss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley G. Prussin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the past two decades the University of California at Berkeley has been
              actively engaged in improving undergraduate education in science and
              mathematics. As a part of these efforts, the Professional Development Program
              has created the `Intensive Discussion Section` (IDS) model for mathematics.
              These IDSs, which emphasize active student learning of course material at a
              high level, as well as collaborative efforts and good communication skills,
              have proven highly successful in advancing certain underrepresented groups
              through introductory calculus courses. The IDS model has recently been adopted
              in physics and chemistry for underrepresented students as well, with the same
              success. A two-year pilot program is proposed to begin expanding these IDSs for
              all students in lower division physics, chemistry, and mathematics, and at the
              same time to improve cross- disciplinary exchange among these subjects. These
              changes will require creation of new course materials and improved graduate
              student instructor training. Coupled with other ongoing curriculum reform at
              Berkeley, these improvements are expected to greatly improve student
              achievement in these gateway courses, to improve student performance and
              retention in upper division coursework, and to produce graduates well matched
              to the needs of employers in science, engineering, technology, and other
              disciplines. This proposal represents the first attempt to institutionalize
              academic reform in lower division at a major research university. The results
              will be thoroughly evaluated and disseminated widely.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
