Title       : Institute Wide Integration of Computer Based Instructional Aids into the Science
               and Technology Curriculum at Caltech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9652066

Award Number: 9652066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Baltimore baltimo@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Everhart  (Principal Investigator former)
              Barry M. Simon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan S. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles J. Brokaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Goodstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  The proposal requests NSF support for a newly-initiated Caltech  program
              designed to foster Institute-wide development of computer-based teaching tools.
               These computer-based materials will be prepared on topics spanning the
              complete range of technical disciplines in the physical and social sciences
              emhasized at the Institute, including efforts in the physical, chemical,
              biological, earth, and planetary sciences, mathematics and applied mathematics
              courses, chemical, electrical, mechanical, civil, environmental, and
              aeronautical engineering courses, and in economics and the social sciences.  To
              accomplish this task, Caltech is seizing an opportunity to involve its most
              valuable resource, the skills of its own undergraduate students, intimately
              into the instructional process, Undergraduate students will work closely with
              Caltech faculty in developing improved visualization, computation, and
              communication aids for the instruction of a broad range of technical courses at
              the Institute.  A committee will be established to oversee the Institute-wide
              teaching reform projects, and this committee will receive student and faculty
              feedback, will be responsible for dissemination of materials to the faculty and
              to the non-Institute community, and will report directly to the Caltech
              administration and Faculty Board regarding the success and future direction for
              the program.  This effort thus strives to be another Caltech-led national model
              for systemic reform, having a focus on comprehensive, coordinated,
              Institute-wide efforts to incorporate multimedia materials into the routine
              course experiences of the science and engineering student.
