Title       : TLC Design: Integrating Team Learning, Computing, and Design in Undergraduate
               Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1999   
File        : a9652973

Award Number: 9652973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall L. Kolar kolar@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Baxter E. Vieux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Mooney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hermann Gruenwald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kanthasamy K. Muraleetharan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                     Evaluations of existing undergraduate engineering programs continually
              cite three weaknesses: graduates lack technical literacy; graduates lack oral
              and written communication skills; and graduates lack design experience. To
              address these weaknesses, the School of Civil Engineering and Environmental
              Science (CEES) at the University of Oklahoma, is proposing a systemic reform
              initiative that will incorporate a single design project integrated throughout
              the curriculum. The common design project, entitled "Sooner City," will be
              introduced during the freshman year and continue for the entire curriculum.
              Design tasks range from population estimates to the water supply system. A
              common design project can unify the curriculum and allow material learned in
              early courses to carry forward. Another advantage is that the students will
              have a professional design portfolio that can be presented to perspective
              employers.  The design project will be taught using the just- in-time learning
              paradigm. By focusing on real-world applications up front, students will be
              interested and motivated to learn. The involved courses will be restructured to
              incorporate team learning and group presentations, which enhances the students'
              interpersonal and communication skills.  In addition, starting in fall of 1997,
              all incoming engineering freshman will have a laptop computer with wireless
              communication technology so that each classroom becomes a networked computer
              lab.  A primary goal of the project is to produce graduates who are
              self-disciplined, responsible, computer literate, and who can communicate
              effectively with fellow engineers, management, and the public. It is
              anticipated that the reformed curriculum can serve as a paradigm for
              engineering programs throughout the country. Interactive design modules and
              hypertext tutorials will be disseminated to other institutions through a CD
              ROM, the world wide web and through traditional outlets such as conferences and
              journal articles.
