Title       : Optimizing a Windows-Based Computer Data Acquisition and Reduction System for
               the General Chemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1996  
File        : a9652855

Award Number: 9652855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Vitz vitz@kutztown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kutztown University
	      
	      Kutztown, PA  19530    215/683-4000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The product of this project will be a Windows-based data acquisition and
              reduction system for general  chemistry laboratories that is based on
              inexpensive, generic hardware and standard software. The  DOS-based LIMSport
              system which it will succeed has been used for years in our laboratories with 
              success, and has been disseminated nationwide by means of seven, week-long
              NSF/UFE Summer  workshops. Most universities are now converting to
              Windows-based software. This necessitates a  revision of LIMSport, but it also
              offers an opportunity for substantial improvement. Our system is  unique in
              that it adds data acquisition capability to the most popular spreadsheets
              (Excel and Lotus), so  that students learn standard, transferable methods of
              data analysis in the laboratory, and teachers can  use the system as an
              authoring language to create their own experiments involving direct data 
              acquisition. We will prepare spreadsheet templates for a number of typical
              general chemistry  experiments which illustrate ways of using the powerful
              graphical and numerical methods built into  modern spreadsheets to reveal
              trends in real-time data as they are collected. An extensive evaluation  plan
              has been developed to determine which computer methods are most effective in
              promoting student  learning in the laboratory. A laboratory manual will be
              written for the new Windows/Excel version of  LIMSport which incorporates the
              results of our work as well as features suggested by the large body  of
              research on educational chemistry laboratories. The manual will provide
              background information for  about 30 experiments which are suitable for General
              Chemistry, using the capability of LIMSport to utilize small quantities of
              relatively innocuous chemicals.
