Title       : Connections: Integrating Mathematics and Science General Education Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9652784

Award Number: 9652784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172168             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet L. Andersen jandersen@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward C. Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/392-5111

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project is for the development of an integrated, mathematics/science,
              general education, two-course sequence. This sequence is aimed at that large
              group of students who encounter mathematics and science courses as part of
              their general education requirements, but all too often find these courses
              neither engaging nor relevant to their course work or their life outside of
              academia. The mathematics course Mathematics in Public Discourse will focus on
              the skills needed to critically interpret the type of mathematical and
              scientific information commonly found in public discourse and positions of
              leadership or responsibility. Students will be able to pair this course with
              one of two science courses: either The Atmosphere and Environmental Change or
              Biological Resources and Environmental Change. The science courses will build
              on and expand the skills introduced in the mathematics course. All of the
              courses will use the same mathematical material (simple functions,
              interpretation of graphs, basic statistics), pedagogical techniques (class
              discussion, collaborative learning, investigative laboratories) and technology
              (graphing calculators). Problems and examples will be taken from sources, such
              as newspaper articles and company reports, that are encountered outside of
              academia. Two mathematicians and two scientists from Hope College will work on
              teams to develop, pilot and revise these courses. In order to test the
              transferability of the model of paired science/mathematics courses, two
              Kalamazoo College faculty will work with the PI's to develop courses for their
              institution. Both the course materials and the model of paired
              mathematics/science courses will be disseminated through journal articles,
              presentations, commercial publications and workshops. The development,
              piloting, revisions, evaluation and dissemination of this project will occur
              during a period of 31 months. The project should serve as both a local and
              national model for integrating mathematics and non-mathematics courses.
