Title       : A Core Course in Scientific Inquiry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9652981

Award Number: 9652981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179798             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh T. Hudson hhudson@the-college.iwctx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suk B. Kong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Watkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of The Incarnate Word
	      4301 Broadway
	      San Antonio, TX  782096318    210/829-3901

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  The science literacy of college graduates is not acceptable for today's
              technological society.  To hold jobs and to be responsible, voting citizens,
              non-science graduates need fewer facts from  specific science disciplines and
              more skills with which to understand, approach, and reason about  science
              issues.    This project will develop a science course designed to instill an
              awareness of how science is  practiced and the skills needed to approach
              science issues with responsible confidence. While  addressing a national need
              for increased science literacy, it will also fulfill the science requirement 
              in the core curriculum. The primary audience for this new course will be
              students in the liberal  arts, education, and the social sciences.    The
              project will reach its desired goal by designing a course in which students
              carry out hands-on  science activities in a controlled discovery environment.
              Students will not be given the content  details in a formal lecture setting.
              Rather they will be given activities that bring out important  variables in
              observed phenomena, instead of in theories.    The course and its development
              will be guided by four objectives: to train students in the  process of
              observation, to assist students in developing explanations for what they
              observe, to  assist students to create models which will test their
              explanations, and to lead to students to apply  their explanations to other
              examples.    At the conclusion of this project a complete, stand alone one
              semester course in scientific  inquiry will be packaged. There will be a full
              series of student activities that can be conducted in  an 80 minute class
              period with preparatory material, further explanations for students and 
              resource material for teachers.
