Title       : Contextual Coursework for Elementary Pre-Service Teachers (ConCEPT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a9652800

Award Number: 9652800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Nanes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia C. Wan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce H. Weber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joan T. Lebsack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Fromson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  To reverse the historically poor preparation of many of California's
              elementary school teachers in science, and to increase the quality and quantity
              of science instruction in the state's elementary classrooms, California State
              University, Fullerton (CSUF), in collaboration with five local community
              colleges, will develop Contextual Coursework for Elementary Pre-Service
              Teachers (ConCEPT). Because most elementary teachers fulfill their science
              requirements at community colleges, ConCEPT will target prospective elementary
              teachers at CSUF and the community colleges (a pool of 3,500-4,500 students).
              ConCEPT will draw on existing exemplary curriculum materials to develop three
              3-unit courses, including laboratory experience, designed to help future K-6
              teachers understand science concepts, acquire science process skills and
              implement the K-6 National Science Education Standards. The courses will be
              cross-disciplinary, with a contextual approach to science and a hands-on,
              inquiry-based pedagogy. ConCEPT courses will be developed collaboratively
              during the first year and refined and piloted during the second year. ConCEPT's
              immediate impact will be to change the way future elementary teachers at the
              six participating institutions experience science. Within a few years, as newly
              credentialed teachers enter their own classrooms, ConCEPT will begin to affect
              the way California's elementary students learn about science as well. The
              ConCEPT courses will have application at any institution where future
              elementary teachers fulfill their general education science requirements and
              after successful field testing, will be disseminated to institutions throughout
              the U.S. Beyond the course design, ConCEPT will establish an innovative model
              for higher education collaborations generally and course development
              specifically, creating a new approach to articulation between community
              colleges and four-year institutions. Ultimately, it will help lay the
              foundation for general education science courses at institutions  across the
              country.
