Title       : Multimedia Simulation Package for Teaching Manufacturing Processes in a Virtual
               Environment, Phase I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1997    
File        : a9652823

Award Number: 9652823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel W. Troxler jtroxler@ie.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Harkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Stanislao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         A substantial number of graduates of engineering, business, and
              technology programs in the U.S. go on to jobs in the manufacturing sector.
              These jobs often require the design, and/or management of complex,
              information-intensive manufacturing systems. But most engineers and business
              majors have very little exposure to manufacturing processes. This project will
              result in the first phase of development of comprehensive simulation software
              for teaching operational strategies and manufacturing processes in a virtual
              environment. The package will include a graphical, animated user interface for
              selection and input of all necessary variables, parameters and process control
              information; process models to simulate changes in materials as they are shaped
              into products; and graphical, multi-media procedures for indicating the results
              and providing a platform for impact analysis on other enterprise elements such
              as cost and quality. It will be used by a variety of engineering, technology,
              and business students in any college or university where manufacturing process
              courses are part of the curriculum. It will also be used by design/build teams
              for manufacturability analysis in capstone engineering design. The system
              developed will be analogous to a flight simulator for training pilots.
              Potential pilots spend many hours in flight simulators "learning to fly"
              without burning an ounce of fuel. Students who use this system will spend time
              'learning to manufacture" by experiencing manufacturing processes where actual
              costs and time demands are usually prohibitive. Incorporating the software into
              the curriculum will result in orders of magnitude improvement in the relevance
              of the educational experience compared to job expectations. Experience gained
              by using this software will permit newly hired engineers, technologists and
              future managers to be more productive and creative in industry in a shorter
              period of time.
