Title       : Free-Air CO2 Enrichment of a Closed-Canopy Deciduous Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9652581

Award Number: 9652581
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Norby   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony W. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nelson T. Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth G. O'Neill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stan D. Wullschleger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DOE-Oak Ridge Operations
	      
	      Oak Ridge, TN  37830    /   -

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9652581  Norby    The response of natural ecosystems to an increasing
              concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere is a key component of analyses of the
              current and potential impact of global change. Efforts to understand how
              eastern deciduous forests will be affected by CO2 enrichment of the atmosphere
              have heretofore been addressed by studying components of the forest system
              (individual small trees, specific processes), but it is now time to take the
              critical leap to measuring the integrated response of an intact forest
              ecosystem with a focus on stand-level mechanisms.  A free-air CO2 exposure
              (FACE) facility being assembled on the Oak Ridge National Environmental
              Research Park provides a mechanism for studying stand-level responses.  The
              facility in a closed-canopy, 11m tall sweetgum monoculture will expose trees
              continuously to CO2 concentrations 200 PPM above ambient.    The scientific
              tasks are organized around an interconnected set of hypotheses that address the
              essential features of a forest stand and how these features could influence
              responses to CO2.  The objectives of these tasks are to characterize
              aboveground tree growth and leaf area in relation to CO2 concentration and
              interannual variation in other environmental factors; determine physiological
              mechanisms of response, including foliar gas exchange, plant water relations,
              respiration and tissue biochemistry; quantify fine root density and turnover
              and other components of soil carbon cycling; quantify the critical components
              of the nitrogen cycle and their response to CO2 enrichment; and use a
              mechanistic, process-based, soil-plant ecosystem model to develop and refine
              hypotheses of ecosystem response to elevated CO2.  The results of these
              analyses will be used for modeling and assessment of potential global change
              impacts.  The Oak Ridge FACE facility will be a user facility, open to
              researchers from universities and other research laboratories who are
              interested in pursuing other questions relevant to forest response to elevated
              C O2.
