Title       : Engineering Models for Everyday Things
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1997  
File        : a9652847

Award Number: 9652847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry J. Petroski hp¦egr.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7410,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Everyday objects like paper clips, pencils, and aluminum cans are taken   for
              granted, yet their design and production present tremendous challenges to  
              engineers in terms of working tolerances, quality control, and economy of  
              manufacture, not to mention aesthetics and ergonomics. Thus, these simple  
              artifacts provide ideal case studies for introducing students to a wide  
              variety of engineering concepts, principles, and problems in already familiar  
              and readily accessible real-world contexts. In this project, a variety of  
              analytical and computer models of simple objects like paper clips will be  
              developed, in conjunction with desk-top experiments, to introduce students to  
              the methods and limitations of design, analysis, and development in  
              engineering. The simplest models will be accessible to firstyear students, yet 
               will necessarily involve enough restrictive assumptions and simplifications to
                make them suitable also for refinement, extension, and further use in  
              subsequent courses. The analytical and computer models, as well as the  
              complementary desk-top experiments employing actual paper clips and, to the  
              extent permitted by the scope of the project, other manufactured objects, will 
               be suitable to introduce and guide individual and group design exercises  
              focused on the redesign and improvement of the artifacts explored. In addition 
               to the development and use of models for design and redesign, this project  
              will also develop larger contexts into which to present the design problem, so 
               that students will be exposed to other aspects of product realization,  
              including marketing and sales considerations. In this way, the analytical  
              aspects of engineering will not be presented in a vacuum. Finally, the  
              pedagogical resources developed in this project will be presented in articles  
              for wide dissemination and use throuqhout the enqineerinq curriculum.
