Title       : An Integrated Calculus Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9652959

Award Number: 9652959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Calvin C. Moore ccmoore@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Ribet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan D. Weinstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan H. Schoenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley G. Prussin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                       The University of California Berkeley is developing courseware for a
              computer class laboratory that is a central feature of a new four-semester
              calculus sequence. Students spend three hours a week in this computer
              laboratory working in groups of 25 using the courseware with a trained Graduate
              Student Instructor. This laboratory work is fully integrated with three hours
              of lectures in a traditional large class format. The courseware consists of
              detailed lesson plans and worksheets together with implementation in MatLab.
              The laboratory courseware attempts to balance individual and group work,
              integrates computer and paper and pencil work, and integrates with an existing
              traditional curriculum. Further, the overall project is creating an
              infrastructure in the department that makes it inviting and easy for all
              faculty to teach in these new courses.  The project pays particular attention
              to the proper training of the Graduate Student Instructors. The project is
              collaborating with the Professional Development Program at Berkeley by
              featuring elements that are aimed at improving the success rates of at-risk
              students in these key gateway courses. Project results are being widely
              disseminated through presentations, a World Wide Web site, and commercial
              publication.
