Title       : Reform of Science and Math Education at New York University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1996       
File        : a9652081

Award Number: 9652081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick P. Greenleaf greenlea@acf2.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice S. Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew S. Santirocco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              New York University proposes to develop a novel program of science and math
              education for nonscience students. The "Foundations of Scientific Inquiry"
              (FSI), a math/science curriculum which was initially developed for NYU's
              liberal arts students, will be adapted to meet the needs of other undergraduate
              student bodies.  The impetus for this project is the need to give these
              nonscientists a basic understanding of the conduct of science and a familiarity
              with quantitative, analytical reasoning that will allow them to function
              effectively as responsible citizens in a highly technological world.  Project
              objectives are to:  l)Improve the scientific and technical literacy of
              nonscience students, particularly student teachers, who as a group are
              seriously under prepared for science teaching; 2)Catalyze institution-wide
              reform and engage university faculty from diverse undergraduate preprofessional
              programs in a productive dialogue about the role of science in undergraduate
              education; 3)Develop a model program relevant to a range of student bodies and
              educational institutions.   The FSI curriculum presently consists of a 3-course
              sequence that integrates physical, biological and mathematical sciences.  Each
              course is modular and interdisciplinary, with each module drawing from several
              areas of science and illustrating the nature of scientific reasoning.  This
              project will modify the curriculum to suit the interests, levels of
              preparedness, and programs of study of diverse student bodies.  Project
              outcomes will include teaching materials, including instructor lecture texts,
              student workshop exercises, and computer-based educational materials tailored
              to a range of audiences.  The intent is to export the NYU experience through
              institutional partnerships with the public higher education system, small
              liberal arts colleges, predominantly black colleges, and teacher training
              programs.  The modular, flexible nature of the project and the availability of
              published curricular materials mean that the curriculum  is easily portable and
              easily  adapted to the student body and training program.
