Title       : Revitalization of Undergraduate Mathematics and Science: A Thematic Systems
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9652116

Award Number: 9652116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harriet Schwartz hschwart@pilot.njin.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis A. Spano  (Principal Investigator former)
              Yvonne A. Kemp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Reginald K. Luke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Hepburn  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Middlesex County College
	      2600 Woodbridge Avenue
	      Edison, NJ  08818    201/548-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Middlesex County College proposes a radical restructuring of mathematics,
              science and technology curricula for non-science majors.  Numerous reports and
              studies have deplored the low level of scientific and technological literacy in
              our society.  College students enrolled in non technical majors programs are
              required to take mathematics and science courses to fulfill general education
              requirement for graduation, but these courses bear no relationship to their
              major program.  Additionally, for the most part, the mathematics, science and
              technology courses that are available to fulfill general education requirements
              for majors in social science, humanities and business programs are designed to
              meet the needs of the mathematics  and science-based majors and are of little
              interest to non-science majors.    The goal of the project is to provide
              non-science majors with the breadth and depth of understanding in mathematics,
              science and technology to enable them to participate as informed citizens in
              discussion and decisions on critical issues facing the nation.  The College
              will take an interdisciplinary, integrated systems approach that fosters
              understanding of a variety of mathematics and science concepts in an applied
              context and that is grounded in issues and problems that have a science
              concepts in an applied context and that is grounded in issues and problems that
              have a clear impact on the lives of students and can, thus, be seen to be
              relevant by the most"unscientific".  It will incorporate the integration of
              social science and humanities concepts to provide a context for consideration
              of the social import of the mathematics and science concepts presented.      To
              accomplish this goal, faculty, working in interdisciplinary teams will create,
              pilot-test and implement module-based courses that incorporate instruction in
              mathematics, science and technology within the context of two themes:  the
              environment and telecommunications.  These courses will form the models to an
              additional four themes tha t will be developed by the College subsequent to
              this project.  These integrated offerings will replace current curricula
              choices for non-science majors.  The restructured curricula will provide
              non-science majors with opportunities for learning mathematics, science and
              technology that are relevant and meaningful.  As a result, students will be
              more likely to continue to learn and read about current issues in which the
              sciences and technology play major roles, and will be capable of making
              informed decisions regarding scientific and technological questions.      The
              College has individually, and consortium with other institutions, participated
              in major mathematics and science education initiatives to ensure that both
              students enrolling in programs and those graduating, have the knowledge and
              technical skills necessary for successful employment and further education. 
              This project is an extension of those efforts
