Title       : Scientific Imaging and Visual Expression: A New and Powerful Approach to
               Learning, Teaching and Communicating Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9652950

Award Number: 9652950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194968             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Kim Vandiver kimv@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Felice Frankel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Modern communication of scientific results makes frequent use of images and
              figures, however, research scientists are rarely trained in the creation of
              images and frequently give little consideration to their communicative power.
              This is a proposal to develop a curriculum and methodology to make new use of
              the power of imaging to communicate science and to provide a new channel for
              scientific creativity.  The process and the methods will change the way
              undergraduates, faculty and researchers in science and engineering see and
              image their work.  The project is an unusual collaboration between the faculty
              and staff of the MIT Edgerton Center, research scientists at MIT, Harvard, and
              the Scripps Institute and a highly regarded photographer/imager of science. 
              MIT's Edgerton Center, which will develop the subjects and materials, has a
              long tradition of scientific photography and enjoys considerable support of
              industry in equipping the Center with modern image processing equipment.  A
              sequence of modules on various topics in image creation and visual
              communication will be developed in small undergraduate seminar classes during
              the first year and a half.  The materials and methodologies developed in the
              seminars will become the basis of working course notes/teacher's guide to be
              prepared in the summers and during the fourth semester. The guide will
              facilitate the export of the methods to other research universities.  Workshops
              will be offered to introduce the methods to teachers.  The new materials and
              methodologies will: 1) make students technically proficient in photographic and
              digital imaging and encourage a clarity in thinking about production of figures
              and images; 2) teach future scientists to communicate better the results of
              their work to the non-scientific community by bringing an aesthetic component
              to their imaging; 3) expose undergraduates to current research, by involving
              them in the process of obtaining informational and compelling images in
              laboratory settings; 4) provide opportunitie s to understand science through
              the imaging process; 5) introduce faculty and students to a new way of thinking
              about science by the creation of visual constructions of scientific principles;
              and 6) introduce the powerful potential of the Internet to create a bi-coastal
              collaboration (Scripps and MIT) in imaging science and engineering.
