Title       : Pre-Engineering in South Alabama
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9652914

Award Number: 9652914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179443             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund Tsang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Husam Omar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin D. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Hamid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mcdonald Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    251/460-6101

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The proposed project is to develop and implement a "Introduction to
              Engineering" course at the University of South Alabama (USA) and Bishop State
              Community College (BSCC). The goals of the project are improved retention of
              first-year students at USA who are not taking Calculus I during their first
              year, and career exploration and preparation for students at BSCC. The
              pre-engineering course has the following objectives: 1) gain understanding of
              the engineering profession; 2) develop problem-solving skills; 3) make
              connections between mathematics, sciences and engineering ideas; 4) practice
              teaming skills; 5) enhance written and oral communication skills; 6) develop a
              positive attitude of self; and 7) use email. The innovation of the proposed
              project is integration of Service Learning into the first-year engineering
              design experience: under the guidance of faculty advisors, student design teams
              will design, produce, and deliver to middle-school teachers educational modules
              and manipulatives that allow hands-on learning of mathematics. The special
              audiences targeted are: first-year students at USA who are not taking Calculus
              I in their first year, students at BSCC who want to find out about the
              engineering profession; and Mobile County students currently participating in
              an honors program (Accepting the Challenge to Excel) sponsored by the College
              of Engineering at USA. The proposed project is a collaborative effort by the
              College of Engineering at USA, Bishop State Community College, and the SECME
              (Southeastern Consortium for Minorities in Engineering) program of the Mobile
              County Public School System. The proposed project has the potential to become a
              model project for integrating Service Learning into the first-year engineering
              design experience to improve student retention and recruitment of under-
              represented groups.
