Title       : Mathematics-Engineering-Science Core Program for Students inNon-Technical Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9652051

Award Number: 9652051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brad G. Osgood brad@osgood.standford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              All college students today need a broad baseline of science and mathematics to
              become full contributors to U.S. society.  For students with concentrations
              outside the technical areas, being cut off from scientific knowledge undermines
              their ability to understand important aspects of the modern world and to act as
              responsible citizens.  Stanford University proposes to develop a core course in
              Engineering, Mathematics and Science for students in the non-technical majors. 
              The goal is for students to have a serious encounter with essential processes
              and ideas in mathematics, engineering, and science, with an emphasis on
              process.  The program will consist of several year-long tracks taught by
              interdisciplinary teams of faculty.  Each track will have a lab component.  The
              tracks allow for disciplinary focus, but will have in common a collection of
              key ideas from science and technology.  The mathematics in the course will be
              developed in context and to support the study of scientific and technical
              problems.  Computer technology will also be incorporated as an important tool. 
              To elicit faculty interests a (university) RFP describing the course and
              inviting proposals to design and teach a track was sent to the faculty last
              year.  As a result there are now three tracks under development to be offered
              next year for a period of at least three years.  The tracks are: Planet Earth,
              The Heart, and Light in the Physical and Biological World.  The RFP process
              will be repeated to bring new faculty and new tracks into the program.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
