Title       : Engineering and Science Modules in First Year Calculus Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1997      
File        : a9652955

Award Number: 9652955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28895              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly J. Black kelly.black@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen G. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Ossenbruggen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The calculus curriculum is being augmented with a series of self contained
              engineering and scientific modules into the laboratory sections of the first
              year calculus course. These modules are specifically designed to challenge
              students and require them to apply basic principles and develop mathematical
              descriptions of physical systems. These modules are unique in that they will be
              presented by engineering and scientific faculty with the purpose of
              demonstrating how calculus is a vital aspect of the curriculum.    The
              advantage of the proposed approach is that it offers a method to present real
              applications and be able to accommodate large student to faculty ratios. The
              exercises associated with each module are designed so that students are
              required to employ spreadsheets on computers in the resulting analysis. This
              allows the use of real data (with noise), but it also requires a minimal amount
              of technological sophistication on the part of the students.    The proposed
              method is specifically designed to accommodate large student to faculty ratios.
              While many programs have been designed to introduce applications and modeling
              to students, a vital component of any addition to the curriculum is the ability
              to be effectively implemented with a minimal amount of resources. Each module
              consists of an introduction into a basic physical system and concentrates on
              the application of a basic principle (for example, conservation of energy or
              momentum). By design, the modules offer an effective method to present open
              ended, applied problems and do so with a minimal amount of resources.
