Title       : Aur-Och: The Origins of Speech and Gesture: An Interdisciplinary, Multimedia
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9652791

Award Number: 9652791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151622             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Bakewell Liza_ bakewell@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William O. Beeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                    "Aur-Och: The Origins of Speech and Gesture" is the title of a CD
              ROM-Internet hybrid.  It is being developed by PROLARTI: The Project on the
              Language-Art Interface at Brown University.  It aims to offer a solution to
              three distinct problems in contemporary education: (1) the widening gap between
              the sciences and humanities in the academy--a problem with theoretical
              consequences; (2) the subordination of visual data in the study of human
              behavior, not only in the sciences but, ironically, in the humanities and
              social sciences, as well--a problem with epistemological consequences; (3) and
              the rapid growth of content deficient multimedia--a problem with pedagogical
              consequences.  PROLARTI's goals for Aur-Och are theoretical, epistemological
              and pedagogical.     The central theoretical and pedagogical questions around
              which Aur-Och will be developed are the following:  What can we learn about
              human communication generally by studying speech and gesture together --
              communication systems that are visual and verbal, iconic and symbolic?  What
              role does the voice play in communication?  What role does the rest of the body
              play?  What role does the body play when the voice does not or cannot play a
              role?  How might the methodologies, data, and theories from the various
              sciences (social and life) as well as the humanities help us to understand the
              totality of speech-and-gesture's communicative qualities, their biological
              necessities, their evolutionary beginnings, their cultural components, their
              neurological constitution, their aesthetic dimensions?      In presenting the
              material, Aur-Och will exploit the new CD ROM and Internet technologies. 
              Rather than be course specific, it will be modeled as an electronic library of
              multimedia "tomes".  These tomes will consist of open-ended laboratories,
              tutorialq, classic experiments, texts, lectures, profiles and discussions
              (debates and dialogues).  It is hoped that Aur-Och will appeal to a broad
              national audience of university/college students and profe ssors as well as to
              other learning communities.  Aur-Och is scheduled for classroom beta-testing in
              1998. A final version 1.0 will follow, pending further sponsorship.
