Title       : Bringing RNA into View: The RNA World and Its Role in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2000    
File        : a9652921

Award Number: 9652921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Pasquale spasquale@bscs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph D. McInerney  (Principal Investigator former)
              John F. Atkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Ellen Friedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond F. Gesteland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Biol Scs Curriculum Study
	      5415 Mark Dabling Boulevard
	      Colorado Springs, CO  809034720    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS) and the Eccles Institute of
              Human Genetics (EIHG), University of Utah, are collaborating on a project to
              develop an instructional module on advances in RNA science. The project
              combines the scientific expertise of leading authorities in RNA science with
              the curriculum-development experience of BSCS.       The instructional module,
              intended for undergraduate biology courses, highlights the growing importance
              of RNA science in modem biology, including its application to health and
              disease and to the likely role of RNA in the origin of life and later molecular
              evolution. The module promotes improvement in undergraduate education by
              focusing on major concepts related to information molecules and by providing
              well-tested, inquiry-based instruction.       The project employs the BSCS
              process of curriculum development, in use since 1958.  The process includes
              direct involvement of practicing scientists and teaching faculty, extensive
              field testing, and external review for scientific accuracy at critical stages
              of development. The final project will include background material for the
              instructor, student materials for hands-on instruction, and detailed
              instructor's materials for each activity.  BSCS and EIHG will hold joint
              copyright on the final program, which will be distributed by a commercial
              publisher that has substantial experience in marketing program in undergraduate
              biology.
