Title       : "Virtual Laboratories in Statistics"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1996  
File        : a9652870

Award Number: 9652870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rafael Martinez-Planell                 
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyle Siegrist siegrist@math.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Statistics is one of the most important subjects in the undergraduate
              curriculum. However, the subject is conceptually difficult because inferential
              methods are based on probability theory, itself a difficult subject which
              cannot be adequately covered in the introductory course. Thus, many students
              finish the course having memorized some of the jargon and techniques, but with
              little real understanding.  The undergraduate statistics course can be improved
              by adopting a rule of three, so that each major topic is explored from three
              points of view:  1. Mathematical. This term refers to the usual mathematical
              derivation and formulation of the statistical methods.  2. Data Analysis. This
              term refers to the application of the statistical methods to data, preferably
              from real problems, yielding numerical and graphical results.  3. Simulation.
              This term refers to simulations of the statistical methods that make the
              conceptual foundations clear in a way that words, static pictures, and even
              data analysis cannot.  The mathematical and data analysis components are a
              well-established part of the course, with many excellent texts and statistical
              packages as teaching tools.  The simulation component is not widely used
              throughout the course, in part because well- designed, customized simulation
              tools are not available. The purpose of this project is to develop a set of
              software modules that function as virtual laboratories, allowing a student to
              replicate a statistical procedure thousands of times in a matter of minutes
              with the output displayed in customized tables and graphs that create a rich
              learning environment. A special web site will be used to help with evaluation
              and dissemination.   The third year of the project is devoted entirely to
              teacher preparation. The main activity will be a summer workshop to promote the
              "rule of three" in statistics education and to disseminate the software
              developed among the faculty who teach statistics, probability and technology
              courses to pre-service teachers.
