Title       : Science Across the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9652125

Award Number: 9652125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert Tricomi atricomi@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert B. Posner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anna Tan-Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne E. Jones, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              College students are the future creators and shapers of our society.  Yet,
              science and technology are playing an increasing role in developments from
              environmental policy to medical ethics.  The undergraduate education must
              install in all students the ability to follow scientific developments and an
              understanding of the method of scientific discovery.  Building on previously
              successful cross-discipline education initiatives, we have designed an
              interdisciplinary program that incorporates science into the non-science
              curricula.  A three-tiered program will be implemented within the existing
              structure and curricula of the State University of New York at Binghamton to
              achieve Science Across the Curriculum.    Tier 1  Beginning fall 1996, all
              students will take two courses in mathematics/science.  The latter include
              investigative laboratory components that make them interesting and exciting for
              beginning students.  Tier 2  will link mathematics/science course sections with
              non-science courses through careful integration of course syllabi and shared
              assignments for a common group of students.  Tier 3  will expand the
              integration of mathematics and science into as many individual, non-science
              courses as possible.  By studying science in the context of other disciplines,
              students will achieve a level of comfort necessary to establish life-long
              learning in science.    A Science Across the Curriculum steering committee
              including administrators, scientists, non-science faculty, and students will be
              created.  The committee will promote interactions among faculty, coordinate
              student assistants, organize intercollegiate workshops, and, with an external
              evaluator, assess the impact of the curricular changes on students.  Binghamton
              University's innovative, cooperative, and research oriented faculty, combined
              with bright and motivated students, many of whom pursue interdisciplinary
              double-majors, provide the key ingredients to achieving systemic change in
              undergraduate science education.
