Title       : The Capstone Project: An Integrated Approach to Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9652146

Award Number: 9652146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben R. White brwhite@gwmail.wake.tec.nc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet H. Hobbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Kimball  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Technical Cmty Col
	      9101 Fayetteville Road
	      Raleigh, NC  276035655    919/772-0551

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1526,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Wake Technical Community College seeks National Science Foundation funding to
              expand the capstone project currently required in three engineering technology
              departments.  A capstone project demonstrating student skills will help resolve
              the problems of students graduating who are unable to integrate curriculum
              components into the high-tech workplace.  Today employers hire those capable of
              assimilating their technical and general education to perform with competence
              in the workplace.   Expanding the project from there A. A. S. curricula to 27
              A. A. S. curricula demands revision and development of required courses to
              emphasize an integrated, practical approach to learning, one in which students
              are active participants in the educational process.  The objective of the
              reform initiative include :  (a) requiring a team of students to complete an
              applications-oriented capstone project, (b) integrating mathematics,
              engineering technology, science, and communications skills early in their
              education, (c) creating a partnership with workforce representatives to assure
              validity of the projects, (d) establishing an annual Presentation Day, (e) and
              collaborating with other community colleges to spread the initiative using the
              College's project as a model.  The reform effort will be evaluated at each
              stage including:  instructor evaluation of classroom performance, evaluation of
              each student team's written reports, evaluation of the team presentation,
              assessment of the program by graduates, and an evaluation of their training by
              employers.    The special features of the reform initiative include integrated,
              participatory approach to education culminating in the team presentation of the
              capstone project to an evaluation panel and to invited guests.  Additionally,
              integrating curricula early in a student's curriculum will provide a
              broad-based practical education.  Finally, requiring the capstone project as a
              culmination to the students' education will showcase their knowledge to their
              peers, instructors, admin istration, and prospective employers; it will also
              showcase the programs offered at the College.
