Title       : Neurobiology Laboratory Exercises in Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9652890

Award Number: 9652890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas T. Carnevale ted.carnevale@yale.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This collaboration between scientist/educators at Yale and the University
              of Texas at San Antonio addresses a basic need in undergraduate neuroscience
              education: a means to illustrate and explore the processes that underlie
              neuronal function. The objective is to create a series of laboratory simulation
              exercises, with an accompanying manual, that are designed to reinforce learning
              of basic concepts, promote creative thinking through problem solving, encourage
              productive interplay between simulation and experimentation, and provide a
              launching point for students who wish to pursue independent research projects.
              The proposed work has three principal advantages over existing educational
              simulators. First the potential audience will be maximized by keying these
              exercises to several leading neuroscience textbooks. Second, important topics
              will be addressed that are not covered by present educational simulators.
              Third, these exercises will be implemented using NEURON, which runs under
              MS-Windows (3.1, 95 and NT) and UNIX, and which will be running on Macintosh
              systems by mid-1997.  NEURON is a research level tool that provides a flexible
              and powerful environment for neural simulations, so that teachers can tailor
              and extend these exercises, and students can create their own models and
              simulations. The assistance of an expert consultant will be enlisted for
              overall guidance in project evaluation. Feedback will also be solicited from a
              panel of advisors who have considerable experience teaching neuroscience to
              undergraduates at several colleges and universities, some of whom have
              themselves developed software for neuroscience education. The educational
              utility of these exercises will be assessed by their impact on student
              performance and attitudes regarding neuroscience. Project results will be
              disseminated through presentations at professional society meetings, articles,
              the Internet, and publication of the manual and software by a major scientific
              publishing house.
