Title       : Institution-Wide Reform of Undergraduate Education in Science, Mathematics,
               Engineering and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1998  
File        : a9652171

Award Number: 9652171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198006             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Byron Pipes pipesb@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack M. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students at many institutions of higher education are taught their undergraduate
              courses (especially the introductory courses) in non-interactive lecture based
              modules that allow for little faculty student interaction and little active
              student involvement.  Often the rationale for this mode of instruction is the
              high cost of doing it any other way.  We wish to replace many of the passive
              lecture based courses with interactive, hands-on, student-centered
              environments.       The Studio Courses at Rensselaer (mathematics, physics,
              chemistry, biology, engineering and others) have been developed to allow the
              replacement of the traditional lecture/recitation/laboratory courses in
              science, mathematics, and engineering with an alternative that promises a far
              higher quality course, greater educational effectiveness, and cost containment.
               To do this we had to break the old paradigm of high-cost/high quality courses
              as alternatives to low-cost/low quality courses.  We wanted
              high-quality/reasonable cost courses.  While traditional large enrolment
              lecture based courses can be low-cost, there is ample evidence that they are
              usually low-quality as measured by effectiveness, student attendance, and
              student satisfaction.  This project is led by faculty from each discipline
              working together to create these new environments.  Reform is taking place in
              all schools, all departments, and in numerous courses at the same time.  The
              curriculum reform is managed by the Curriculum Reform Implementation Team
              (CRIT) under a mandate from the Faculty Senate.  All changes are reviewed and
              approved by the Faculty Senate curriculum Committee.  The end result is a
              better place for our students to learn and a better place for our faculty to
              teach.
