Title       : Digital Signal Technology in Music
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1997       
File        : a9652875

Award Number: 9652875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107603             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark F. Bocko bocko@ece.rochester  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Headlam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         We will develop course curricula and associated multimedia course
              software that will introduce a diverse group of students, including students of
              engineering and science, music, social sciences, and the humanities to the
              technology of digital signals, communications and signal processing in the
              context of "Digital Signal Technology in Music". There will be two courses
              developed jointly by the Investigators, one to be offered within the Electrical
              Engineering Department and the other by the Eastman School of Music of the
              University of Rochester. The courses are intended to attract and retain
              students to the study of engineering and to introduce other non-technical
              students to the important and widespread technology of digital signals and
              systems. The two courses will share a common core curriculum encompassing about
              75% of the course lecture material and both courses will rely heavily on
              laboratory and studio experiences for the students. The difference between the
              two courses will be that the laboratory of the engineering course will be
              designed for the students to manipulate and explore the technology at a
              fundamental level, while the practical aspect of the music course will be
              oriented toward projects utilizing the technology discussed in the lectures.
              The other major activity in this project is the development of interactive
              multimedia courseware that will be designed to productively be used by students
              at many levels - from high school to advanced undergraduate engineering
              students and it will be distributed via computer network to interested parties.
