Title       : Incremental-Improvement Design Case Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1997   
File        : a9652775

Award Number: 9652775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54457              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Mavrovouniotis michael@tgsmc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                While design is gaining emphasis in engineering curricula, a disproportionate
              part of this emphasisis placed on designing new products and processes. In
              practice, in engineer is faced with an imperfect existing process (or product)
              far more often than with a requirement to build a new one.    We propose to
              address this discrepancy between curricula and engineering practice, by
              developing process-improvement modules to be incorporated in engineering
              courses ranging from freshman-level through intermediate courses to the
              capstone design courses. The process improvement modules will be based on
              industry-inspired case studies, and will be targeted to chemical  engineering
              for the initial scope of this project.    The instructional modules will
              cultivate problem-solving strategies that enhance a key ability of an engineer:
              The ability to examine an existing, operating process or industrial system and
              identify ways in which it can be improved in the broadest sense (including cost
              reduction, better quality,  improved reliability or flexibility, etc.), without
              a complete redesign of the process.    Incremental process improvement is
              eminently suitable for the freshman or sophomore levels because
              design-from-scratch is usually complicated by the lack of engineering science
              background.  Process improvement retains many of the advantages of a design
              activity but comes in more manageable problems. In incremental improvement, the
              students have from the outset an entire feasible design (which would be
              impossible for them to derive on their own without comprehensive
              engineering-science background).    The instruction mode for identifying and
              implementing process improvements will involve class discussion much like a
              meeting of an engineering team. The students will float ideas about process
              limitations and areas of improvement, and the team discusses the pros and cons
              of each idea. This enhances the students' ability to constructively participate
              in meetings and exchange ideas and critiques in that setting.  This will
              improve communication skills, as well as encourage critical thinking in the
              context of continuous review and proactive improvement.    The deliverables of
              the project will be 6 case studies in process improvement, which will be
              synthesized based on a review of industrial process improvements. The case
              studies will cover a cross-section of chemical engineering topics and suitable
              for courses at different levels. Some case  studies will include computer
              simulations, while others will be suitable for laboratory experimentation. For
              each case study, we will provide comprehensive information on the initial
              process and a series of potential improvements, with numerical results,
              rationale, hints that can be  offered to the students, and class discussion
              topics.    The introduction of modules in existing core courses (rather than
              the development of a new course) has the advantage that many more programs (at
              other institutions) are likely to adopt at least a portion of the modules. The
              course modules will be promoted in forums that include selected professional
              conferences, publications of the American Society for Engineering Education
              (such as Chemical Engineering Education and the Journal of Engineering
              Education), and the non-profit organization Computer Aids for Chemical
              Engineering Education.
