Title       : Integrating Student-Centered Teaching Methods into the FirstYear SMET
               Curriculum: The University of Hartford Model for Institution-Wide Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9652161

Award Number: 9652161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mako E. Haruta mharuta@hartford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine B. Stevenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Hartford
	      200 Bloomfield Avenue
	      West Hartford, CT  06117    860/768-4635

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                          Despite the influx of an increasingly diverse, often under-prepared
              student body,  institutions of higher education have not sufficiently
              reassessed and revised their  curricula and teaching methodologies in Science,
              Math, Engineering and Technology to  accommodate the varying cultural
              backgrounds and levels of preparedness of these  students. All too often
              students' first encounter with college level work in these  challenging areas
              is through classes taught in a lecture-format in which little or no  attention
              is paid to encouraging active learning, attending to differing learning needs
              or to  exploring the human and social dimensions of science and technology. As
              a result,  students can become indifferent or hostile to these fields, avoiding
              further SMET work.  This problem is further complicated by the fact that
              students who do persevere beyond an  initial course are not afforded a
              consistent, coherent, interconnected education as they  move among the various
              SMET courses.                The University of Hartford's reform proposal aims
              to attract more students,  particularly female and minority students, to SMET
              fields by improving teaching and  learning in introductory courses as well as
              by fostering increased curricular and  pedagogical coordination and consistency
              within SMET disciplines particularly within  the first years. Employing a
              synergistic combination of innovative teaching practices  and technologies,
              faculty will reform entry level SMET courses. The objective of these  reforms
              is to create environments in which students engage in collaborative learning 
              projects, work in groups with specially trained peers, and employ appropriate
              educational  technologies that increase interactivity and foster intellectual
              synthesis. Within the two-  year period of the grant 10 to 12 introductory SMET
              courses (offered in four colleges of  the University) will be transformed.
              Furthermore, the project will create a strong cross-  collegiate framework
              within SMET disciplines for facult y collaboration and professional 
              development,                The reform builds upon and integrates five highly
              successful programs already in  place at the University of Hartford. The first
              is the reform of "gateway" mathematics  courses in the College of Arts and
              Sciences to incorporate the use of graphing calculators,  applications based
              exercises, group work, and peer facilitation. The second is a program  for
              women in SMET funded by the US. Department of Education at Hartford College for
               Women. In supportive classroom cultures, women engage in collaborative
              learning;  outside of the classroom they attend "metacognitive sessions " which
              nurture scientific  thinking and study skills applicable to SMET fields, while
              combating culturally induced  anxieties about working in these fields. The
              third is a faculty development project for  innovative pedagogies in the
              natural sciences sponsored by the Keck/PKAL which  introduced science faculty
              to collaborative and problem-based learning techniques,  effective interactive
              multimedia tools, and pedagogical methods most responsive to the  needs of
              women students. The fourth innovation is the College of Engineering's  
              reconceptualization of its first-year curriculum to include work in teams on
              small scale,  practice-oriented research projects and experience with current
              technologies. Finally, the  Advanced Education Computing Grant funded by FIPSE
              has trained a cadre of faculty  (70 by the end of AY 1996) in the authoring and
              use of interactive multimedia in the  classroom in order to foster
              student-centered learning.                The University expects to develop a
              national model of excellence in SMET  education at small comprehensive
              universities; this model will enhance consistency and  coherence of students'
              experience of science, encourage student-centered learning  experiences, foster
              greater student success in introductory SMET courses, and encourage  increased
              persistence among students in pursuing further SMET work. Its uniqueness  stems
              fr om a realistic assessment of the process of change, experience with
              successful  small scale change initiatives, and institution-wide commitment to
              reexamining the first  year experience and reallocating resources to
              introductory level courses and support  services.
