Title       : Pilot Project: An Integrated Science Curriculum for Undergraduate Non-science
               Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9652828

Award Number: 9652828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Dianne Martin                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Howard   (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Convey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robin L. Selinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Course distribution requirements normally lead undergraduates not majoring in
              the sciences, including students preparing for careers in elementary and early
              childhood education, to take several unrelated science courses, each of which
              lies within the traditional boundaries of a single scientific discipline. As an
              alternative to the standard approach, this pilot project will produce a four
              semester sequence of integrated science courses focusing on the general theme
              of environmental science. All four courses will be suitable for enrollment by
              students not majoring in the sciences, including students enrolled in teacher
              preparation programs.  The courses to be developed include: 1) Ecosystems:
              Their Formation, Function, and Impact on Life; 2) Environmental Health; 3)
              Global Change; and 4) Quantitative Methods in Environmental Science: Non-linear
              Dynamics, Fractals, and Chaos in Nature. These courses will be based on a
              variety of combinations of biology, chemistry, ecology, engineering, geology,
              mathematics, meteorology, and physics, and all will place emphasis on the role
              of science both in students' everyday lives and in public policy. As part of
              each course's requirements, students will work in small groups to carry out
              research projects, and cooperative learning strategies will be employed. Each
              course will include a laboratory component and three of the four will include a
              series of all-day field trips to nearby sites. University resources will be
              supplemented with personnel and facilities drawn from a variety of local
              industrial and governmental organizations.  The primary goal of the pilot
              project is to demonstrate that this alternative approach improves the
              scientific and environmental literacy of students, relative to traditional
              course offerings for non- science majors. Evaluation efforts will include close
              monitoring of relative outcomes for students majoring in early childhood and
              elementary education, who will be assigned randomly to the standard curriculum
              and the pilot courses. If su ccessful, the pilot project will serve as a model
              for the development of thematically organized cross-disciplinary science
              courses for non-science majors, including education majors, at the college
              level.
