Title       : Undergraduate Research and Education Through Radio Astronomy at the Haystack
               Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9652787

Award Number: 9652787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Salah   (Principal Investigator current)
              Preethi Pratap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Thomas Megeath  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northeast Radio Obs Corp
	      77 Massachusetts Ave
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/692-4764

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                     Undergraduate science and engineering students nationwide need the
              opportunity to incorporate state-of-the-art research into their educational
              experiences. This project presents a new initiative in response to a national
              goal of linking science and engineering education with research. The objective
              is to develop a novel center for undergraduate research and instruction at
              MIT's Haystack Observatory, operated by the Northeast Radio Observatory
              Corporation (NEROC)--a consortium of non-profit educational institutions.      
                The recent growth in Internet connectivity offers a new opportunity: to
              provide remote access to the 37-meter Haystack radio telescope, one of the
              largest in the world, and to give students the educational background, support,
              and instrumentation necessary to pursue challenging and exciting experiments in
              astrophysics. These experiments will allow students to utilize diverse concepts
              from physics, chemistry, mathematics, computer science, and  engineering, and
              learn to solve multidisciplinary problems.         A low-cost
              3m-radio-telescope kit is also being developed as a complement to observations
              with the 37m-telescope. Construction and operation of this small telescope will
              provide students with valuable hands-on experience with microwave and computer
              technology.         This project provides support for the development and
              implementation of an educational program that includes the preparation of
              educational material, tutorials, and tools to provide students the necessary
              background in radio astronomy. Support for the planning and conduct of research
              projects is included. Workshops will be held for both faculty and students.    
                  This educational program will be implemented through a phased approach,
              starting with a pilot project between MIT and University of Massachusetts,
              Lowell. The program will then extend to regional colleges to further test the
              developed materials and techniques prior to the ultimate goal: national access
              to the telescope. This program will  expand research and undergraduate
              education nationwide.         This activity is jointly supported by the
              Division of Undergraduate Education, the Division of Astronomical Sciences, and
              the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.
