Title       : Early Molecular Events in Plant-Fungus Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0312183

Award Number: 0312183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 31,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46368              (Estimated)
Investigator: P. E. Kolattukudy pkolattu@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9816868
Kolattukudy
The overall objective of this research program is to
              elucidate the early molecular events involved in the interactions of fungi with
              the plant cuticle using Colletotrichum gloeosporioides and Nectria haematococca
              as test organisms.  These interactions include the first priming stage that
              involves the contact of the fungal conidia with hard surface followed by
              germination and appressorium formation triggered by the host's chemical
              signals, and penetration of the cuticle and pectin barriers of the host.  Early
              molecular events involved in the interaction of C. gloeosporioides with its
              host will be elucidated by cloning the genes induced by contact of the conidia
              with hard host surface.  The Colletotrichum Hard surface Induced Protein (chip)
              genes will be disrupted to assess whether they are required for pathogenesis
              and the functions of the chip gene products will be explored.  How hydroxyfatty
              acids of plants activate cutinase gene transcription in N. haematococca will be
              elucidated by cloning the transcription factors involved in the activation and
              by assessing their functions in yeast transformed with marker genes and the
              cloned transacting factors.  The role of pectate lyase in pathogenesis will be
              tested by assessing the virulence of single and double disruptants in which
              pectin-inducible pelA gene and/or host-inducible pelD gene are disrupted.  The
              host factor that is responsible for the in Planta expression of pelD gene will
              be purified and identified.  The results of the proposed studies will provide
              new insights into the role of the cuticle in pathogenesis, and may help to
              devise new methods to control fungal diseases of plants that constitute one of
              the major causes of losses in food and fiber production. 


