Title       : Strategic Voting for the Israeli Knesset, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0312654

Award Number: 0312654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16786              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Aldrich aldrich@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Israel will hold elections on January 28, 2003 for the Knesset, their national
              legislature.  This Small Grant for Exploratory Research is to assist the
              Principal Investigator and an advanced graduate student  in including a battery
              of questions in the Israel National Election survey to study whether there is
              strategic voting in that election.  This study is particularly timely and
              important and builds empirically on  work begun on strategic voting in the 1999
              Israeli election by a team that includes the Principal Investigator and a
              collaborator.

The research is significant because:  1)  prior work offers
              the suspicion that there is a considerable degree of strategic voting (voting
              not in accord with the voter's true preference order but meant to bring about
              an outcome more desired by the voter than the social choice that would result
              from voting in accord with the voter's true preference order) in this, the most
              nearly perfect proportional representation electoral system in the world. 
              Theory, such as that from Maurice Duverger and Gary Cox implies at least that
              such voting should be extremely rare, if not none existent entirely.   And yet,
              earlier work suggests that it is as common as in simply plurality voting, where
              theory says that it should be extensive.  It appears that no one, including the
              Principal Investigator has been able to employ the full set of measures needed
              to test for this possibility, let alone even begin to investigate the reasoning
              for its occurrence, should the suggestive evidence be confirmed;  2)  this is
              the first Israeli Knesset election since the change in electoral law and such
              change provides a unique opportunity to test for the effect of changing
              institutional rules on voting behavior;  3)  one reason for the lack of
              theoretical development of the study of PR systems, relative to plurality
              systems, is the difficulty in determining the electoral goals of parties in a
              multi-party PR system, and thus the impact of these goals on voter behavior.  
              Measure of each of the three most prominent goals are being investigated, two
              of which are novel measures used in surveys of the mass public.  The Principal
              Investigator is in a position to be able to measure how, if at all, voters
              react to the strategic circumstances facing political parties in multi-party,
              Proportional Representation systems.

This investigation will yield a data
              set that will be of enormous value to other scholars interested in the topic. 
              The study has the potential to enhance our understanding of the topic and to
              have a broader social value of helping us to understand the effects of voting
              systems on electoral outcomes.

