Title       : Nonlinear Parabolic Equations: Free-Boundary Problems and Singular Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0312006

Award Number: 0312006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69519              (Estimated)
Investigator: Panagiota Daskalopoulos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The major  objectives of this proposal are concerned with the  study of
              nonlinear  parabolic equations  related to  degenerate and singular diffusion,
              in connection with more complex  problems of   differential geometry, including
              the Gauss curvature flow and the Ricci flow
and with   physical applications  
              such as diffusion in porous media and thin liquid film dynamics.
One specific
              area which will be investigated concerns with the  regularity and geometry of
              interfaces in degenerate diffusion: this long term project  which was initiated
              in 1997, has the objective of determining the connection between the geometry
              and regularity of the interfaces in degenerate  diffusion. Another specific
              area of the main objectives  concerns the study fast and super-diffusive
              nonlinear parabolic problems: this project has the objective of studying  
              several new important phenomena related to the well-posedness  and  vanishing
              profile of solutions to  singular diffusion equations arising in physical
              applications and differential geometry. In particular,
it involves the study
              of the vanishing profile of the maximal solutions to the Ricci flow and the
              geometric implications of these results.


The non-linear equations to be
              studied under this proposal form the basic concepts of many applications which
              deem to be important to technology and the society at large. The purification
              of materials, from chemicals to petroleum and even water, is often achieved by
              diffusion through filters. The purification filters are the porous media
              described in the proposal. Thin film dynamics and the Van der Waals forces
              operating between thin layers are described  by singular quasilinear  equations
              of super-fast diffusion. The dynamics of population growth, polymer chain
              growth, including cross linking and high rate growth of biomolecules, are also
              non-linear phenomena amiable to our basic studies. The interesting problem of
              the expanding universe and other cosmological phenomena seem to be governed by
              nonlinear dynamics, which in certain cases are  applications of the more
              complex problems described here.

