Title       : Computational Fluid Dynamics in Chemical Reaction Engineering III Conference;
               Davos, Switzerland; May 25-30, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0312019

Award Number: 0312019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney O. Fox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Intellectual Merit: 
Despite the widespread use of Computational Fluid Dynamics
              (CFD) in industry, 
there is still a lack of fully validated predictive CFD
              models of many relevant transport phenomena in Chemical Reaction Engineering
              (CRE),  especially in the field of multiphase flows and complex reacting flows.
               The CFD in CRE conferences provide a unique forum for cross-fertilization
              between CFD model developers and industrial practitioners in order to advance
              the state of the art and prioritize research needs.    CFD in  CRE  conferences
               are  the  only  scientific  meeting  that  focuses  on  CFD  research  in
              chemical engineering, in general, and chemical reaction engineering, in
              particular.  Thus, it provides a unique and valuable forum for U.S. academic,
              governmental and industrial 
researchers  to  discuss  limitations  of 
              current  CFD  models  and  to  explore  new  research avenues and application
              areas with colleagues from around the globe.  Promoting the exchange of ideas
              among leading researcher groups in this field will not only favorably impact
              the future growth of CFD in the U.S. chemical and pharmaceutical industries,
              but should ultimately result in more efficient and cleaner technologies and an
              improved way of life for the society as a whole. 

Broader Impact: 
NSF.s
              travel support for CFD in CRE III to be held in Davos, Switzerland, May
              25-
30, 2003, will make it  possible for up to twenty  young researchers from
              the USA to attend the meeting by  covering travel  costs.   NSF funding  will
              allow these  young researchers to profit by listening to state-of-the-art
              review talks and research papers and from the opportunity to interact with
              their fellow researchers in the area.  The public at large  will  significantly
               benefit  by  the  advancement  of  CFD  tools  for  the  chemical reaction
              engineering  field as a whole  and the use of the new ideas  generated  for the
              development of more efficient and environmentally friendlier technologies for
              the 
production of fuels, materials and chemicals.    

