Title       : Mechanism of Transition Metal-Catalyzed Reactions in Hydrocarbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9809856

Award Number: 9809856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Grubbs rhg@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is threefold.   First, the activity of   ruthenium
              olefin-metathesis catalysts will be determined as functions of   ligand
              composition and metal content.    Second, the chemistry developed   with the
              ruthenium complexes will be extended to iron and rhenium to   determine whether
              complexes of these metals also form metal-carbon double   bonds, and as such,
              function as metathesis catalysts.   Third, the   activity of the ruthenium
              complexes as initiators for the living   polymerization of strained olefins
              will be examined in unusual media   including aqueous solution and on the
              surface of a support.  Graduate   students involved in the proposed research
              will receive broad,   interdisciplinary training in the areas of organometallic
              and polymer   chemistry.  The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              (CHE) and the Solid   State Chemistry and Polymer Program (DMR) support the
              research of   Professor Robert Grubbs of the Department of Chemistry at the
              California   Institute of Technology.   Professor Grubbs will focus his
              research on   the synthesis of metal complexes capable of forming carbon-metal
              double   bonds, and the use of these complexes as initiators of polymerization 
               reactions.   Formation of polymers of unusual shape and composition and  
              initiation in unusual environments, including aqueous solution and on the  
              surface of a support, will be explored.   Professor Grubbs will train  
              graduate students in the design, synthesis and characterization of  
              organometallic complexes and their use as polymerization initiators.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
