Title       : A Grammar of Madurese Syntax
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9809044

Award Number: 9809044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184067             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Davies william-davies@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The goal of the project is the creation of a descriptive grammar of the syntax
              of Madurese, a Western Austronesian language of Indonesia. The grammar will
              fill a void in the relatively small literature on Madurese, the fourth most
              widely spoken language in the world's fifth most populous nation, and will
              serve as a reference for linguists and anthropologists with various interests.
              Although the work will be grounded in the general assumptions of generative
              linguistics and will be informed by recent developments in theoretical
              linguistics and recent studies in Austronesian linguistics, the grammar will be
              a largely descriptive work. The three year project, to be conducted at the
              University of Iowa and in Western Madura in Indonesia, will consist of (1) the
              collection of data through consultation with Madurese speakers, via direct
              elicitation and tape recorded texts and conversations, (2) analysis and
              collation of data, and (3) creation of a grammar in both hypertext and print
              monograph media.  The project will focus on the following types of syntactic
              considerations:  0 the syntax of subclausal constituents such as the noun
              phrase, the verb phrase, the   prepositional phrase;  0 the means of expressing
              anaphoric relations and possession;  0 sentence types, such as existentials,
              locationals, copulars, verbal sentences, questions;  0 clausal modification,
              including negation, modality, and adverbial modification;  0 syntax beyond the
              clause, including complementation, coordination, relative clause   formation,
              adverbial clauses.  Particular attention wig be given to the areas of voice
              marking, question formation, anaphora, and word order, as these grammatical
              phenomena interact in important and interesting ways in Madurese. These
              phenomena will also inform discussion and debate in current theoretical
              linguistics (particularly question formation and anaphora, which have been a
              primary focus of generative linguistics for decades) and in comparative
              Austronesian studies, where much current work has focused on voice marking,
              question formation, and anaphora. The resulting grammar will thus not only
              serve to make accessible detailed information of the syntax of Madurese but
              will also inform theory construction in linguistics.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
