Title       : LEXEN: A Collaborative Proposal on Geophysical Constraints on Sea-Ice Bacteria:
               Implications for Life on Ice-Covered Solar Bodies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9809468

Award Number: 9809468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jody W. Deming jdeming@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Deming, Jody
Eicken, Hajo

The overall goal of the project is to
              better understand, at relevant spatial scales, the geophysical constraints on
              bacterial activity at very low temperatures in the brine pores of wintertime
              sea ice. The role of solid surfaces as attachment sites for bacteria figures
              strongly in the formulation and testing of hypotheses. The three main
              objectives are: 1) to characterize the evolution and spatial distribution of
              the different phase components in sea-ice pores on scales relevant to
              microorganisms; 2) to determine the in-situ distribution of bacteria within the
              ice matrix and their association with different surfaces; and 3) to examine
              bacterial activity in brine solutions at temperatures from 4 to -300C as a
              function of concentration of dissolved organic matter and presence of different
              surfaces. The research approach combines field observations of Arctic sea ice
              (known to entrain mineral surfaces) with novel laboratory experiments designed
              to characterize micro-physical features of sea-ice as it evolves at decreasing
              temperature and to measure microbial reactions to increasingly extreme thermal
              and chemical conditions. The plan relies upon standard methods for assessing
              bacterial abundance and location (epifluorescence and scanning electron
              microscopy) and selected metabolic activities (substrate uptake and
              extracellular hydrolysis), but applied in new ways (after ice sublimation, to
              viscous sub-zero brines). Standard methods for physical and chemical
              assessments of sea ice will also be employed, but in combination with novel
              techniques (micro-scale collections by sublimation, NMR). Results will
              significantly expand the knowledge base for predicting the lower temperature
              threshold for microbial life on Earth and possibly elsewhere on ice-covered
              solar bodies. They should also enhance understanding of the seasonal
              functioning of polar microbial ecosystems and sea-ice itself, as it effects the
              global heat budget and climate, and practical applications of low-temperature
              bacteria and enzymes in biotechnology. 

