Title       : Feasibility Studies of an Investigation into the Multi-Fractal Nature of the
               Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1998    
File        : a9809531

Award Number: 9809531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11546              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Coleman PCOLEMAN@ASTRO1.CNNET.CLU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      P.O. Box 21926
	      San Juan, PR  009311926    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1206,1217,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-9809531  Coleman    Several feasibility studies will be conducted to
              investigate the Multi-fractal nature of the universe. This is an important
              topic since the standard models of our universe are contradictory to any
              fractal or multi-fractal properties. The models are based on the assumption
              that the universe, on some large scale, can essentially be treated as a liquid
              system. All the density enhancements such as galaxies, clusters, and
              superclusters, wash out and the matter in the universe becomes homogeneous and
              a measurable average density will exist. The multi-fractal picture of the
              universe is much different. No average density will ever be defined and the
              universe cannot be treated as a liquid system.    These two points of view are
              so radically different that hopefully there is some definitive evidence which
              rules one of them out.  The research to be carried out is aimed at finding that
              evidence. The research will proceed along three separate lines: Analysis of
              existing and anticipated data; Monte-Carlo simulations of false universes to
              create models of the true universe; N-body analysis in the new framework of
              fractals.    The analysis of galaxy catalogs requires fairly complete catalog
              material and robust software which can used to test those catalogs. Target
              catalogs, including their deficiencies, are to be compiled and some estimation
              of the time and effort required to modify already written computer programs is
              to be obtained. Furthermore, a pilot study of data taken with the Arecibo
              telescope (a nearby facility in Puerto Rico) is to be undertaken with the
              eventual goal being a much larger analysis of the data.    Creation of very
              simple multi-fractal universes which mimic the true universe will help to
              demonstrate the feasibility of the fractal framework. Studies will again be
              made on adapting software and on various multi-fractal generating schemes.   
              The final approach to this problem is the one which has the best possibility of
              telling something about the physics involved in  the processes which generate
              these fractal structures. A careful survey of the available N-body software
              should point out some candidate packages for this somewhat different type of
              analysis.    The anticipated result of this research, is to be a workable,
              concrete, well defined plan of attack to answer the question, "Is the universe
              multi-fractal?"  ***
