Title       : Federalism and Public Education: The Role of Household Choices, Information and
               Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9809269

Award Number: 9809269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Nechyba tnechyba@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this a research is to investigate the impact of education policy
              in a federal system. It utilizes an already developed and successful
              theoretical model of state and local public finance to derive a computable
              model that is calibrated to data and extended to apply particularly to
              education. This model has the advantage that it allows for imperfect
              stratification of incomes across school districts, the use of various types of
              tax instruments, and the incorporation of many different kinds of fiscal
              between state and local governments. Thus, it can be calibrated to the kind of
              data commonly observed in the US. The model is then modified to make it
              particularly applicable to public education. Rather than focusing on any one
              input in the education production process, the model seeks to trace the impact
              of individual behavior by parents and school officials resulting from changes
              in incentives brought about by changes in state policies toward public
              education. In particular, the research focuses on the impact of state policies
              on school quality, and it defines school quality as an outcome of a process in
              which, in addition to per pupil spending, such factors as peer quality,
              parental characteristics, effort by teachers and parents and effective
              utilization of local information play a significant role. Given the link
              between a family's residence and its public school, the potential of state
              policies to impact migration choices by parents is particularly highlighted.
              This, combined with parental voting choices and the consideration of private
              school alternatives generates powerful general equilibrium forces that shape
              public schools but that are often ignored in policy analysis. Furthermore,
              informational asymmetries give rise to tensions between state and local control
              and allow for the introduction of competitive effects of increasing the choice
              set parents face.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
