Title       : Synthesis and Characterization of Organic-based Molecular Magnetic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9809548

Award Number: 9809548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303485             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Lahti lahti@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9239,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to Prof. Paul Lahti at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst   is
              supported by the Advanced Materials and Processing Program in the   Chemistry
              Division. The theme of the research is the synthesis,   characterization  and
              performance of molecular organic assemblies with   multiple unpaired electrons
              as magnetic materials. Structural alterations   will be developed in both
              polymeric arrays and solid state crystalline   arrays which optimize
              interactions among the unpaired electron spins.    Specifically, polymeric free
              radical systems will be made which maximize   planarity, stable free radicals
              systems which interact through hydrogen   bonded assemblies will be
              investigated, and free radical systems that   assemble through metal chelation
              will be studied. The stable free radical   types employed will be nitronyl
              nitroxides, iminoyl nitroxides and   benzonitroyl nitroxides. Characterization
              will be by elemental analysis,   ESR, NMR and GC-MS. Magnetic performance
              measurements will be carried out   through established collaborations.  This
              highly interdisciplinary research addresses fundamental mechanisms   of organic
              ferromagnetism based on long range assembly of electronic   spins.  The
              combination of organic synthesis, stable free radical   characterization, and
              magnetic performance measurements will provide an   ideal environment for the
              training of students in problems of both   fundamental interest and
              technological relevance.  Additionally, many of   the precursor and free
              radical species involved may have medicinal and   pharmacological activity and
              will be made available for biological   screening.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
