Title       : Adoption and Survival in Technological Epochs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1999   
File        : a9809530

Award Number: 9809530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew F. Mitchell mitchell@econ.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9809530  Mitchell    Many industries have recently experienced a speed-up in the
              rate of technological innovation. These new technologies often must be adopted
              in the face of incomplete information about how best to use the new technology.
              Adoption often involves a tradeoff between discarding an older, better
              understood technology and taking a chance on learning a newer technology that
              promises higher returns. A model is developed to capture these trade-offs in an
              industry equilibrium framework.  It is then shown to be consistent with a
              variety of industry dynamics data. The goal of the research is to fit the model
              to a particular industry, and then see what the model predicts following a one
              time unanticipated increase in the rate of growth in the productivity of new
              technologies.  The model's predictions about the size distribution of firms and
              the age/size profile of hazard rates of firms are driven by the learning
              component. Learning is modeled as a Bayesian problem similar to the myopic, one
              agent problem studied by Jovanovic and Nyarko (1997). New technologies arise
              each period. In order to be operated efficiently, technologies require an input
              which can only be gained by experience. Vintages of technology are connected
              informationally, in the sense that the relevant parameter is correlated across
              vintages. This leads to a potential advantage in adopting a new technology for
              existing firms, which already have some experience on an older vintage. On the
              other hand, incumbent firms' advantage at producing using the older technology
              gives them an incentive to stick with the older technology. The updating
              process is rich and nonlinear, with the potential for a variety of equilibrium
              outcomes across firms of different degrees of experience.    The model is shown
              to be consistent both with evidence on the differences between incumbents and
              entrants in Dunne, et al. (1988) as well as evidence on exit rates and
              employment growth in Audretsch (1995). The next step is to fit the model to
              evidence fr om the computer industry (SIC code 357) prior to the rapid increase
              in computer technologies in the 1970's and 80's. The model will have
              predictions concerning the resulting size distribution and hazard rates
              following the increased technological opportunities which can be compared to
              data. It will provide an important step towards understanding the forces that
              effect industries when a new generation of products arrive. It can also be
              potentially helpful in understanding changes in the firm size distribution at
              more aggregate levels following an increase in technological progress that
              might be termed a technological revolution. The model's predictions will be
              compared to the actual experience of the computer industry. The comparison will
              shed light on the importance of adoption of new technologies in determining the
              entry, growth, and survival characteristics of firms following a technological
              speed-up.
