Title       : Portfolio and Consumption Choice for Long-Term Investors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9809545

Award Number: 9809545
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222230             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Y. Campbell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9809545  Campbell        The choice of an optimal portfolio of assets is a
              classic problem in financial economics. In a single-period setting the problem
              is well understood, and analytical solutions for optimal portfolio weights are
              available in important special cases. When mean-variance analysis is
              appropriate, for example, optimal portfolio weights are known functions of the
              first and second moments of asset returns.  In a multi-period setting the
              problem is far less tractable. Explicit solutions for portfolio weights are
              available in the special cases where a long-term investor has no labor income
              and either has log utility or faces constant investment opportunities; but
              these cases are tractable precisely because they reduce to the familiar
              single-period problem. The seminal work of Samuelson and Merton in the late
              1960's showed that in more general cases portfolio choice is influenced by
              long-term investors' desire to hedge against random shocks to labor income and
              investment opportunities, but it has been very hard to go beyond this general
              insight to find explicit solutions for portfolio weights as functions of state
              variables.  This gap in the literature is particularly unfortunate because it
              is clear that the tractable special cases do not adequately describe reality.
              Labor income is more important than financial income for most investors who are
              not yet retired. The assumption that investors have log utility is inconsistent
              with the large rewards for bearing risk that are observed in equity and bond
              markets. The assumption that investment opportunities are constant is
              inconsistent with a substantial body of evidence that real interest rates and
              risk premia move over time and are related to the state of the economy.   A
              number of important policy questions can only be answered if one has a solution
              to the long-run portfolio and consumption choice problem. For example, the
              recent issue of indexed bonds by the US Treasury makes available for the first
              time a long-term investment vehicle  that is riskless in real terms. How does
              this affect the welfare of conservative long-term investors? The Secretary of
              the Treasury has argued that the availability of indexed bonds should increase
              savings. For what preference parameters is this true? How large is the effect?
              There is growing momentum for reform of the Social Security system. Many
              privatized systems involve investing retirement savings in risky assets which
              offer a higher average rate of return. Under what conditions does this improve
              the welfare of system participants?   This project aims to increase our
              understanding of long-run portfolio choice by deriving approximate analytical
              solutions to several variants of the intertemporal portfolio choice problem.
              Each variant concentrates on a single aspect of the problem: time-varying real
              interest rates, time-varying risk premia, or uninsurable risk in labor income.
