Title       : The Influence of Founder's Gender in Business Start-Ups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9809841

Award Number: 9809841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178687             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy M. Carter nmcarter@stthomas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome A. Katz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Candida G. Brush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard E. Aldrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of St. Thomas
	      2115 Summit Avenue
	      St. Paul, MN  551051096    651/962-6720

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The rapid growth rate of women owned businesses throughout the world makes women
              critical actors in developed and emerging economies.  Despite their economic
              importance, women still own only a fraction of all enterprises and the size of
              their businesses as measured by sales and number of employees lags
              substantially those of men owned ventures.  This minority status is in stark
              contrast to women's representation in the labor force and raises questions
              about whether fewer women choose to be self-employed, or whether they exit the
              start-up process prematurely and consequently are underrepresented in
              self-employment numbers.   This project attempts to determine what factors
              affect the impact of women's participation in the entrepreneurial process by
              focusing on the very earliest stage of new venture creation.  We examine
              whether women encounter barriers during the gestation of their businesses that
              cause some to give up their efforts and disengage; or less extreme, whether
              others experience difficulties that imprint their businesses for constrained
              growth and limit future success.  The focus of the proposed project is to
              examine both differences in entrepreneurial intentions, and differences in the
              ways women and men construct their businesses.  In other words, the project
              focuses on how organizations actually emerge.   Four reasons have been
              suggested for why the start up process may differ for women and men.  Women
              have been viewed as having: (1) fewer resources and human capital to bring to
              the firm creation; (2) more limited access to opportunity structures; (3)
              different intentions for their firms; and (4) less beneficial social networks
              to assist the start up process.  Research that can substantiate these claims
              has been equivocal, and virtually none has addressed the gestation stage of a
              firm's existence.  A longitudinal design is adopted to follow nascent
              entrepreneurs across 24 months to determine the extent to which these factors
              explain differences in the experiences of women and men as they move their
              businesses from the conception stage to that of fledgling new firm status.   A
              random sample of U. S. households is screened to identify individuals at the
              initiation stage of new firm formation (nascent entrepreneurs), and a
              comparison group of typical adults not engaged in starting new firms. 
              Comparisons are made between the experiences of women and men starting
              businesses and their cohorts in the adult population.   The project has
              potential for impacting public policy.  If the attrition rate for bringing a
              new firm to fruition is higher for women than men and the proposed research can
              pinpoint probable causes, recommendations regarding appropriate assistance
              programs can be formulated.  The development and delivery of training,
              information or resource assistance could be targeted more specifically to the
              critical stages of the gestation process where they could make the most
              difference.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
