Title       : Stages and Mechansims of Selective Attention
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9809126

Award Number: 9809126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136370             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Luck steven-luck@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Although the human brain is an incredibly powerful computational device, it
              does not have sufficient capacity to process the thousands of sights, sounds,
              memories, thoughts, and emotions that may arise at any given moment. 
              Mechanisms of selective attention are therefore used to focus the brain's
              processing resources onto a subset of the many possible sources of information.
               Previously, attention has been considered to be a unitary cognitive process,
              but recent evidence has suggested that separable attention mechanisms operate
              at different stages of processing.  The goal of the present project is to
              isolate and characterize these multiple attention mechanisms, focusing on the
              stages of visual perception, short-term memory, and response selection. 
              Because these separate attention mechanisms may concurrently influence overt
              behavior, it is difficult to isolate them by means of traditional behavioral
              measures of performance.  We will therefore use electrophysiological recordings
              of the brain's activity (colloquially known as `brain waves` and technically as
              `event-related potentials`) to measure the influence of selective attention at
              different stages of processing.  Although selective processing may be necessary
              at different stages of processing and may require different neural mechanisms,
              the brain must also maintain unity of behavioral output, and we will therefore
              also study how the different attention mechanisms are linked together into a
              coherent system. This research will help us to understand how the brain copes
              with an overload of input sources, which will have important implications for
              the design of future computing devices, and for remediating disorders of
              cognition.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
