Title       : Asset Prices in Markets with Frictions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a9809183

Award Number: 9809183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando E. Alvarez f-alvarez1@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9809183  Alvarez    It is well know that it is difficult to reconcile many of
              the quantitative asset pricing implications of the standard representative
              agent models with the data. For instance, the average excess return and Sharp
              ratio of an equity portfolio are much higher in the data than in simple
              parametrized representative agent models. It is also well known that for a
              model to imply the Sharp ratios that we observe in the data, the relevant
              marginal rate of substitution has to be quite volatile. In a representative
              agent economy this can be achieved, among other ways, by an extremely large
              risk aversion or by a very (counterfactually so) volatile consumption process.
              Additionally panel data on consumption shows that agents do not insure
              idiosyncratic risk completely. Motivated by these facts, this project analyzes
              the asset pricing implications of a model with heterogeneous agents and
              idiosyncratic risks that are not completely insurable.   The project studies a
              model of limited risk sharing motivated by the possibility of default due to an
              extreme form of limited liability.  It is assumed that if agents default they
              are punished by permanent exclusion of the asset market. The strength of this
              model is that it produces endogenously solvency constraints - a form of
              borrowing constraints- The solvency constraints have to balance two conflicting
              objectives, to provide as much risk sharing as possible against the
              idiosyncratic shocks and to avoid default. In equilibrium agents carry some of
              the idiosyncratic risk, which is reflected in asset prices. The equilibrium
              theory behind these models has been worked out by Kehoe and Levine (1993) and
              subsequently adapted to asset pricing by Alvarez and Jermann (1997).   More
              specifically, this project develops computational algorithms to explore
              quantitative versions of this model. In doing so it uses the connection between
              (constrained) efficient allocations and equilibria.  There are three topics for
              a close economy where the interaction between a ggregate and idiosyncratic
              shocks may be important. The first is a study of the properties of the (real)
              term structure.   The second part  reexamines the "equity premium puzzle" and
              the third studies the cost of business cycles.
