Title       : Durable Goods Monopoly Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1999  
File        : a9809110

Award Number: 9809110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80118              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley S. Reynolds reynolds@eller.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Durable goods monopoly theory provides a commonly-used framework of analysis
              for Industrial Organization economists. In most formulations of this theory,
              durability is a product characteristic that serves to restrict a seller's
              monopoly power. In spite of its widespread use, this theory has been subject to
              little empirical scrutiny.  This project utilizes laboratory experiments to
              evaluate predictions from durable goods monopoly theory.  Laboratory methods
              permit the researcher to control features of the environment (such as
              information about other agents' payoffs, time discounting, length of time
              horizon) that theoretical models identify as key determinants of market
              outcomes.  The design of experiments is based on an asymmetric information
              model in which one or more buyers are privately informed about their valuation
              for the good.  Durability is introduced into the experiments through a multi
              period trading structure and exogenously-induced time discounting. The
              equilibrium that takes the information asymmetries into account predicts prices
              below the static monopoly price and a high incidence of demand withholding
              (i.e., a buyer's rejection of a profitable offer).   Results from experiments
              are used to assess quantitative equilibrium predictions on pricing and demand
              withholding and qualitative, comparative-static predictions concerning the
              effects of durable vs. non durable product type, changes in the distribution of
               buyers' values, short vs. long trading horizons, and contractual provisions
              that provide buyers with best price guarantees. An important part of the
              research is an examination of the roles of fairness perceptions and of learning
              in explaining observed behavior. The long trading horizon experiments permit
              evaluation of a striking theoretical prediction; the so called Coase
              conjecture, that the initial price offer of the monopolist will be close to
              marginal cost.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
