Title       : ESH: Pleistocene Lake Bonneville Hydrodynamics: Sedimentology, Geomorphology and
               Regional Climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9809241

Award Number: 9809241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Jewell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Currey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie A. Chan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1577      GLOBAL CHANGE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9809241
Jewell

A variety of paleoclimate proxies have been used in
              conjunction with atmospheric General Circulation Models (GCMs) and more
              spatially detailed Regional Climate Models (RCMs) to understand climates from
              the last glacial maximum throughout the world.  Traditionally these have
              included analysis of tree rings, pollen, and packrat middens among others. 
              Unfortunately, the most widely used proxies only determine one hydrologic
              variable: effective moisture.  This project will attempt to develop additional
              paleoclimate proxies capable of predicting several hydrologic variables by
              using the physical geologic and geomorphic features of a well-studied
              paleolake.  We believe that many lake features can be directly related to lake
              circulation and hydrodynamics, which in turn are a function of wind direction
              and magnitude as well as precipitation.  We further believe that the best place
              to develop this methodology is in the natural laboratory of Lake Bonneville
              (Utah-Nevada), one of the largest and best studied Late Pleistocene pluvial
              lakes in North America.

The project will proceed in a logical 3-stage
              (approximately 3-year) sequence, which will rely upon the expertise of the
              three PIs.  In the first stage, a coarse-resolution (2-km grid spacing),
              3-dimensional hydrodynamic model of Lake Bonneville will examine the velocity
              field (which define general transport and deposition patterns), surface waves
              and their relationship to shore transport, bottom shear stress, and flow
              convergence.  Emphasis will be placed on using idealized wind boundary
              conditions in which mean wind direction is varied.  This stage will proceed in
              concert with photogeologic and GIS analysis of longshore transport
              directionality of Bonneville shoreline segments.  The hydrodynamic model output
              and geomorphic and GIS analysis will be used to identify areas in one or more
              subbasins of Lake Bonneville where siliciclastics lake deposits will be studied
              in detail.  This portion of the project will also be used to determine the
              prevailing wind direction for both the Bonneville and Provo lake stands.  These
              analyses in turn will aid in interpretations about the role of the continental
              ice sheet on mean wind direction in the Great Basin.

In the second stage
              (years 2 and 3 of the project), detailed field studies will be followed with
              fine-grid (100-500 m grid spacing) hydrodynamic simulations of selected
              portions of Lake Bonneville.  Fieldwork will consist of determining shoreline
              character, morphometry and morphostratigraphy of the shore-zone sediment
              bodies, and detailed facies analyses.  These fine-grid simulations will permit
              detailed calculations of velocity, bottom shear stress, as well as
              determination of the temporal evolution of sedimentary and geomorphic features.
               The hydrodynamic model is capable of operating at any grid spacing, and can
              therefore be tailored to the particular field setting being considered. 
              Sensitivity analyses with the fine-grid model will examine the importance of
              storms; irregular increases in river input as well as time-dependent formation
              of lacustrine features.

Finally, in the third stage (year 3), there will be
              interactive feedback between fine-grid modeling and field studies to resolve
              the real observable field data with both GCMs and RCMs.  This final synthesis
              of the combined modeling and field studies should allow considerable guidance
              for future integrated studies of climate models, hydrodynamics, geomorphology,
              and siliciclastics sedimentology.

