Title       : Multi-level Dynamics of Action-Perception Patterns During Quiet Standing and
               Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9809447

Award Number: 9809447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tjeerd M. H. Dijkstra   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The human postural control system serves two main functions: to maintain a
              stable upright posture, and to fix the orientation and position of the body
              segments that serve as a reference frame for perception and action.  The
              question this research addresses is how various sources of information are
              integrated to form postural goals, how these goals are stabilized against
              perturbations, and how the goals are flexibly reorganized when the information
              or tasks change. In particular, the proposed research focuses on the
              contribution of vision to postural stability during standing and locomotion. 
              In the experimental studies human participants will view computer-generated
              visual displays while their postural responses are monitored. The displays
              simulate simple scenes, such as a tunnel or hallway. The scenes are shown
              through a head-mounted display and postural responses are measured with a
              system that detects the position of infra-red markers on body segments of the
              participant.   The research is motivated by a conceptualization of the postural
              control system as a two-level dynamical system. The low-level dynamics achieves
              postural stability and constant velocity of locomotion. The high-level dynamics
              achieves flexibility by tuning the parameters of the low-level dynamics to
              environmental constraints. This division between levels achieves flexibility by
              piecing together simple control strategies. A new contribution of this research
              is a concrete proposal as to how the high-level controller influences the
              low-level controller.  The results of the studies will add to our understanding
              of human postural control, and may also point the way toward remedies for
              impairments of postural control (e.g., falling in the elderly).                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
