Title       : Dissertation Research: Federalism and Economic Adjustment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9809211

Award Number: 9809211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Remmer remmer@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This Doctoral  Dissertation Research Support project analyzes the impact of
              political federalism upon the capacity for national economic adjustment in
              emerging market and developing nations.  Existing literature has emphasized the
              national level political dynamics shaping adjustment efforts, largely ignoring
              the complicated relationship between market-oriented reform and the
              decentralization of political and fiscal power inherent in federal political
              systems.  In contrast, the research has as its central point of theoretical
              departure the potentially negative consequences of the territorial division of
              political power for economic adjustment to the globalization of production and
              financial markets.  The central hypothesis guiding the research is that the
              capacity for economic stabilization and adjustment decreases with the
              divergence of political interests across different levels of government within
              nations.  A number of specific hypotheses are developed to answer whether or
              not nations with federal arrangements adjust less successfully than centralized
              nations, what institutional incentives across federal systems encourage
              successful adjustment, and what factors influence the capacity of individual
              states to adjust within federal nations.  These questions will be addressed in
              a broad comparative framework that incorporates statistical and field research
              methods.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
