Title       : AFGE: Developing a Virtual Museum Using the World Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1999    
File        : a9809458

Award Number: 9809458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49977              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Ackerman stevea@ssec.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9809458
Ackerman

The PI will create a virtual museum depicting the
              contributions to the geosciences of the late Verner E. Suomi, the father of the
              geostationary weather satellite, and to help teach people the practical
              ramifications of his work.  Professor Suomi's research and inventions have led
              to many scientific breakthroughs in our understanding of the Earth's energy
              budget, as well as new techniques for indirect measurements that are widely
              used across many disciplines.  The idea is to use the Web in new, interactive
              ways to encourage learning at all levels (public, primary and secondary,
              college) by showing not only some historical perspectives, but more importantly
              by using highly interactive learning modules to provide opportunities for
              better understanding the meaning of everyday experiences.  Modules will be
              created for the virtual museum, using Professor Suomi's work as the theme.  The
              virtual museum concept reflects an approach to designing educational Web
              activities.  The Web should flow like a museum and not a book.   Books need to
              be read from front to back; whereas, we enter a museum and then go to the rooms
              that interest us most.  This museum design concept allows learners to choose a
              particular module that interests them, and then provides links and thoughts
              that relate the current exercise to other activities.  In true museum fashion,
              Web pages will be linked together in a variety of different ways, and not force
              the visitor to strictly follow any preconceived path.  The Web has an advantage
              over the museum in that one can better link relationships between rooms.  The
              highly interactive approach reflects the nature of a hands-on museum.  There
              are substantial numbers of applications for this work, ranging from summer
              workshops for high school teachers, to kiosks in actual museums, to classroom
              use in teaching concepts of remote sensing.  Properly designed activities could
              also serve the community at large by providing a reference for understandable
              explanations of difficult concepts.  This is groundbreaking research that has
              immediate widespread potential.

