Title       : Experiential Influences on Perceptual, Communicative, and Neural Capacities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9809883

Award Number: 9809883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291038             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meredith J. West mewest@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew P. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT    Proposal Number:  9809883  Experiential Influences on
              Perceptual, Communicative, and  Neural Capacities    Meredith J.,  King, Andrew
              P.        The aim of the research is to explore the effects of  differences in
              social experience on the development of vocal  communication through studies of
              song learning in birds.  Three objectives are outlined. First, the influence of
              adult  social models on juvenile learners will be examined by  manipulating the
              nature of adult stimulation.  Measures of  the effects of social influence
              include vocal growth in the  young, use of signals, and competence as adults. 
              Second,  female perceptual preferences for vocal signals will be  studied to
              explore modifiability in receivers.  Measures  include responsiveness to vocal
              playback and discrimination  of potential mates.  Neural studies of the avian
              forebrain  are included to relate brain organization to vocal  comprehension in
              females and to social competence in males.    The results of the work should
              advance knowledge of the  effects of early social environments on vocal and
              perceptual  learning, learning that is fundamental to an individual's  success.
               This topic has broad implications for many  species, including humans, as
              avian vocal learning is one of  the premier models for identifying potential
              mechanisms of  language learning.  Of special significance is the  possibility
              of identifying previously ignored sources of  instruction including visual
              stimulation.  The coordinated  studies of brain and behavior also set the stage
              for  measuring how behavioral experiences affect brain growth  itself.
