Title       : RUI: Regulation of the Expression of the TFIIB Gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9809917

Award Number: 9809917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara C. Hoopes bhoopes@center.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9809917
Hoopes
The general transcription factors are a class of proteins
              required for the expression of all genes in the cell. Although much is known
              about their structure and function, little is known about how their expression
              might be controlled. This project will pursue the observation made by this
              laboratory that there are two discrete transcripts that encode the general
              transcription factor SUA7 (TFIIB) in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae that
              differ in the amount of 3' untranslated sequence. It was also found that the
              relative amounts of these two transcripts differ under different cell growth
              conditions. This research will address how this observation relates to the
              function of this essential transcription factor in the cell. First, deletion
              mutagenesis will be performed to create plasmid borne copies of SUA7 that
              individually affect the accumulation of the two transcripts. Mutations that
              decrease the formation of the shorter and longer RNA separately will be used in
              a "plasmid shuffle" assay to allow assessment of the effect of eliminating one
              or the other of the transcripts on the production of TFIIB protein and on cell
              growth under different conditions. Second, experiments will be performed to
              determine the mechanism by which the two transcripts are differentially
              affected by cellular conditions. A likely hypothesis is that the two
              transcripts differ in stability and show changes in stability under different
              growth conditions. If effects on stability are not observed, changes in 3' end
              processing will be pursued as a possible mechanism for the switch. Third,
              experiments will be done to address the means by which total SUA7 transcript
              levels decrease in response to nutrient limitation or amino acid starvation.
              Since this effect is similar to one seen for ribosomal protein genes, an Abf1p
              activator binding site in the promoter will be eliminated and altered promoters
              tested for function in vivo.
Elucidating how the DNA sequence of a gene
              determines its regulation is of critical importance for understanding how an
              organism develops from a single cell. Determining how the general transcription
              factors are regulated is an interesting problem, since this class of proteins
              is itself required for the expression of all genes in the cell. How the levels
              of these proteins change in response to cell states could potentially have
              global effects on the production of different protein products. This research
              seeks to better understand the effect of different cellular conditions on the
              production of one of these general transcription factors, TFIIB. This
              particular factor is important in the first steps of the production of RNA from
              DNA, and several of the characteristics of the gene suggest that learning more
              about the control of its expression will increase understanding of the effect
              of cellular conditions on other important classes of genes in the cell.


