Title       : ESH: Mg/Ca Thermometry for the Marine Mussels Mytilus californianus and M.
               trossulus: Refinement of an Elemental Thermometer Based on Laboratory Culture
               Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1998    
File        : a9809374

Award Number: 9809374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyger C. Lohmann kacey@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1577      GLOBAL CHANGE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9809374
Lohmann

This project will refine the Mg/Ca paleothermometer (Klein
              et al., 1996a) for the marine mussels Mytilus trossulus and M. californianus
              through a series of laboratory culturing experiments.  The importance of
              developing alternative proxies for paleotemperature is emphasized by the
              inadequacy of utilizing only d18O for temperature determinations where
              decreases in seawater salinities bias estimates towards warmer values.  For
              example, in coastal regions where an abundance of historical and fossil
              materials are available in archeological middens and raised beach sequences,
              the effects of salinity biasing preclude examination of these materials. 
              Paleoclimate information from shallow marine coastal sites, which accurately
              record variations in air temperatures, will be extremely valuable because they
              represent the interface between the marine and continental settings.  Although
              a preliminary field-based study of M. trossulus has demonstrated a consistent
              relationship between temperature and the Mg/Ca of the outer prismatic calcite
              layer of the shell, the precision of this paleothermometer can be further
              refined with a series of well-controlled laboratory experiments.  Furthermore,
              we will extend the use of the Mg/Ca thermometer to M. californianus, a species
              that is easily identified in ancient fossilized specimens and extends across a
              greater latitudinal range than M. trossulus.  Such calibration will enable
              reconstruction of paleoclimate conditions that existed on the west coast of
              North America during the late Pleistocene and Holocene, a goal of future
              studies.

Specifically, this project will culture two species of Mytilus, (M.
              trossulus and M. californianus) in randomly intermixed assemblages at 8, 16 and
              23 C in two successive experiments: the first at 35ppt salinity and; the second
              at 20ppt salinity.  Growth conditions (temperature and salinity) and water
              compositions (d13C, d18O and Mg/Ca, Sr/Ca and B/Ca) will be monitored
              throughout the duration of the experiments.  Following 6 months of shell growth
              for each experiment, shells will be sectioned and the outer prismatic calcite
              layer will be microsampled for elemental and isotopic analysis.  Analysis of
              variance techniques (Model I and mixed-model nested ANOVAs) will be applied to
              determine the sources of compositional variation (i.e., within individuals,
              among individuals within a species, among species at each temperature, and
              among temperatures).  If no differences are observed between M. trossulus and
              M. californianus, a single Mg/Ca paleothermometer will be
              calculated.

Preliminary work (Klein et al., 1996b and 1997) suggests that
              combined Sr/Ca, d18O and d13C measures provide a means determining salinity and
              the d18O of the seawater and freshwater endmembers.  Moreover, work of Kitano
              et al. (1978) and Fudrst et al. (1976) suggest that boron concentrations may
              also serve as independent proxies of salinity.  Therefore, during the course of
              this study, we will also examine variations in shell Sr/Ca, B/Ca and d13C to
              evaluate the utility of these ratios as measures of paleosalinity.

Given the
              cosmopolitan distribution of Mytilus, validation of Mg/Ca content of skeletal
              calcite as a new proxy of temperature will allow the reconstruction of
              paleoclimate conditions across a broad latitudinal range in the shallow marine
              environment, a setting that represents the interface between marine and
              continental regimes.

