Title       : Response of Legionella pneumophila to Starvation and Oxidative Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a9809902

Award Number: 9809902
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard M. Steinman steinman@aecom.yu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva University
	      500 West 185th Street
	      New York, NY  100333201    212/960-5400

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9809902
Steinman
One of the enigmatic features of bacterial stationary phase
              is the involvement of antioxidant enzymes. The involvement is curious because
              electron transport to oxygen, the major source of reactive oxygen species
              during exponential growth, is severely attenuated in stationary phase. Classic
              studies in E. coil have led to the "anticipation mechanism": that antioxidant
              enzymes are involved in the stationary phase response in anticipation of the
              high flux of reactive oxygen species that will be encountered when rapid growth
              is resumed.

The research of this project is based on the hypothesis that the
              anticipation mechanism is not an appropriate model for non-enteric obligate
              aerobes. Legionella pneumophila, the causative organism of Legionnaires'
              pneumonia, is the subject of the study. The Pl's laboratory has shown that the
              copper-zinc superoxide dismutase (SodC) of L. pneumophila is induced 2-fold in
              stationary phase and that a sodC null mutant is decreased in stationary phase
              survival by 3-6 orders of magnitude.

The goal of the research will be to
              isolate suppressors of the stationary phase survival phenotype. By
              characterization of their mechanism of suppression it will be possible to
              determine which of the 3 possible alternatives to the anticipation mechanism is
              operative in L. pneumophila: [a] sources of reactive oxygen in stationary phase
              other than aerobic respiration, [b] synthesis of oxidation-sensitive
              biomolecules or decreased repair in stationary phase, and [c] alternative
              functions of the CuZnSOD that do not involve decomposition of
              superoxide.

Certain organisms that cause human disease are not spread from
              human to human but are spread from environmental sources to humans. The
              Legionnaires' disease bacterium is one such pathogen. One infected human does
              not infect another. Rather, the bacterium is spread in air-borne particles that
              originate from environmental sources such as air conditioning ducts,
              respirators, and water cooling towers. Each of these environmental sources
              lacks sufficient nutrients for the Legionnaires' disease bacterium to grow. In
              ways that are not understood, the bacterium survives the starvation conditions
              in its environmental reservoirs and is able to become infective once air-borne
              particles containing it are breathed by susceptible human or animal hosts. The
              research to be performed in this study will determine fundamental molecular
              processes underlying the survival of the Legionnaires' disease bacterium in
              starvation conditions. This information may be helpful in eradicating this
              pathogen from the environmental sources in which it usually survives. Such an
              eradication would prevent the infection of susceptible human hosts and curb
              this disease.


