Title       : Analysis of Auctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9809082

Award Number: 9809082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161695             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip A. Haile phaile@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Auctions have been a productive focus for theoretical and empirical studies of
              strategic behavior in markets with asymmetric information. Yet despite a rich
              and growing literature, auction theory has ignored potentially important
              features of real world auction markets, and fundamental empirical questions
              regarding auctions remain unanswered.  This project addresses some of these
              shortcomings with new empirical and theoretical analysis.  The empirical
              component of the project focuses on ``structural'' estimation of auction
              models, where a theoretical model is used to map observed bids into model
              primitives. Structural estimation provides a precise interpretation of the data
              and can be particularly valuable for policy analysis.  However, there is a 
              serious danger: if the theoretical model underlying the empirical specification
              is poorly matched to the economic processes actually generating the data,
              results can be wildly misleading. Two new estimation approaches are proposed to
              partially address this problem. The first addresses a well known discrepancy
              between auctions in theory and practice: the fact that English auctions are
              most often held in an `oral ascending bid'' format (where bidders call out
              prices on their own) rather than the ``button auction'' format envisioned in
              most theoretical work.  This mismatch has important implications for the
              interpretation of   data from English auctions.  While one solution would be
              development of a more descriptive theoretical model, an attempt to explain
              choices of bids called out in the dynamic environment of an oral auction faces
              severe challenges.  The approach proposed here enables semi-parametric
              estimation of the distributions of bidder valuations at oral ascending bid
              auctions without requiring a precise specification of the process generating
              the observed bids. Relying on only weak implications of economic theory, this
              approach is robust to variations in fine details of the `true model` generating
              the data.  This technique is applied to data from U.S. Forest Service timber
              auctions, where it is used to address important policy questions regarding
              reserve prices and to assess its methodological contribution relative to
              existing approaches.  The second approach sacrifices flexibility of the assumed
              distributional specification in order to allow a more general information
              structure in the underlying theoretical model than has previously been used in
              empirical studies.  In particular, the model allows ex ante asymmetry in
              bidders' values for the object,  asymmetry in the precision of bidders' signals
              of values, and separate signals of both private and common value components. 
              These complications are likely to exist in many applications and have important
              implications for policy and evaluation of theory. Tests are performed for the
              presence of each of these complications in an application to Federal auctions
              of offshore mineral rights. Auxiliary data on quantities of minerals extracted
              are used to construct tests of the empirical specification and to investigate
              the tradeoff between flexibility of the underlying theoretical model, as
              permitted here, and flexibility of the distributional specification, as allowed
              by other approaches.  The second component of this project is a theoretical
              investigation of optimal selling procedures when potential buyers can trade in
              a secondary market. Such resale opportunities exist for most goods sold by
              auction and can have significant impacts on the constraints faced in designing
              a selling mechanism.   Nonetheless, nearly all of the auction literature has
              ignored the possibility of resale. Implications of resale opportunities for the
              ability of sellers to extract surplus are investigated, as is the impact of
              resale on the efficiency of allocations under optimal selling mechanisms.  For
              standard auctions followed by a resale opportunity,  the use of reserve prices,
              bundling of multiple objects, pre-auction information revelation by the seller,
              and information acquisition by buyers are all investigated.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
