Title       : Clergy, Parishioners, and Politics: A survey of ELCA and Episcopal Church
               Ministers and Parishioners
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9809536

Award Number: 9809536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132476             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher p. Gilbert cgilbert@gac.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Djupe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This project investigates political beliefs and activities within two   major
              American Protestant denominations - the Evangelical   Lutheran Church in
              America (ELCA) and the Episcopal Church.   Within each denomination, 3,000
              ministers and members of fifty   selected congregations receive surveys asking
              for their   political views, the extent of their political activism, and the  
              degree to which their religious beliefs and church activities   affect these
              political views and actions.   The results from this research help to address
              several significant  questions about how religion and politics intersect in a
              nation   dedicated to the separation of church and state.  Throughout  
              American history, groups and individuals have engaged in political  
              activities, believing their faith has called them to do so.  Much   has been
              written about the large-scale movements originating from   religious
              communities, such as the pre-Civil War crusade against   slavery, the drive for
              Prohibition in the early 20th century, and   the campaign for civil rights led
              by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther   King and other religious leaders.  Far less is
              known about the   connections that ordinary citizens make between faith and  
              politics as part of their daily lives.  Over 90 percent of   Americans believe
              in God and three-fourths belong to a church.   This extraordinary level of
              religious activity - unmatched in any   other democratic nation - clearly
              affects numerous aspects of the   lives of church members.  Through this
              project the researchers assess   what political issues are addressed in
              churches, how much   political knowledge and guidance members receive from
              their   ministers, and how this knowledge and guidance influence members'  
              political activities.  While other researchers have explored   these questions
              in other large U.S. denominations, to date no one   has investigated ELCA
              Lutherans and Episcopalians; hence this   study fills a sizable gap in our
              knowledge about religion and   politics.       The larger goal of this research
              project is to understand  better how Americans become informed, active
              citizens.  Recent   studies have suggested that contemporary Americans are less
                likely to join civic groups or to participate in politics than   was the case
              thirty or forty years ago.  Churches are a major   exception to this rule,
              going against the trend of declining   membership and civic participation.  If
              an informed and active   citizenry is necessary to sustain this nation's
              democratic   institutions, it is essential to understand how and why some  
              institutions, such as churches, have retained the loyalty of   their members
              and have continued to play integral roles in   building strong local
              communities across the United States.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
