Title       : Developing ERC: A Model of Equity, Reciprocity, and Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9809228

Award Number: 9809228
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Bolton geb3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bolton  Most business and economic theories assume self-interested material gain
              is the sole driver of behavior.  Are there other important motives?  When we
              look around, the right answer is hard to judge:  People compete fiercely for
              profits in the marketplace.  But they also demand fairness in their workplace. 
              People strike mutually beneficial bargains; other times, negotiations collapse
              in bitter, personal dispute.  People 'free ride' on the public domain - and
              contribute to charities.  The variety of behavior suggested by casual
              empiricism is mirrored in the laboratory:  Experiments featuring market
              institutions tend to produce the type of competitive behavior we associate with
              the struggle for material gain.  Simple bargaining situations yield results
              suggesting a role for fairness.  When given the chance, some free ride on the
              efforts of others, while some choose to contribute.  The ERC theory is based on
              the premise that people are motivated by both material gain, and social status.
               ERC stands for equity, reciprocity and competition, the types of behavior the
              theory captures.  the basic idea behind the theory is that different situations
              present different opportunities to trade-off material gain and social status. 
              For example, in a two-person negotiating situation, ending the negotiation
              instead of accepting a bad deal avoids elevating the social status of ones
              bargaining partner to the detriment of ones own status.  Hence demands for a
              fair agreement - that is, an agreement that protects social status - have
              credibility in bargaining encounters.  In contrast, it is very hard to
              unilaterally influence anyone else's social status in a large, impersonal
              market where there are many trading partners to choose from.  ERC implies that
              the best way to improve ones status in a market (as well as to make the most
              material gain) is to compete.  ERC is still an early development stage, but it
              could eventually influence how we think about a wide variety of issues in the
              economic and business domain, including how markets should be structured,
              methods for conflicts resolution, and the design of mechanisms to remedy free
              riding problems.  I am asking for funding to perform the experiments necessary
              to develop the model further in two important directions.  Most of what ERC has
              been demonstrated to explain is qualitative in nature.  Quantitative
              predictions are more precise, but there is little in the way of necessary data
              for testing at this level.  The first experiment I propose is designed to test
              the foundational quantitative premises of the theory.  The theory presently
              relies on a rather crude measure of social status.  The second experiment I
              propose is intended to determine whether modification is necessary, and if so,
              what modification.  Some of these experiments have a direct baring on the issue
              of conflict resolution.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
