Title       : Chemical and Thermal Modification of PMN-Type Relaxor Ferroelectrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2000  
File        : a9809035

Award Number: 9809035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347618             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Davies davies@sol1.lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Davies
9809035

Following their discovery over thirty five years ago, relaxor
              ferroelectrics based on Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)03 (PMN) have attracted widespread
              interest for applications in multi-layer capacitors, transducers, electro-optic
              devices, and thin film memories.  However, advances in the development of new
              PMN-type relaxors have been severely impeded by the apparent "frozen" nature of
              their chemical order, which has been assumed to be inert and unresponsive to
              thermal treatment.  The inability to modify the nano-level cation order has
              also complicated attempts to characterize the local atomic structure or
              understand and model their relaxor response.  Through experiments conducted on
              tantalate members of the PMN family of relaxors, Pb(Mg1/3Ta2/3)03 and its solid
              solutions with PbZrO3, Professor Davies has identified thermal conditions that
              can induce more than two orders of magnitude changes in the size of the
              chemically ordered domains.  In contrast to other classes of perovskite
              relaxors, he has also found that the electronic properties of these large
              domain PMT systems retain a relaxor type response.  These new observations
              cannot be reconciled in terms of the currently accepted "space charge" models
              for the structures of the PMN-type systems, and instead support a "random site"
              model for the cation order.  Experiments using TEM and X-ray and neutron
              diffraction will be used to characterize the local chemistry and structure of
              the large domain systems.  The dielectric response and ferroelectric properties
              will be measured.  Several of the experiments will be carried out in
              collaboration with Professor Clive Randall of the Pennsylvania State
              University.
%%%
Professor Davies' discovery of methods to modify the cation
              order opens a new avenue of research for the PMN family of relaxor
              ferroelectrics. In this renewal project, the findings from the previous project
              will be utilized to develop a new class of large domain, chemically ordered
              niobate, tantalate, and tungstate relaxors that will have improved properties
              over those currently available.  Collaboration with Professor Clive Randall of
              the Pennsylvania State University will enhance the experimental capability of
              the PI's group.
***

