Title       : Osmoregulation and Contractile Vacuole Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9809929

Award Number: 9809929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Allen allen@pbrc.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9809929  Allen    Cells must maintain their content of salts and water at
              concentrations that are favorable for life even though the cells live in a
              harsh environment.  If these concentrations depart significantly from the norm,
              the cell cannot function properly and dies.  The overall goal of this project
              is to discover how a single-cell protozoan, Paramecium, which lives in fresh
              water, is capable of secreting water to maintain this proper balance of water
              and salts.  This protozoan has a contractile vacuole complex which acts as a
              pumping organelle to expel water.  However, it is not known how the organelle
              accumulates water from the rest of the cytoplasm since the membrane of the
              organelle is freely permeable to water.  One solution to this paradox would be
              that the contractile vacuole pumps and accumulates salts so that its fluid
              contents would have the same osmolarity as the cytoplasm.  Water would enter
              the contractile vacuole passively with the salts and both would be expelled
              together.  However, the salts that might serve this role in Paramecium have not
              been identified.  To test this model and to identify those salts that might be
              transported by the contractile vacuole, this project will focus on the
              following specific aims.  (1) Ion-selective electrodes will be inserted into
              the contractile vacuole in living organisms to determine ion content of the
              vacuole fluid.  (2) Microelectrodes will be used to patch-clamp the organelle
              to study the ionic currents and to identify ion channels and pumps that may be
              present in the membrane.  (3) A specific hypothesis will be tested that could
              account for water accumulation in the vacuole.  The hypothesis is that a proton
              gradient develops across the vacuole membrane which brings bicarbonate ion into
              the vacuole as a counter ion.  Accumulation of bicarbonate would then cause
              water to flow passively through aquaporin-like water channels.  This study will
              provide clues on how osmoregulation (water and salt balance) has evolved from
              "simple" life forms  such as Paramecium to its present state in higher
              multicellular organisms.
