Title       : Monetary Policy, Inflation Stabilization, and Welfare
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9809469

Award Number: 9809469
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197724             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Woodford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with the analysis of alternative rules for monetary
              policy. The rules to be considered consist of alternative specifications of
              feedback rules for setting the Federal funds rate, the instrument of monetary
              policy in the U.S. While the numerical results of the study will address U.S.
              policy choice in particular, the more general conclusions are likely to be of
              application to other economies as well. The class of rules that will receive
              primary attention makes the funds rate a function of the current and recent
              past evolution of inflation and real economic activity, and of its own recent
              past values. Such a specification incorporates the two types of variables that
              most clearly affect current U.S. policy, and allows consideration of a range of
              popular policy proposals as well. Under at least certain simple assumptions, a
              policy within that class can also be shown to be optimal. Issues to be
              addressed include the degree to which it is desirable for policy to respond to
              these two variables, the consequences of responding to such data only with a
              delay, and the consequences of adjusting policy only gradually over time rather
              than in one sudden move. Consideration will also be given to the possible
              advantages of the use of additional indicators, especially when direct measures
              of inflation and output are not available that are sufficiently timely or
              accurate. Among such other indicators, the proper use of inflation forecasts
              will receive particular attention.  The project will analyze alternative
              policies in the context of a small structural model in which the model
              equations are derived from explicit intertemporal optimization on the part of
              the suppliers and demanders of goods, and as a result incorporate
              forward-looking behavior; the analysis will thus take account of the `Lucas
              critique` of more traditional methods of econometric policy evaluation. At the
              same time, the model parameters are estimated on the basis of U.S. aggregate
              time series, and the model is able to mimic the properties of U.S. data on
              output, inflation and interest rate variations in considerable detail. A
              benchmark version of such a model has been introduced in recent work with Julio
              Rotemberg of Harvard; but the model will be further elaborated under this
              project. Comparability of the results obtained with this model with those of
              other small structural models will also be considered, in attempt to reach
              conclusions that are relatively robust to alternative assumptions in areas
              where model uncertainty is especially significant.  Alternative policies will
              be evaluated from a variety of points of view. Particular emphasis will be
              given to the consequences of policy for the variability of inflation, and for
              the average rate of inflation (which turns out to be closely related to a
              policy's consequences for the variability of short term interest rates). The
              use of a model with optimizing foundations means that it is also possible to
              consider macroeconomic performance under alternative policies in terms of the
              level of private welfare attained, according to the preferences reflected in
              the structural relations of the model. Thus the project will also compute
              measures of the `deadweight loss` resulting from price level instability, in
              the spirit of standard public finance exercises, and seek to characterize the
              policy rules that are optimal in the sense of minimizing this loss, under
              various assumptions about the information available to the Fed, and the degree
              of complexity that the rule may involve. Theoretical deadweight loss will be
              shown to be increasing in both the average rate of inflation and its
              variability, owing to the relative price distortions caused by inflation when
              prices are not all changed simultaneously; hence policies that are desirable in
              terms of their consequences for these intuitive criteria are closely related to
              those that are optimal in welfare terms.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
