Title       : An Experimental Testbed for Research in Advanced Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9809018

Award Number: 9809018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1460203            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Fitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Raj Jain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chao-Ju Hou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Urbashi Mitra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven W. Ellingson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The demand for wireless services has experienced explosive growth in recent
              years with no signs of abatement. Much of the remaining potential gains in
              wireless communications inherently require the synergy of both theoretical and
              experimental methods. The objective of this project is to achieve significant
              gains in wireless system performance and spectral efficiency through a tight,
              synergistic theory-experiment loop.  The research objectives of the seven
              proposed focus areas are summarized below:

Wireless Testbed: An existing and
              functioning wireless testbed will be leveraged to build an experimental system
              which forms the bedrock of the proposed research. This flexible design permits
              operation at multiple frequencies, with multiple bandwidth and array
              capabilities.

Multiple Access Signaling:  Advanced multi-user receivers will
              be designed by considering novel characterizations of multiple access
              interference, inherent parameter mismatch, and systems that offer multiple data
              rates.  Coupled model order selection/parameter estimation techniques will be
              employed to optimally characterizecand mitigate interference.

Space-Time
              Modems:  Traditional models for space-time characteristics will be validated
              via field tests. Experimentally refined models will be used to optimize
              space-time codes.  Both coupled and decoupled space-time processing algorithms
              will be developed to perform multi-user separation and channel equalization for
              multiple data rate systems.

Error Control:  An interactive/iterative design
              process between physical layer system design and network layer protocol design
              will be employed to efficiently distribute system complexity.  To this end,
              experimental error statistics will be characterized and error statistic shaping
              methods will be developed.  For given error statistics, optimal protocols will
              be designed and analyzed.

Access Methods:  Based on the error
              characteristics drawn from experimental data, we will design medium access
              control protocols to support timely establishment of message streams and to
              support different levels of temporal QoS in the presence of channel errors and
              fading.

Mobility:  The testbed will be used to study how the channel error
              and fading characteristics of wireless links impact the design of a robust
              handoff mechanism and how error characteristics can be shaped and tuned to
              facilitate the design.

Flow Control:   Flow control is an important resource
              management problem for reliable data transmission, especially in a high demand
              situation.  A stable, robust, adaptive controller design scheme will be
              developed for a class of time-varying, time-delay system models appearing in
              basic flow control problems of communication networks.

This research project
              addresses several of the priorities established by the NSF for sponsored
              research programs. The project has been designed to be collaborative and
              interdisciplinary and each problem has been specifically chosen to take
              advantage of existing and proven expertise of the OSU team.  Additionally,
              successful achievement of the research objectives necessitates the merging of
              theoretical and experimental activity. The project leverages existing
              facilities, but will also improve the infrastructure for future research and
              educational endeavors. Graduate student training will play a major role in the
              execution of the proposed research and the unique dual theoretical and
              experimental nature of the work will offer an enriched educational
              environment.

