Title       : Infrared and Device Physics of Quantum Well Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9809746

Award Number: 9809746
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Unil A. Perera uperera@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9809746
Perera
The proposed project involves research on novel
              multi-quantum-well (MQW) concepts, intraband processes and IR detector
              operating leading to significant improvements in focal plane quality, and to
              potential applications in high-performance infrared imaging systems.  Under the
              previous NSF program, emphasis was placed on photo-emissive homojunction
              detector formats for detection in the far infrared (FIR).  These studies led to
              the successful development of the new family of FIR detectors, with record
              values of wavelength cutoff.  For optimum operation at shorter wavelengths
              (LWIR-VLWIR), quantum-well IR photodetectors (QWIP's), which can be bandgap
              engineered for more selective spectral response, are preferred.

Recent
              analyses summarized in this proposal have demonstrated that when operated in
              the steady-state photoconductive mode, IR QWIP detectors undergo an initial
              transient during which extensive redistribution and depletion of carriers in
              the well may occur.  The number of wells contributing signal current decreases
              rapidly and responsivity and detectivity fall significantly, so that the full
              potential of such detectors cannot be realized.  In collaboration with
              scientists at other universities (Cornell, NRC and UCLA) and national
              laboratories (JPL and U.S. Army Research lab) this problem will be addressed by
              exploring operation of the detector in a transient rather than a steady-state
              mode.  Our initial thrust will be to experimentally study and model the
              transient IR behavior of prototype LWIR-VLWIR QWIP detectors, and to
              established the time-dependent operational physics of IR response in the
              steady-state mode.  The role of intraband levels, well-doping, barrier
              parameters, emitter/collector structures, etc. in influencing transient values
              of IR response and dark current will be investigated.  Time-varying operational
              bias conditions for re-fill of wells and periodic extraction of signal current
              will be devised.  Extending on recent analysis of transient modes of detection
              and of space-charge distribution in multi-layer GaAs/AlGaAs structures, studies
              on the frequency and bias dependence of sensor response will be continued, with
              the aim of establishing optimum operation parameters.  Optimized designed
              features, well-doping profiles, energy-selective QW barriers, emitter/collector
              barriers, etc. will be modeled and incorporated.  These efforts should lead to
              the achievement of QWIP device architectures and focal plane drive and sensing
              circuits yielding significantly enhanced performance over all spectral ranges
              accessible to QWIP detectors.

Our studies of spontaneous pulsing in MQW
              structures and the frequency response to IR radiation will also be continued
              and extended, in order better to assess the potential of this operation mode in
              configuring higher performance detectors and focal planes.

The high national
              importance of this cutting-edge technology, and the close involvement of highly
              qualified staff and students at Georgia State, Cornell and UCLA will continue
              to impact significantly on advancing knowledge, and physics and engineering
              education making a significant contribution to the nation's science and
              technology base by supplying the scientific community with leading young
              scientists.  The collaborations will also ensure effective transfer to emerging
              high-tech applications both in commercial and government laboratories.  The
              results of the proposed research will vastly improve the understanding of
              detectors and form the basis for the next generation of detectors.  In
              addition, realization of the proposed structures, will have an immediate impact
              on areas such as ultrafast electronic devices for logic, long wavelength IR
              digital data transmission or oscillator applications and in imaging
              applications.
***


