Title       : Engineering Equipment for Antenna Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9809862

Award Number: 9809862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33595              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed A. Kishk ahmed@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9809862
Kishk

	The Deparment of Electrical Engineering at The University of
              Mississippi will purchase a mircorwave receiver which will be dedicated to
              support research on antennas and scatterers.  The equipment will be used to
              pursue studies of new, innovative antennas for several research projects,
              including studies of dielectric resonator antennas, cylindrical wire antenna
              scatterers in multi-layeted media, antenna for a ground coupled radar, and
              meander and spiral antennas for wireless communication.
RF and Microwave
              technology has been used and is being proposed for a variety of military and
              commercial applications based on the rapid growth of wireless and personal
              communication usage.  The availability of reasonably priced components and
              propagation characteristics in the RF and GHz. range are, however, contributing
              factors for the rapid growth of RF and wireless applications in this country. 
              Personal communications systems have generated a great deal of interest by
              industry and research organizations with a need for new antenna technology.  As
              a result, this group of six faculty members has been very active in the
              development of dielectric resonators for communications applications.  This has
              led us to begin research related to the development of technologies for the
              design and application of dielectric resonators for microwave networks and
              antennas.  It is foreseen that the proposed equipment is required for the study
              of new types of dielectric resonators for use as antennas for future
              applications.  In addition, the investigation of now meander and spiral-type
              antennas for RF and wireless applications has been initiated to discover new
              antenna configurations for these applications
In another research project, a
              multi-wire, cage model has been developed to solve the important problem of the
              determination of the radiation pattern and longitudinal current distribution
              along and around a wire antenna protruding through a multi-layer medium.  This
              research is of significant merit because the longitudinal directed current
              distribution on a wire antenna near the interface between two layered medium is
              not uniform as a function of angle around the antenna because of proximity
              effects, and current simulation programs cannot model these structure's
              accurately.  In this research, directed towards investigation of a more
              accurate simulation model for these type wire structures, several different
              cases are being analyzed using a cage model used in this research for
              verification of a model, and antenna current distributions, impedance, and
              radiation patterns are to be measured for discovering the characteristics of
              this class of wire antenna structures in the presence of lossy media.
The
              fourth project that is currently under investigation is a study of an optimized
              antenna for a ground coupled radar system for location of unexploded artillery
              shells and mines.  The location of unexploded munitions is currently a high
              priority area of interest, and this research is being pursued in an effort to
              discover new technology for the solution of this widely recognized
              problem.
The proposed equipment is to provide a wide-band microwave receiving
              system (<20GHz) for magnitude and phase measurements of current and charge
              distribution, input and mutual impedance, and radiation patterns for the
              advancement of antenna technology by this research group.  'Me availability of
              this equipment, which includes the proposed receiver and University of
              Mississippi provided signal source and test set, will have a significant impact
              on the quality and type of research that can be pursued for creating new
              knowledge antennas, as well as on the level of instruction for training
              engineers for the future with backgrounds in RF, wireless, and microwave
              technology.


