Title       : A Fluid Simulation Methodology for Complex, Large Scale Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9809332

Award Number: 9809332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $631807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weibo Gong gong@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Kurose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald F. Towsley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Researchers from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and
              Dartmouth
College jointly propose to perform fundamental research on
              developing a
fluid simulation methodology that will enable efficient,
              multi-time-scale,
hierarchical performance modeling of complex networks such
              as the next
generation Internet. The proposed effort will allow networks to be
              more
easily modeled and their performance to be evaluated significantly
              faster;
it will make it possible to model significantly larger networks than
              before
and to allow the tradeoffs between modeling accuracy and solution speed
              to
be quantitatively assessed. The novel features of the proposed
              fluid
modeling methodology include:
>
>Modeling at multiple time-scales. The
              proposed unified modeling framework
provides for modeling system behavior at
              different time-scales, allowing for
significant savings in simulation
              execution times when modeling at coarser
time-scales. Development of formal
              means for quantitatively characterizing
the potential loss of modeling
              accuracy when fast-time-scale behavior is
modeled at a coarser time-scale is
              an important part of the framework.
>
>Hierarchical fluid modeling. The PIs
              demonstrate that multi-level
(hierarchical) fluid modeling allows for
              abstraction of a potentially
complex component of the simulation by a simpler
              model and substitution of
this simpler model into the larger simulation.  The
              PIs also develop
rigorous techniques that can automatically identify when such
              substitution
can be performed without significant loss of modeling
              accuracy.
>
>Efficiency in modeling complex systems. The PIs demonstrate that
              in
addition to providing for multi-time-scale, multi-level modeling,
              fluid
simulation can be significantly more efficient than traditional
              discrete
event  simulation. The PIs' initial work shows a 50-fold speedup in
              a
uniprocessor fluid simulation speed over the discrete-event counterpart
              with
little loss in modeling accuracy. 
>
>Applicability in many problem
              domains.  The PIs demonstrate that fluid
simulation methodologies are ``plug
              and play'' in the sense that they can be
applied equally well to the current
              Internet protocol suite, future
real-time and multicast protocols, or  ATM
              networks.
>

