Title       : Electrosensory Processing in Laminated Midbrain Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a9809913

Award Number: 9809913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Rose gary.rose@m.cc.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Sensory processing involves how nerve cells handle a sequence  of signals
              with particular timing features.  Often there are  populations of neurons that
              act as filters, selectively responding  only to signal trains with particular
              frequencies.  The brain of  weakly electric fish provides a model system for
              studying these  temporal filters.  Some weakly electric fish emit a small
              electric  discharge at a highly regular frequency, and they have an 
              electrosensory system that shows high sensitivity to any changes  in the
              electrical pattern in the water.  When a neighboring fish  comes near, using a
              slightly different discharge frequency, both  fish show a 'jamming-avoidance
              response' in which each fish shifts  its own discharge frequency away from that
              of the neighbor, to  avoid signal 'jamming' and allow easier reception of its
              own  signal.  This project uses a novel technique of recording single  cell
              activity in a part of the midbrain called the torus, while  giving precise
              signal frequencies to the electrosensory system.  Physiological measures such
              as the variable conductances of the  cell membrane will be analyzed to see how
              temporal filtering can  be enhanced by a frequency-dependent mechanism of gain
              control for  the incoming signals.     Results will have a major impact because
              they will clarify one  of the few cases where cellular membrane properties
              produce  selectivity for temporally varying behaviorally relevant stimuli.  The
              impact will extend across all sensory neuroscience, and also  to a better
              understanding of central brain mechanisms.
