Title       : The Dynamic Effects of Medicaid Expansions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1999      
File        : a9809546

Award Number: 9809546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230352             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Ham   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lara D. Shore-Sheppard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is an examination of the impact of public health insurance for poor
              children and pregnant women on household economic decisions. Three important
              decisions are focused on: (i) the decision of whether or not to have a child;
              (ii) the choice of medical insurance coverage (public, private, or none); and
              (iii) the employment decision. The analysis is based on an examination of the
              impact of federal legislation of the late 1980s which dramatically expanded the
              Medicaid program to poor children and pregnant women who were previously
              ineligible. Panel data on fertility, insurance, and employment from the Survey
              of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), together with dynamic estimation
              methods (duration models), are used to shed new light on the impacts of public
              health insurance. A key difference between this research and previous studies
              is the use of panel data. In panel data, households may be observed both before
              and after they become eligible through the expansions, and thus behavioral
              responses are directly observable. In addition, the monthly data available in
              the SIPP provide a better match between changes in entitlement and changes in
              employment, insurance status, and fertility, and allow other time varying
              factors such as unemployment rates to be controlled for.  The research will
              contribute to the literatures on the impact of public policies on fertility,
              health insurance coverage, labor supply, and job mobility. It will also
              demonstrate the application of duration models with endogenous explanatory
              variables to policy analysis. Because these models are computationally
              difficult, they have not been widely used by applied researchers. In
              particular, they have not been used to examine the impact of public health
              insurance, despite the important dynamic aspects of the policy. Recent federal
              legislation authorizing the largest increase in public spending on insurance
              for children in three decades makes this research particularly timely and of
              interest to policymakers as they begin the process of designing and
              implementing these new expansions.  The first part of this research examines
              the impact of the Medicaid expansions on fertility, a question that has not
              been previously addressed. The Medicaid program was expanded to cover the costs
              of prenatal care, delivery, and infant and child health care for eligible
              families, thus reducing some of the costs associated with fertility. The impact
              of public health insurance on fertility is an important question in light of
              public concerns about birth and abortion rates. A duration model is used to
              estimate the probability of birth in a given month, accounting for the possible
              endogeneity of eligibility for, and participation in, Medicaid.  In the second
              part of the research, the impact of expanded Medicaid eligibility on the rate
              and type of transitions between health insurance states (public, private, and
              none) is examined. As the intent of the policy was to provide insurance to
              uninsured children, if the program worked as intended the rate of transitions
              between the uninsured and publicly insured states should increase. However
              expanding public health insurance may also have the unintended consequence of
              increasing transitions out of private insurance and into public insurance,
              increasing the costs of the program and potentially leading to distortions of
              insurance markets. The determinants and correlates of movements between
              insurance states is estimated, again using dynamic models.  Finally, the effect
              of public health insurance on labor market transitions, including transitions
              into and out of the labor force and between jobs, is examined. This portion of
              the proposed project represents a contribution both to the literature on the
              labor supply effects of public programs and to the literature on health
              insurance and job mobility. As a major goal of current policy is to move
              individuals out of welfare and into the labor force, it is important to
              determine the potential contribution of public insurance in easing
              welfare-to-work transitions.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
