Title       : CARE: National Center For Sign Language & Gesture Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9809209

Award Number: 9809209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitris N. Metaxas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Liberman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norman I. Badler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The University of Pennsylvania and Boston University are collaborating on the
              establishment and maintenance of resources for research in sign language and
              gesture.  The goal of this project is to make available several different types
              of experimental resources and analyzed data to facilitate linguistic and
              computational research on signed languages and the gestural components of
              spoken languages.  Activities in the project include the following:

     * 
              A facility for collection of video-based language data will be established,
              equipped with synchronized          digital cameras to capture multiple views
              of the subject.

     *  A substantial corpus of American Sign Language video
              data will be collected from native signers and             made available in
              both compressed and uncompressed forms.

    *  Significant portions of the
              collected data will be linguistically annotated.  The database of linguistic   
                    annotations will be made publicly available, along with the applications
              needed to access the database.
     
    *  Video data will be analyzed using
              computer-based algorithms, with analysis and software made publicly         
              available.

Thus the project makes available sophisticated facilities for
              data collection, a standard protocol for such collection, and large amounts of
              language data.  The combination of linguistic and computational expertise in
              this project  will ensure scientific integrity of data collection, and will
              result in useful data for researchers in a variety of fields. 
   


