Title       : AFGE: Seismology and Verifying Nuclear Test Ban Treaties -- An Initiative to
               Link Geosciences and Public Policy in Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1998 
File        : a9809570

Award Number: 9809570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew A. Nyblade ANDY@GEOSC.PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Langston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9809570
Nyblade

An initiative in undergraduate education is proposed linking
              the geoscience of seismology with the public policy issue of verifying nuclear
              test ban treaties.  This initiative consists of designing two new undergraduate
              courses, modifying two existing graduate courses, modifying two existing
              graduate courses, and creating a universally available Web resource at Penn
              State University.  The Web resource will consist of learning modules,
              simulation software, and a database that will facilitate hands-on,
              discovery-based learning in the courses and information for the national and
              international public.  Course development includes a general education course,
              "Seismology and Monitoring Nuclear Test Ban Treaties" that will expose students
              to concepts in geology, geophysics, and international policy centered about the
              Comprehensive Ban Treaty (CTBT).  "Forensic Seismology" will be an upper level
              geosciences majors course based on the same principles of discovery-based
              learning that will cover technical material in greater depth.  Both
              undergraduate courses will also expose students to actual seismic data
              collection through hands-on work with an inexpensive broadband observatory and
              field deployments of 5 refraction seismographs.  The Web resource that will
              form the core of these courses will be freely available to other institutions
              to disseminate these courses elsewhere.  The Web resource will also be an
              educational instrument for the general public in the important area of the role
              of geosciences in nuclear non-proliferation and verification of the CTBT.  The
              development, implementation, and assessment of the undergraduate courses will
              be formally accomplished with the expertise of Penn State's Schreyer Institute
              for Innovation and Learning.

