Title       : AFGE: Development of Web-Based Instructional Modules To Facilitate Geoscience
               Education Using The Theme, Geologic Controls of Landscape Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9809768

Award Number: 9809768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don W. Byerly dbyerly@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Dunne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin E. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9809768
Byerly

The National Science Education Standards (NRC, 1996), the
              Benchmarks for Science Literacy, Project 2061 (AAAS, 1993), and the Tennessee
              Science Framework Grades K-12 (1995) recognize the value of natural systems as
              embraced by geoscience for promoting interdisciplinary curricula; however,
              before a level of geoscience education in the K-12 classrooms can be consistent
              with these curricular guidelines, new tools (methods) for teaching Earth
              Systems Science and new opportunities for professional development in
              geoscience education for all science teachers must be available.  These needs
              will be addressed by constructing three virtual field trips as instructional
              modules that emphasize Earth systems.  Several information visualization
              methods will allow evaluation of each as potential learning vehicles.  Modules,
              suitable for K-12 and collegiate freshman-level geoscience students, as well as
              the public-at-large, will be interactive, taking full advantage of multiple
              ways to access information, and at the same time encouraging self-paced study
              and learner-centered activities.  Collaboration of K-12 and collegiate teachers
              to construct, test and assess the modules will afford opportunities for mutual
              professional development in Earth System Science.  Although Tennessee teachers
              and students are the focus for this project, web-based modules will be "free"
              instructional tools readily transferable to all educators (K-16) having access
              to the Net.  "Geologic controls of landscape evolution" is the chosen thematic
              vehicle for generating geoscience education modules because: 1) it is germane
              to Earth System Science education initiatives; 2) landforms are familiar to
              everyone, providing a natural platform for cognitive learning; 3) it is
              pertinent to the paradigm, "landforms, climate, and resources of the earth's
              surface affect where and how people live and how human history has unfolded";
              4) the scientific method involving multiple working hypotheses can be applied
              during exploration of contrasting landforms from diverse physiographic settings
              that include the Mississippi Embayment of the Gulf Coastal Plain, the Ridge and
              Valley and Appalachian Plateaus provinces, and a portion of the Central Rocky
              Mountains.  Given the weak initial background in Earth system science of many
              educators, these modules will be generating new science, but will be achieving
              the important results of involving the users in the scientific process.

