Title       : AFGE: Learning by Doing Physical Geology in a Virtual Laboratory/ Virtual Field
               Trip Computer Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1998 
File        : a9809761

Award Number: 9809761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49981              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian M. Slator slator@cs.ndsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald P. Schwert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernhardt Saini-Eidukat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9809761
Slator

The need for computer-based education and distance learning
              systems has become increasingly obvious, while the value of "active" versus
              "passive" learning has become increasingly clear.  The Geology Explorer is a
              computer-based educational environment for teaching aspects of physical
              geology.  This takes the form of a synthetic, virtual space where students are
              given the means and the equipment to undertake geologic exploration.  This
              pedagogical approach gives students an authentic experience that includes
              elements of exploration of a spatially oriented virtual world, practical, field
              oriented, expedition planning and decision making, and scientific problem
              solving (i.e. a "hands on" approach to the scientific method).  The pedagogical
              goal of the Geology Explorer is to teach students a framework of basic
              principles and approaches that can be used to solve science-based problems
              while at the same time introducing students to the content of their discipline.
               The Geology Explorer implements educational tools and methods that deliver the
              principles but also teaches important content material in a meaningful way.  By
              its nature, geology is a highly visual science.  The need is for implementation
              of a graphical environment for navigational ease, spatial authenticity,
              engaging students, and visualization of geologic objects, contexts, and
              processes.  A highly graphical and interactive Geology Explorer will be
              implemented in order to meet these objectives by supplying a graphical user
              interface layered on top of the existing networked multi-user database and
              messaging system.  The Java/MOO visual component of the Geology Explorer will
              accomplish this using client software written in Java that is a viewport into
              the server.  In it, objects are represented by graphical elements that can be
              manipulated in a way that makes sense to the domain.  Virtual environments,
              such as the Geology Explorer, enable students to undergo experiences that would
              otherwise be impossible or impractical: distant worlds, subatomic spaces, or
              dangerous places.  The potential impact of this virtual environment approach is
              that it will help solve many of the problems facing the modern university:
              distance learning will become a reality, learner diversity will be accommodated
              (both in terms of learning styles and life styles), and in many cases the
              curriculum will become more active, more role-based, more self-paced, and more
              "learn by doing" than "learn by listening."

