Title       : Drug Dealing, Incarceration, and Self-Employment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1998    
File        : a9809266

Award Number: 9809266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56422              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Fairlie rfairlie@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical models of self employment posit that risk aversion, entrepreneurial
              ability, and a preference for autonomy are central to the individual's decision
              between self employment and wage/salary work. Absent actual measured of these
              factors, previous empirical studies have included crude proxies, such as age,
              education, marital status and spousal characteristics, in their econometric
              models of self employment. The empirical literature, therefore, has not been
              able to adequately test whether risk aversion, entrepreneurial ability, and a
              preference for autonomy are important determinants of self employment. A
              potentially superior proxy for these three factors is whether the individual
              sold drugs in the past. The nature of drug dealing makes it likely to be
              attractive to individuals who are less risk averse, have more entrepreneurial
              ability and have a preference for autonomy, all else equal. The relationship
              between drug dealing and legitimate self employment, however, has not been
              examined in the literature.  Data from the National Longitudinal Survey of
              Youth (NLSY) will be used to investigate whether young drug dealers are more
              likely to choose self employment than non drug dealers early in their careers.
              This project will bring together research on self employment and the economics
              of crime to shed new light on previously unresolved issues in both literatures.
              The findings from this research will also provide insight into the extent to
              which governmental programs promoting self employment among youths, former drug
              dealers, and ex convicts can be effective.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
