Title       : The Economics and Sociology of Second-Best Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9809107

Award Number: 9809107
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Feinberg                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155880             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Gibbons rgibbons@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                In 1940, Robert Merton launched a new approach to organization theory. Whereas
              Weber had focused on the role of formal structures (such as job descriptions,
              authority relationships, and career ladders) in designing efficient
              organizations, Merton challenged both the focus on formal structures and the
              conclusion of efficient performance. In the 1950s and '60s, Merton's students
              and their contemporaries undertook detailed, first-hand observations of
              organizations and wrote books describing and analyzing what they saw (see Blau
              (1955), Crozier (1963), Dalton (1959), Gouldner (1954), and Selznick (1949),
              for example). These books confirmed that many organizations do not exhibit the
              `precision, speed, expert control, continuity, discretion, and optimal returns
              on input` (Merton, 1940: 561) of Weber's ideal type, and that informal
              structures (such as quid pro quos, shared understandings, and relationships not
              shown on the organization chart) are at least as important as formal structures
              in many organizations. Furthermore, these books showed two roles for informal
              structures: in some cases, they subverted the organization's rational design;
              in others, they inspired superior organizational performance.  In the 1970s,
              organizational sociology had begun to shift its focus from life inside
              organizations to the relationship between an organization and its environment.
              Today, this transformation is essentially complete: two of the strongest
              sub-fields are population ecology and institutional theory, both of which
              typically treat the firm as a black box, and even network theory focuses more
              often on networks between firms (again treated as black boxes) than on networks
              of people within firms.  In economics, the last 25 years saw a different
              transformation, in which the theories of information, incentives, games, and
              contracts developed rapidly. I believe it is now time to revisit the
              sociological evidence on life inside organizations by developing models rooted
              in these new economic theories. (I also wonder whether one reason sociologists
              stopped working on these issues was that they ran out of new ways to make
              progress. Now we have one.)  This suggestion may not seem new: in the last five
              years there have been many papers in the emerging area of organizational
              economics. But much of this theorizing seems to have taken place in an
              empirical vacuum. In particular, I fear that many organizational economists
              have been exposed to no organizations other than universities! In an attempt to
              avoid this fate myself, I have developed a deep relationship with one
              organization (Citibank). In this proposal I seek support for a second approach:
              I would like to read and model the accounts of other first-hand observers of
              organizations, including those from the organizational sociology literature of
              the '50s and '60s, as well as more recent accounts that straddle the business
              and academic literatures (such as Bower (1970), Eccles (1985), and Gerlach
              (1991)).  My limited reading of accounts by first-hand observers suggests that
              this research strategy may be enormously fruitful. For example, the proposal
              describes an argument by Crozier (1964) that was reinvented by Milgrom and
              Roberts (1988). My point is neither that such subsequent formal modeling by
              economists has no value nor that informal arguments by non-economists have no
              value until they are formalized. Rather, my point is simply that anyone who
              anticipates the economics literature by two decades merits further attention. 
              Because I have not yet read much, I cannot say much about the models I will
              develop. In this proposal, therefore, I give two examples of my prior work to
              suggest that the proposed research is both feasible and valuable. The first
              example is drawn from `Taking Coase Seriously,` an essay I wrote about
              (second-best) inefficient organizations at the request of the Administrative
              Science Quarterly (the leading journal in organization theory). The second
              example is drawn from Baker, Gibbons, and Murphy (1997), which combines Simon's
              (1951) conception of relational contracting with Grossman and Hart's (1986)
              definition of integration as asset ownership. The second example shows that
              formal and informal organizational structures not only co-exist but also
              interact, and hence that optimal organizational design involves choosing the
              formal design to facilitate useful informal interactions.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
