Title       : Collaborative Research: Evolution of Preferences in Strategic Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9809208

Award Number: 9809208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83671              (Estimated)
Investigator: Efe OK okefe@fasecon.econ.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award supports collaborative research (with SBR-9812379) which deals with
              the evolution of preferences in strategic environments.  Our approach to the
              evolution of preferences is characterized by the following features: (i) a
              focus on preference interdependence rather than on other aspects of preferences
              such as attitudes toward time and risk; (ii) a focus on strategic rather than
              decision-theoretic environments; (iii) the use of a general analytical
              framework which encompasses a variety of spatial interaction and matching
              models as special cases; (iv) consideration of the simultaneous presence of
              distinct kinds of interdependent preferences in the population, and (v) the
              pursuit of general results rather than the provision of suggestive examples. 
              An individual is said to have interdependent preferences if her (subjective)
              well-being is either enhanced or diminished by changes in the (objective)
              material well-being of others. Preference interdependence may be positive, as
              is the case with altruism, or negative, as is the case with envy or spite.
              Interdependent preferences have often been used to explain empirical and
              experimental findings that are anomalies from the perspective of the more
              standard postulate of independent preferences.  Few attempts have been made to
              account for interdependent preferences in the economics literature, and those
              that have tend to focus on simple stylized environments.  It is now well
              understood that the type of interdependence that emerges in such models is
              inextricably tied to the particular environment that is assumed, with different
              environments giving rise to different forms of interdependence. This makes it
              difficult to assess the robustness of any particular model of preference
              interdependence. What is missing in the literature is a comprehensive analysis
              of the general properties of environments that give rise to particular forms of
              preference interdependence.  It is this gap in the literature that we attempt
              to fill. We develop an analytical framework for the analysis of preference
              evolution which subsumes as special cases the three main classes of
              evolutionary environments that have been considered in the literature to date:
              random matching in pairs or larger subgroups, local interaction with geographic
              or social neighbors, and interactions involving the entire population. Using
              this framework, we examine a number of questions and conjectures pertaining to
              the properties of the strategic environment that correspond to the evolution of
              particular forms of preference interdependence. For instance, we generalize our
              previous results on preference interdependence, which suggest that in
              interactions involving the entire population, negatively interdependent or
              envious preferences emerge in a variety of strategic settings. In contrast,
              positive interdependence can evolve and persist in certain random matching and
              local interaction environments, and we investigate the precise set of
              conditions under which this can occur.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
