Title       : Sex Differences and Estrous Cycle Changes in Hippocampal Information Processing:
               Relating Learning to Hippocampal Single Unit Network Representation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  2002   
File        : a9809958

Award Number: 9809958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Etan J. Markus markus@psych.psy.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9809958  PI= Markus, E.      Sex differences and estrous cycle changes in
              hippocampal  information processing: Relating learning to hippocampal  single
              unit network representation    The long-term objective of the research is
              understanding the  neuronal mechanisms that underlie learning and memory 
              processes; examining the relationship between behavioral  ability and the
              activity of brain cells.  The focus of the  work is the hippocampus, a brain
              structure important for  establishing new memories and for navigation.  There
              is  evidence of sex differences in the hippocampus, and it has  also been shown
              that there are changes in this brain region  over the course of the female
              rat's natural estrous cycle.  Male and female rats will be tested on a series
              of memory  and navigation tasks.  Solving some of the tasks depends of  having
              an intact hippocampus while the rest are hippocampus  independent (this has
              been shown by others in experiments  where the hippocampus is removed).  Sex
              differences in  hippocampal related abilities will be examined; in addition, 
              the female rat's estrous cycle will be monitored to  investigate whether sex
              differences found are related to  this natural cycle.  Some of the animals will
              have  electrodes implanted into their  hippocampus.  This will enable us to
              monitor the activity of  individual cells in the  hippocampus as the animal
              performs the different tasks.  The  distinctive aspect of the research lies in
              combining the  behavioral analysis with the monitoring of the neuronal 
              activity.  This research will enhance our understanding of  how memories are
              formed and provide a basis for the  development of therapeutic intervention in
              cases of memory  dysfunction.
