Title       : Sex Differences in Self-Evaluative Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9809292

Award Number: 9809292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200830             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva M. Pomerantz pomerentz@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Women are almost twice as likely as men to experience depressive symptoms, yet
              little is known about how this difference develops. Because the difference
              first occurs during adolescence, it has been assumed that it is due to changes
              that occur at that age. However, evidence suggests that the precursors are in
              place prior to adolescence. In this project, the possibility that parents may
              socialize these precursors is investigated. The major focus is on parents' use
              of control with daughters and sons. Parents are expected to push or guide their
              daughters more than they do their sons to meet externally set standards. Such
              differential treatment may cause girls to be more vulnerable than boys to
              challenge. Because adolescence is accompanied by a variety of challenges, such
              as the transition from elementary school to junior high school, parents'
              differential use of control may put girls at greater risk than boys for
              depressive symptoms at these ages. These hypotheses are examined by following
              elementary school children and their parents over the course of a year. Because
              exposure to challenge may be critical to the emergence of the sex difference in
              depression, half of the participating children encounter challenge in the form
              of a transition from one school to another, whereas the other half do not.
              Guided by multiple theoretical perspectives in psychology, the research will
              contribute to basic scientific knowledge in psychology, and offers strong
              potential for gaining new insight into a troubling and costly social
              problem.


