Title       : Arbitrage and Rational Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9809225

Award Number: 9809225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56348              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Nau   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nau  Abstract  Arbitrage and Rational Choice  Over the last 50 years, the theory
              of rational choice has provided the foundation for much of the most important
              and influential research in the social and economic sciences, including work in
              statistical decision theory, game theory, social choice, microeconomics,
              financial economics, and political science.  Rational choice theory predicts or
              prescribes socioeconomic behavior by starting from a mathematical model of the
              perfectly rational individual-the `expected utility maximizer` - but modeling
              approach has become increasingly controversial in recent years for a variety of
              reasons.  First, there is abundant empirical evidence that real individuals do
              not display the type of rationality (e.g., completeness and consistency of
              preferences) that the theory requires, while the impressive talents that they
              do have (e.g., pattern recognition, inductive reasoning, creativity,
              leadership) play almost no role in theory.  Second, many  of our familiar
              democratic and market institutions (speculative trade, voting systems,
              organization structures) are hard to reconcile with the assumption that every
              individual has a complete mental model of the world and consistent preferences
              with respect to everything that might happen in it.  Third, some of the
              technical elements of standard rational choice theory are now regarded to be
              untenable even as idealizations of intelligent, self-interested behavior.  This
              project develops a alternative formulation of rational choice that resolves
              many of the paradoxes and puzzles of the standard theory and leads to a deeper
              unification of the theories of decisions under uncertainty, games of strategy,
              and competitive markets.  In place of the standard assortment of preference
              axioms and equilibrium concepts, there is a single axiom of rationality, namely
              that there should be no unexploited arbitrage opportunities - i.e., no free
              lunches or money pumps.  This no-arbitrage definition of rationality is
              inherently group-centered rather than individual-centered, and it does not
              depend on the assumption that every individual has a complete decision model. 
              Rather, it provides a framework in which the incomplete decision models of
              bondedly-rational individuals can combine to form a more complete model when
              they interact with each other.  As such, it admits a more natural role for
              institutions and organizations, namely that they aggregate the knowledge,
              expertise, and creativity of many individuals in order to solve complex
              problems.  The project will develop new arbitrage-based models of sequential
              decisions, strategic reasoning, and asset pricing, as well as explore some of
              the larger foundational and methodological issues surrounding the theory of
              rational choice.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
