Title       : Targeted Mutagenesis of the Hoxc8 Early Enhancer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2000      
File        : a9809926

Award Number: 9809926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374535             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank H. Ruddle frank.ruddle@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This grant application describes a new experimental approach to the analysis of
              axis formation in vertebrates.  Anterior-posterior axis formation is governed
              by the Hox genes that are organized into four clusters in mammals.  Each
              cluster contains subsets of thirteen primordial cognate genes organized within
              a span of approximately 100 kb.  The clusters are estimated to have existed
              over a period of at least 500 million years, suggesting an intimate and
              biological adaptive interplay among the clustered genes. The Ruddle laboratory
              has studied the role of the Hoxc8 gene intensively with respect to its
              contributions to axis formation in the brachial and thoracic regions of the
              developing mouse embryo from molecular, genetic, developmental, and
              evolutionary points of view.  The PI has identified enhancers that regulate the
              transcriptional activity of Hoxc8 and regulate its expression temporally,
              control its spatial distribution on the A/P axis, and target its expression in
              spedtic organ rudiments. One of these enhancers, the early enhancer, has been
              analysed in considerable detail.  It is highly conserved in amniotes, extends
              over a 200 bp domain, and contains at least ten transcription factor binding
              motifs.  The PI has assembled evidence for the identities of the transcription
              factors interacting with this regulatory unit and have shown that the factors
              interact cooperatively in a manner similar to that of an enhanceosome. Much of
              this work has been accomplished using normal and mutated forms of the early
              enhancer in reporter constructs that are introduced into the early embryo by
              transgenesis. While highly informative, reporter experiments do not provide
              direct knowledge of enhancer behavior in the context of the intact gene
              cluster.  The PI now seeks to specifically modify the endogenous enhancer
              element by homologous recombination using embryonal stem cell methodologies. 
              In this way, he expects to obtain unambiguous information on the influence of
              individual enhancer motifs on developmental patterning, the effect of the early
              enhancer on cis regulation of genes throughout the Hoxc cluster, and the
              interplay between the early enhancer and other enhancer elements in the Hoxc8
              region of the C cluster.  The PI believes that this new line of analysis will
              greatly deepen understanding of the means by which the Hox genes regulate
              pattern formation.
