Title       : Development of Interactive Visualization Modules for Use in Geoscience Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1998    
File        : a9809817

Award Number: 9809817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2020   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69232              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent C. Kirkby kirkby@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        KIRKBY  9809817    Visualization modules will be developed for use in
              introductory Earth Science courses, as lecture demonstrations, laboratory
              exercises, or individual tutorials.  Each module will consist of several
              three-dimensional visualizations and electronic text that can easily be
              combined or separated to fill a variety of educational uses.  Students and
              instructors will be able to interactively manipulate the visual components in
              three, and often four, dimensions.  Modules will run on either MacIntosh or
              IBM-compatible personal computers, and can be downloaded over the Internet or
              distributed as CD-ROMs.  By translating the modules into HTML format, they will
              run on public software and be immune to future changes in Internet operating
              systems.     Three initial modules will be developed the first summer that will
              be disseminated and extensively tested during the academic year.  Modules will
              be distributed to over 2000 students in introductory geoscience  courses at the
              University of Minnesota and to instructors at other institutions.  Modules will
              be revised on the basis of student and instructor evaluations during the second
              start.  In addition, the Department of Geology and Geophysics at the University
              of Minnesota will host a series of workshops the second summer with local
              elementary and secondary education teachers to develop module versions for
              pre-college levels.  A proposed cooperative venture with Encyclopedia
              Britannica will make the modules immediately available to over half  the
              nation's universities and colleges that are current subscribers to Encyclopedia
              Britannica On-line.  Free access to the modules will be maintained through
              servers at the University of Minnesota, which will retain all proprietary
              rights to the modules, text and visualizations.    These initial modules are a
              pilot program.  The University of Minnesota has been a pioneering institute in
              using computer visualizations in geoscience research.  It now will use this
              expertise to develop materials fo r geoscience education.  This pilot program
              is designed to prove the technical feasibility of exporting, supporting, and
              disseminating the modules, and more importantly to determine how to maximize
              their potential use by extensive classroom testing.  Additional funding will be
              pursued to move beyond this pilot program into a larger series of modules, to
              incorporate more faculty, expand the program across institutional lines, and
              involve more undergraduate research assistants in geoscience visualization.  A
              series of workshops will be initiated to promote visualization use in
              geoscience education (elementary through graduate) and to facilitate
              visualization efforts between institutions.
