Title       : Topics in Global Warming and Markovian Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9809988

Award Number: 9809988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prajit K. Dutta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Global Warming has emerged as the most important environmental issue of our
              times and one with potentially dramatic consequences for all future
              generations. Although its technological causes and consequences are being
              currently studied intensively, there has been much less attention devoted to
              the attendant economic and strategic questions. The first part of this project
              analyzes global warming from the perspective of dynamic games. It is argued
              that several outstanding features of the problem   irreversibility, the global
              common, the regional level (at which negotiations have taken place thus far)
              suggest a Markovian commons game as a natural framework for analysis. At the
              same time, in order to analyze global warming the existing theory must be
              refined and generalized in several directions. A Mechanism Design perspective
              must be included since the rules of the game are not cast in stone and the many
              asymmetries must be addressed such as emissions source, level of development,
              climate costs, etc. that underpin the problem.   The second part of the project
              poses a program of theoretical research on Markovian games and their
              applications.. Although the framework of Markovian games has been widely
              employed in recent applications in economics, business, and political science,
              somewhat remarkably, very little is known in general about equilibria in such
              games. It is hoped that the present project will contribute toward a more rapid
              discovery of general results in this area, thereby facilitating further
              applications of the theory.  Methodologically, the two halves of the proposal
              are unified by their dynamic game perspective. It is also anticipated that
              numerical methods will be employed in the analysis in both parts; such methods
              are currently rare in dynamic game analyses.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
