Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Selenium Stable Isotopes as Indicators of Selenium
               Transport and Cycling: Laboratory Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1998     
File        : a9809263

Award Number: 9809263
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41496              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Bullen tdbullen@usgs.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald S. Oremland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Sur-Menlo Park
	      
	      Menlo Park, CA  94025    /   -

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9809263  Bullen          The proposed work develops measurements of selenium
              (Se) stable isotope ratios in surface water and ground water systems for use in
              studies of Se transport and chemical cycling.  Previous work is very limited
              because of technical limitations that we have recently overcome.  Parallels
              between selenium and sulfur isotope systematics combined with previous Se
              isotope work, suggest that the dominant mechanism for Se isotope fractionation
              is reduction of soluble oxyanions (Se6 or Se4) to insoluble Se( Because  this
              transformation can determine  the mobility and bioavailability of Se, Se
              isotope measurements could be a valuable tool in Se transport and cycling
              studies.  For example, isotope ratio shifts in groundwater over time or flow
              distance could provide evidence for active reduction of selenium.  In contrast,
              Se concentration decreases could be caused by reduction, reversible sorption or
              changing input concentration.  Se isotope studies thus provide complementary
              information to standard techniques.  Also, if sources of selenium in a given
              system are isotopically distinct, Se isotope measurements may serve to
              determine the dominant source or delineate areas impacted by point source
              inputs.    Experiments in the first half of the study will measure isotope
              fractionation caused by various processes, build on previous work, and fill in
              major gaps in the basic understanding of Se isotope variation.  The experiments
              focus on chemical reduction (bacterial and abiotic) as the dominant isotope
              fractionation mechanism, but also investigate plant growth, volatilization of
              alkyl selenides, sorption and precipitation.  After the isotopic fractionation
              "rules" have been ascertained, field experiments in groundwater, surface water,
              and estuarine settings are planned to demonstrate three distinct applications
              of the new technique.  The group assembled includes a unique combination of
              expertise: 1) It is currently the only group measuring selenium isotope ratios
              on environmental samples.   2) One collaborator has extensive expertise in
              bacterial reduction of selenium.  3) The group has experience with Se-impacted
              sites in the San Joaquin Valley and elsewhere, and has good connections with
              many other researchers in the field.
