Title       : Endomembrane Calcium Control and the Regulation of Cell Division
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9809900

Award Number: 9809900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252448             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Silver   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project is to continue studies on how calcium initiates cell division in
              the fertilized sand dollar egg.  Evidence indicates that the calcium signal
              that is responsible for the breakdown of the nuclear envelope arises from
              localized release from membrane enclosed compartments in a region near the
              nucleus.  Furthermore, this localized release seems to be triggered by a
              specific signaling molecule, leukotriene B4.  The project addresses one of the
              central questions of calcium signaling:  how can calcium, a second messenger
              involved in a seemingly vast array of different control pathways, initiate a
              very specific set of events and not others?  The general assumption has been
              that the cell accomplishes this by limiting calcium signals to pulses of short
              duration at discrete sites within the cell.  This project provides an
              experimental system to test this assumption.  The project focuses on two
              general aspects of the calcium signaling in sand dollar eggs.  Light microscopy
              and computer analysis will be used to determine the spatial and temporal
              features of the wave-like calcium signals in real time in the living egg under
              various experimental conditions.  A luminescent calcium reporter called
              aequorin will be used in a way that is sensitive enough to detect quantal
              events of calcium release.  The second area of interest is to verify that
              leukotriene B4 triggers this calcium release and that the enzymes that
              synthesize this upstream signaling molecule are located on the intracellular
              membranes that release calcium as defined by the microscopy studies.  The
              project is potentially highly significant since this specific system for the
              localized control of calcium release may very well be found in many other types
              of cells.
