Title       : Biogenesis of Gas Vesicles in Halobacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  2001   
File        : a9809906

Award Number: 9809906
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shiladitya DasSarma   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth S. Stuart  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9809906
Stuart
Gas vesicles are unique organelles produced by many aquatic
              prokaryotic microorganisms and used presumably for flotation. They are bounded
              by an unusually stable proteinaceous membrane that enfolds a gas filled space.
              Although detected in numerous groups of prokaryotic species representing both
              archaea and true bacteria since their discovery in 1888 by Winogradsky, the
              general morphology of the vesicles appears very similar and at least the major
              proteins appear homologous. For many years, researchers hypothesized that gas
              vesicles were formed from a single self-associating protein. However, recent
              molecular genetic work by DasSarma and his colleagues, using the archaeal
              prokaryote Halobacterium as their model system, led to the discovery of a large
              cluster of genes involved in gas vesicle formation. Further, they were able to
              transfer the gene cluster to laboratory strains of E. coli and engineer the
              expression of gas vesicles in this bacterium, which does not naturally produce
              gas vesicles. The gene cluster is hypothesized to comprise three genes coding
              for structural proteins, in rightward transcriptional orientation, and ten or
              more genes encoding regulatory or initiation proteins, in leftward
              transcriptional orientation.
DasSarma and his colleagues are continuing their
              work on biogenesis of gas vesicles in Halobacterium, using immunological and
              molecular-genetic methods to analyze the sequence and timing of steps in
              protein formation, assembly, and regulation to build functional gas vesicles.
              Individual proteins are to be tagged using immunological procedures, and then
              localized within the organism using immunogold cytological nethods. Mutants
              strains of Halobacterium will also be studied to determine the sequence of gene
              activation and action leading to vesicle formation. Complementation studies
              with mutants and purified protein products will help understand the dynamics of
              protein interactions in building the vesicle membrane. The overall goal is to
              describe the component proteins and regulatory signals in the biogenesis of gas
              vesicles and understand the sequence of genetic and metabolic events leading to
              their formation

