Title       : Geology of Utah's National Parks and Monuments: A Field-Based Education Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1998    
File        : a9809813

Award Number: 9809813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35584              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline E. Huntoon jeh@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregg J. Bluth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fritz J. Erickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                    HUNTOON  9809813    The aim of this project is to develop,
              conduct, and assess the effectiveness of a new, field-based course designed to
              give beginning geoscience and earth science education students, and
              professional earth science educators an opportunity to obtain hands-on
              experience solving research-type questions.  The mix of students is targeted so
              that professional educators can act as mentors for undergraduate students
              during the course an encourage undergraduates to pursue a career in teaching. 
              The general goals of the project are: 1) an increase in motivation and
              technical competence of participating university students; and, 2) an increase
              in the number of technically competent and motivated professional geoscientists
              who pursue careers in teaching.    The course will be taught primarily in
              southeastern Utah, and will use the excellent geologic features exposed in
              Canyonlands, Arches and Capitol Reef National Parks, and Natural Bridges and
              Dinosaur National Monuments as teaching aids.  Key components of the course
              that are expected to contribute to attainment of its goals are: a field-based
              learning environment, a focus on problem solving, use of experimental learning
              methods, use of intensive instruction modules, encouragement of group learning,
              emphasis on development and testing of hypotheses, the requirement that
              information from a variety of sources be integrated, an emphasis on the
              processes responsible for producing what is observed in the field, extensive
              incorporation of communication experiences, and the course's ability to provide
              students with a framework for future learning.    The course's success at
              meeting the goals will be assessed using a suite of pre-course/post-course
              attitude surveys and an instrument designed to measure higher-order cognitive
              skills.  A diagnostic learning log instrument will be used to measure students'
              progress during the course.
