Title       : Labor Markets and Business Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9809009

Award Number: 9809009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gadi Barlevy barlevy@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to develop a theoretical framework that can
              explain why workers and jobs differ in their responses to aggregate shocks. In
              particular, this research is motivated by the observation that empirically,
              certain groups of workers appear more likely to change jobs and move into and
              out of unemployment over the business cycle, and that certain jobs and certain
              sectors appear more likely to experience turnover during particular phases of
              the business cycle. Gaining a better understanding of why the effects of
              aggregate fluctuations are so different across individual workers and firms
              serves two purposes. First, it is essential for arriving at an estimate of the
              costs of aggregate fluctuations, since different individuals bear different
              costs from aggregate fluctuations. This estimate is important in assessing the
              benefits of pursuing macroeconomic stabilization policies. Second, studying the
              implications of competing macroeconomic theories on different subgroups of the
              labor market can highlight differences between these macro theories, which can
              then be tested against micro level data on workers and firms in order to
              understand the causes of aggregate fluctuations.  To study these issues,
              several forms of heterogeneity both across workers and across firms are
              studied. Examples of these include differences in productivity or
              specialization of skill across workers on the one hand, and differences in rent
              sharing arrangements, cyclical sensitivity and layoff risk, and match
              productivity across jobs on the other. Aggregate shocks are introduced into
              these heterogeneous agent environments to study the behavior of the different
              agents in response to these shocks. This approach is used to identify the
              implications associated with different forms of heterogeneity across workers
              and firms, or with different types of aggregate shocks.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
