Title       : GOALI: Manufacturing Logistics Optimization Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9809479

Award Number: 9809479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16699              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Storer rhs2@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Brinker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9147,9290,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9809479  Storer       This grant provides funding through the Grant
              Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) initiative for Faculty
              in Industry Internship.  The faculty intern will conduct joint research with
              the Decision Sciences Group at Air Products and Chemicals Inc. Research will
              focus on manufacturing logistics, primarily in the areas of supply chain
              integration, distribution, and resource allocation. Challenging problems
              associated with the production and distribution of product to customers in a
              cost efficient manner face many firms, including Air Products.  Solutions for
              these types of problems are central to both the financial success of Air
              Products and the research interests of the faculty intern.  Of particular
              interest are problems that include complicating factors caused by a dynamic and
              unpredictable business environment. These problems are typically large,
              complex, and contain stochastic components.       A primary goal of the project
              is to foster a long-term relationship between faculty and students of the
              Manufacturing Logistics Institute (MLI) at Lehigh University and the Decision
              Sciences group at Air Products.  Working closely with Air Products, the faculty
              intern hopes to define long-term research issues as the basis for continuing
              collaboration, as well as providing some useful short-term results. 
              Identifying collaborative research opportunities will help develop a strong
              working relationship with Air Products, and will provide significant
              educational experiences and research opportunities to the students and faculty
              of the Manufacturing Logistics Institute.  Air Products will benefit from
              additional expertise in areas key to their competitive advantage. If
              successful, the project will ultimately lead to research results of generic
              interest.  Advances in supply chain integration and in solving optimization
              problems in a dynamic and stochastic environment are anticipated.
