Title       : ESH: Development of Luminescene Banding in Speleothems as a High Resolution
               Climatic Record
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1998   
File        : a9809138

Award Number: 9809138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. White wbw2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9809138
White

Previous research has shown that humic substances, mainly
              fulvic acid, incorporated into the secondary calcite crystals of cave
              speleothems produce a distinct luminescence banding.  The bands are best
              observed in longitudinal sections of cylindrical stalagmites and in cores or
              slabs cut from planar flowstone deposits.  The bands have widths on the order
              of 10 - 100 micrometers and appear to represent annual wet and dry cycles where
              each band represents one year's growth of the stalagmite.  There is much
              additional detail within the banding.  A 1-meter high stalagmite might contain
              bands representing 20,000 years of deposition.  The luminescence bands,
              therefore, have the potential for being a very high resolution climatic
              record.

The intent of this proposal is to establish a sound basis for the
              paleoclimatic interpretation of the luminescence banding in speleothems.  There
              are three main objectives.

(i) Construct an apparatus that will measure
              laser excited luminescence intensity along longitudinal sections of speleothems
              with high photometric accuracy, spatial resolution of a few micrometers, and
              tracking of spatial position within a few micrometers.  This is to be
              accomplished by using an existing microfocus Raman spectrometer as a base
              instrument and constructing a computer controlled mechanical stage to translate
              the slab of stalagmite.

(ii) Conduct an extensive series of measurements
              intercomparing the records obtained from multiple transects of the same
              specimen, specimens collected from the same location within the same cave, and
              specimens collected from caves within a small geographic area.  These
              measurements are needed to establish the reproducibility of luminescence
              banding records and to test methods for matching the records for speleothems of
              overlapping but not identical ages.

(iii) Construct luminescence-banding
              profiles for very recent speleothem growth to compare with contemporary
              climatic records.  This is a calibration step to correlate specific variations
              in luminescence intensity with known precipitation and other climatic events in
              the historical record.

(iv) Construct profiles spanning late Holocene
              speleothems so that the details of luminescence banding may be compared with
              other recent paleoclimatic records.

(v) If items (i - iv) work out as
              planned, this project would lay the groundwork for a more extensive study of
              speleothem records extending farther back into the Pleistocene.

