Title       : Reconstitution of Core and Accessory Light-Harvesting Complexes of
               Photosynthetic Bacteria: Role of the PufX Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9809918

Award Number: 9809918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Loach p-loach@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9809918  Loach  The major membrane complexes that accomplish the capture of
              light energy  in bacterial photosynthesis are the reaction center (RC) and the
              core light-harvesting complex (LH1).   Even though the 3-dimensional structures
              of the RC and LH2 (closely related to LH1) are known, the contributions of the
              various stabilizing interactions have not been measured.  The investigator's
              laboratory has reversibly dissociated LH1 and reconstituted it from its
              fundamental components, thus enabling the determination of stabilizing
              interactions by utilizing analogs of bacteriochlorophyll (Bchl) and the
              protein.  Part of the projected research will complete the measurement of these
              stabilizing interactions.  Several key questions as to how the RC, LH1,  and
              bc1 complexes function together are now being addressed.  One of this
              investigator's current major goals is to learn how reducing equivalents of the
              RC (ubihydroquinol) are made available to the bc1 complex.  In some
              photosynthetic bacteria (e.g., Rhodobacter sphaeroides) a protein coded for by
              the pufX gene is involved in assisting this process.  The investigator has
              isolated this protein from two different bacteria and characterized its effect
              on LH1 formation.  In continuing work, the major domains of the Puf X protein
              are being chemically synthesized in order to evaluate regions showing specific
              interaction with LH1.    Quantitative knowledge of stabilizing interactions is
              essential for full  understanding of how the RC and LH1 function.  Completion
              of the investigator's measurements of these stabilizing forces in LH1 will
              provide the first full description of such a membrane complex.  This kind of
              knowledge is fundamental to understanding membrane complexes in general, and
              for engineering new complexes to carry out specific tasks. Determination of the
              role of the PufX protein in controlling the movement of reducing equivalents
              from the RC to the bc1 complex will provide an important insight into the
              regulation of light energy capture and seco ndary electron transport.
