Title       : Conference on the Synthesis of Southern California Native American Traditional
               Knowledge and the Earth Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1998    
File        : a9809709

Award Number: 9809709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20451              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford E. Trafzer trafzer@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dawn G. Marsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric M. Riggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    Trafzer  9809709    In recent years, there has been a growing awareness of
              the need for increased science education and science literacy in our society. 
              There is also a growing awareness that various ethnic and cultural groups are
              persistently under-represented in all fields of science, with Earth Science as
              no exception.  Native Americans are one cultural group especially poorly
              represented in all basic sciences, the geosciences included.  Reasons for the
              under-representation of many minority groups and particularly for Native
              Americans is often linked to basic pedagogical and cultural styles that may not
              be automatically compatible with the teaching and research styles common to
              much basic science.  The Earth Sciences offer a potential bridge between a
              Native American approach to knowledge and the more traditional "Western"
              scientific approach.  The Geosciences are commonly integrationist in their
              practice, deliberately drawing on knowledge from many different fields, and
              applying that knowledge with the understanding that the Earth is an integrated
              system.  Additionally, we in the Earth Sciences teach our students in a very
              "active" manner, allowing students to struggle with new material and problems
              until they solve them on their own, based on their own prior knowledge and
              creativity.  These styles of knowledge and pedagogy make the Geosciences the
              most accessible of all the sciences for reaching many Native American cultures.
               The Earth Sciences, and all sciences, stand to benefit from the increased
              understanding and interest generated among Native American groups resulting
              from organized outreach.  This award supports a three-session conference series
              taking place over a total of three months which will foster direct and candid
              discussions between practicing researchers, professionals, and groups on whose
              lands many various Earth Science-related projects operate.  The program
              includes sets of moderated, frank and open discussions of various political,
              economic, spiritual, philosophi cal, cultural, and educational issues important
              to Geoscientists and Native Americans alike.  The ultimate goal of this project
              is to improve mutual understanding and education of the scientific and
              traditional interpretations of the history and significance of our regional
              landscapes and geology.  A new communication aimed at increasing direct Native
              American participation in the Earth Sciences and at increasing awareness and
              appreciation in the scientific community of Native American culture, values,
              and interpretations of the Earth will be established.  This communication will
              be established through workshop sessions via presentations and subsequent
              extended discussions.
