Title       : Integrating GIS and Remote Sensing Research Into the Secondary Science Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9809704

Award Number: 9809704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59326              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Hall-Wallace hall@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                  WALLACE  9809704    Successful computer based educational
              programs have impact in K-12 science education because students become
              investigators of a wide range of scientific disciplines while applying computer
              technology developed in (and previously limited to) research laboratories. 
              Students are most likely to become engaged by a new technology when the subject
              of investigation is familiar.  A computer technology with tremendous potential
              in K-12 education is Geographic Information Systems (GIS).  GIS software with
              global and national data packaged for K-12 educational uses has been developed
              and is available to schools at affordable prices.  The Environmental Systems
              Research Institute (ESRI) K-12 Schools and Libraries Program has provided an
              effective model for a graduated introduction to GIS and for organization of GIS
              coverages in their Arc Voyager package.  What is not readily available is
              locally derived GIS coverages which can provide hooks for grabbing the
              attention of K-12 students.    Through the efforts of professional GIS experts,
              a wealth of GIS coverages are available for Tucson, Pima County, and the State
              of Arizona.  This award will make these immense and varied GIS data coverages
              accessible to K-12 teachers and their students.  Most of the locally derived
              GIS datasets are too large and complex for the level of the learner and the
              level of computing power available in the K-12 environment.  The initial task
              will be to transform the most relevant available GIS coverages into datasets
              readily usable on computers generally found in the classroom.  Using the
              adapted local data, a small set of pilot GIS activities for the high school
              classroom will be developed.  Working with high school teachers the P.I.'s will
              perform classroom testing and assessment of the modules.  Assessment will
              address: 1) student learning behavior and the different ways students use GIS
              to solve problems, 2) student learning and response to locally focused versus
              regionally focused activit ies, 3) institutional and pedagogical obstacles for
              integrating GIS in the classroom.  The processes and exercises can serve as
              models to guide others in bringing local GIS coverages to K-12 classrooms
              across the country.
