Title       : Characterization of Earth Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1998 
File        : a9809752

Award Number: 9809752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34159              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Mogk mogk@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                              MOGK  9809752    Educational modules will be developed which
              demonstrate the characterization of Earth materials using a variety of modern
              analytical techniques.  Each module will simulate authentic research
              experiences through presentation of a hierarchy of research-related questions
              and integrated datasets of images and analytical results will be accessed by
              students to develop their own tests and interpretations.  Each module will
              include information on the geologic context, capabilities and limitations of
              analytical techniques, research-related questions, images that range in scale
              from mesoscopic to atomic embedded analytical results   (e.g. X-ray diffraction
              data, compositional and chemical data, etc.), and links to similar projects
              that have been reported in the literature.  The modules will promote
              discovery-based learning as students will focus their own observations and
              choose appropriate tests.  Earth materials that will be presented in these
              modules will include samples from common rock types and soils (representing a
              variety of Earth processes), materials of interest to industry (e.g., mineral
              and energy exploration; environmental remediation), and exciting new fields of
              investigation such as geomicrobiology and the surface chemistry of minerals. 
              The analytical instruments that will be used are housed in the Imaging and
              Chemical Analysis Laboratory at Montana State University, and include scanning
              electron microscope equipped with back-scattered electron detector,
              cathodoluminescence detector with spectrometer, energy dispersive spectrometer,
              and cryo-preparation stage; X-ray powder diffraction; Auger Electron
              Spectrometer; X-ray photoelectron spectrometer; Time-of-flight Secondary Ion
              Mass Spectrometer; and Atomic Force Microscopes.  All images and spectra will
              be digitized and distributed through the WWW.  Development of the multi-media
              educational modules will be done with the assistance of the Burns
              Telecommunications   Center at Montana State University.
