Title       : Eyewitness Memory in Older Adults
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9809977

Award Number: 9809977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247591             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Bartlett jbartlet@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amina Memon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean Searcy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Ten experiments are conducted that compare eyewitness testimony in young
              adulthood and old age, exploring the person- and task- characteristics that
              might affect performance of the older eyewitness. Parts I and 11 further
              examine findings that false identifications in lineups are increased in old
              age, and that exposing the eyewitness to a post- event narrative is a factor
              involved in producing this effect. Modifying the procedures of earlier
              researchers Experiment 1  addresses the possibility that verbal recall of the
              crime-event prior to the lineup task (a) increases rates of false choosing in
              elderly (and/or young) adults, and (b) magnifies the deleterious effects of
              previously exposed narrative. Extending recent work on the `verbal
              overshadowing effect`, Experiment 2  tests the possibility that high choosing
              rates among older eyewitnesses reflect a non-optimal mode of face processing
              (verbal encoding of facial features) that is reinforced by verbal recall of
              facial information, and can be prevented in at least some eyewitnesses by
              eliminating the task of verbal recall prior to a lineup. Considering prior
              evidence that context reinstatement prior to a lineup can either help or hurt 
              lineup identification, in Experiment 3 participants are exposed to a highly
              salient event involving physical interaction with an actor, comparing the
              cognitive interview to both a standard structured interview and a control
              (non-structured) interview to assess its effects on both (a) completeness and
              accuracy of recall as well as (b) accuracy and choosing in lineups. Experiment
              4_ is based on the `mugshot effect` of increased rates of false identifications
              of faces not seen at a crime but viewed in another context  The hypothesis
              tested that the mugshot effect will be even stronger among elderly persons but
              that it can be reduced by instructions and testing materials that discourage
              eyewitnesses from basing their judgments on perceived familiarity.  Experiment
              5 addresses a similar hypothesis as applied to the `bystander effect` of
              increased rates of false identification due to the presence in a lineup of a
              bystander (instead of the perpetrator) in a prior a crime event). Although the
              bystander effect is known to be ephemeral  it was found that older eyewitnesses
              show the effect more strongly. A replication of this potentially important
              finding is undertaken, examining whether older persons can overcome the effect
              if the instructions and materials discourage familiarity-based responding. The
              next three proposed studies (Part lil) depart from prior work in exploring how
              socio-cogntive variables of stereotypes and person-schemata affect recall of
              crime-events and lineup identification.  Experiments 6 and 7  assess this
              possibility. In addition, both studies  examine how positive and negative
              biographical information about the perpetrator and/or victim can moderate the
              effect. The key question is whether the tendency to pick a guilty-looking
              suspect reflects a simple response bias or a more complex appraisal of the
              appearance of the suspect relative to the story being told about the crime.
              Experiment 8  returns to the `bystander effect,` assessing whether the
              selection of a bystander is linked not merely to perceived familiarity, but to
              the congruence between the bystander's appearance (guilty vs. innocent) and the
              nature of the event (a crime vs. a charitable act).  The final two experiments
              (Part IV) reflect a change of focus from lineup identification to verbal recall
              about a crime. Experiments 9 and 10 both address the well known observation
              that repeated questioning of witnesses can increase the frequency or erroneous
              intrusions and confabulations, particularly if the questioning entails
              presentation of misleading information. First, Experiment 9 examines the
              conditions under which repeated questioning can have positive, `hypermnesia`
              effects which heretofore have not been examined in old age. Experiment 10
              examine the phenomenon that misleading information implanted in the questioning
              will be incorporated in later recalls, testing a prediction based on
              cognitive-aging theories that this effect will be increased in old age.  An
              important component of all the experiments will be the inclusion of
              neuropsychological and/or personality tests to reveal individual-difference
              factors that might moderate age differences.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
