Title       : HSP mRNA Primary Structure Regulates Its Translation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a9809887

Award Number: 9809887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger F. Duncan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Duncan 
Translation controls the expression of many critical regulatory
              proteins, such as proto-oncogenes, transcription factors, and nerve cell
              receptors. Determining the molecular mechanisms of translational control is key
              to understanding the basis for this level of genetic regulation. Heat shock has
              proved to be an invaluable model system for unraveling how translation is
              regulated, as well as many other aspects of the regulation of gene expression.
              Heat shock provides the preeminent example of how one class of messenger RNAs
              can be preferentially, efficiently translated at a time when virtually all
              other ("normal") mRNAs are excluded from active translation. Understanding this
              unique capacity of the heat shock mRNAs has broad implications both with
              regards to basic translation molecular mechanisms and for devising strategies
              that optimize gene expression.  This proposal will investigate the hypothesis
              that specific 5' untranslated region (5'UTR) sequence elements are required for
              preferential translation of HSP mRNAs. It is well established that the entire
              HSP mRNA 5'UTR is sufficient to confer preferential translation. However, the
              identity of any required sequence elements and how they promote an unusual
              translational pathway that can evade translational repression remain critical
              unresolved issues. These studies will identify the critical features or
              sequence elements in HSP mRNA 5'UTRs that confer preferential translation. From
              a broad perspective, it has been well-established that the heat shock response
              promotes survival following environmental insults, such as wounding, UV-induced
              damage, and environmental hyperthermia in non-motile organisms (e.g. plants).
              These studies will elucidate how preferential translation optimizes heat shock
              protein production during the heat shock response, and thus enhances survival. 
              The first series of experiments will investigate the hypothesis that a specific
              nucleotide sequence is required for preferential translation. A minimum length,
              heat shock-active 5'UTR will be fine-scale mutagenized to identify critical
              nucleotide sequences that confer preferential translation. The second and
              related hypothesis is that preferential translation results from an unusual
              mode of translation initiation, such as internal initiation or non-linear
              ribosome scanning. Site-directed mutagenesis will be used to create various
              test 5'UTRs, containing stem-loops and upstream AUGs introduced at several
              locations. These elements produce predicted, diagnostic effects on translation
              depending on the mode of translational initiation. Bicistronic mRNAs will be
              used to directly test for internal initiation. These studies should suggest a
              molecular mechanism for heat shock translational reprogramming. Previous
              studies have shown that stable HSP70 5'UTR-protein interactions cannot be
              detected. An intriguing possibility is that RNA-RNA interactions recruit
              ribosomes to the HSP mRNAs. If sequence analysis proves consistent with this
              model, a putative 18S rRNA-HSP70 5'UTR interaction will be investigated via
              several complementary approaches. Other HSP mRNA's 5'UTRs will also be
              characterized to assess whether one translational control mechanism accounts
              for all instances of heat shock preferential translation.    Protein synthesis
              (translation) controls the expression of many proteins that regulate cellular
              processes.  During heat shock, the synthesis of a particular set of proteins is
              enhanced, while other cellular proteins fail to be synthesized.  The objective
              of this research is to identify sequences within heat shock messenger RNA that
              result in enhanced synthesis of heat shock proteins and to investigate a number
              of different mechanisms that may explain how heat shock protein synthesis is
              specifically enhanced.  These studies may elucidate novel mechansims for
              protein synthesis and lead to strategies to optimize synthesis of foreign
              proteins.
