Title       : Continuing Archaeological Investigations of late Archaic Cerros de Trincheras
               Sites in Chihuahua, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a9809839

Award Number: 9809839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220485             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Hard   (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Roney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Robert Hard and his colleagues will
              conduct three seasons of archaeological research at the site of Cerro
              Juanaquena, located in northwestern Chihuahua, Mexico. The site covers over 8
              hectares and includes over 8 km of terraces and walls. The investigator
              estimates that ca. 20,000 metric tons of material were moved during its
              construction. During NSF supported preliminary research at the site, the team
              confirmed the site's placement, based on artifact typology, within the Late
              Archaic period. Radiocarbon determinations yielded an age of ca. 3070 years
              before the present. This makes the site extremely important because it shows
              that it precedes by 1500 years other northern Mexican sites of similar size and
              labor investment. At that time maize, an important staple in Middle America was
              just beginning to spread widely and most peoples still lived by hunting and
              gathering. It is extremely unusual for sites at this level of complexity to
              develop on a non-maize subsistence base. Paleobotanical analysis of collected
              samples shows that maize in fact is present, but it is relatively unimportant
              ranking lower in importance than many native plants, including cheno-ams,
              lovegras, chia, milkvetch and wild gourd. These findings contradict the
              archaeological expectation that the intensive occupation and major labor
              investment at Cerro Juanaquena were based on maize agriculture. Heavily worn
              grinding stones are common at the site and it appears that wild seeds played a
              central dietary role.       Dr. Hard and his colleagues will now conduct
              extensive excavation at the site. Approximately thirty terrace features will be
              excavated in order to gauge the occupation span. The level of sedentism at the
              site and its history will be determined through examination of the organization
              and planning of terrace constructions. A major flotation program will be
              initiated to recover seeds and other plant remains, and these together with
              abundant fauna will shed additional light on subsistence practices.       Cerro
              Juanaquena is unique and its existence has caused archaeologists to reevaluate
              their understanding of the initial spread of agriculture and related models of
              sedentism and village development. These issues are of relevance not only in
              Mesoamerica but in other parts of the world where domestication of plants and
              animals independently occurred.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
