Title       : LEXEN: Microbial Adaptation to High Temperature and Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a9809352

Award Number: 9809352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank T. Robb robb@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1075,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hyperthermophilic microorganisms may be suitible models for ancestral, and
              possibly extraterrestrial, biosystems because their extraordinary adaptive
              capabilities allow them to colonize a wide range of subsurface volcanic areas
              on Earth. Deep sea hydrothermal vents and terrestrial hot springs support
              highly diverse ecosystems without access to solar energy, harboring autotrophic
              microorganisms and their dependant heterotrophic micro- and macro communities
              in geochemical conditions similar to those that may exist below the surface of
              Mars or Europa. Hyperthermophiles also dominate most of the deeper branches of
              the universal phylogenetic tree, suggesting that ancestral microorganisms may
              have been thermophilic. The environmental limits for growth and survival of
              known hyperthermophilic species, as well as newly isolated strains will be
              established, using a combination of bioengineering, microbiology and molecular
              biology. This collaborative project with Dr. Douglas S. Clark of the University
              of California, Berkeley (Award 9816490) emphasizes molecular adaptations to
              high pressure and high temperature, with the following objectives: 1. To
              determine the effects of supraoptimal temperatures and pressures on the
              survival and growth rates of existing hyperthermophilic microorganisms;
2.To
              utilize pressurized continuous fermentation systems for isolation and culture
              of new hyperthermophilic microbial strains and; 3. To examine physiological
              adaptations and genetic regulation of gene expression  in response to transient
              challenges by heat and high pressure.  The hypothesis being tested is that
              hydrostatic pressure may greatly extend the upper temperature limits of growth
              and survival of hyperthermophiles. Ongoing studies by these researchers have
              established that many enzymes from thermophiles display enhanced
              thermostability under pressure. Further, the growth rate of Methanococcus
              jannaschii accelerated five-fold and its maximum temperature for methane
              production rose by 6 degrees C in response to pressure, and the growth rate and
              ATP production of a newly characterized abyssal hyperthermophile, Pyrococcus
              horikoshii, were elevated under pressure. Novel equipment for incubating
              hyperthermophiles in continuous culture, under pressure and with thermal
              cycling, will be combined with molecular biology to explore the adaptive
              responses of hyperthermophiles in extremis. Gene expression, membrane lipid
              composition and morphology will be examined. The genes that are induced under
              conditions approaching lethality, will be identified by subtractive cloning and
              transcriptional assays.  Upper survival limits of the abyssal hyperthermophiles
              as a function of pressure, using isolates from a shallow terrestrial sampling
              site to provide control data for pressure responses, will be determined.
              Enrichment cultures of hyperthermophiles from the vent systems of the back-arc
              region of the Northwest Pacific (Okinawa Trough and Uzzon Caldera on the
              Kamchatka Peninsula) will be incubated at temperatures and pressures exceeding
              those tolerated by known strains, thus using survival rather than rapid growth
              as the criterion for selection of new isolates. The phylogenetic positions and
              physiological requirements of the new strains will be determined.

