Title       : Valuing Learning and Flexibility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9809176

Award Number: 9809176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93883              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin F. McCardle   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              McCardle  Abstract   Valuing Learning and Flexibility  Firms routinely make
              risky investment decisions:  they must decide whether to invest some amount
              today in exchange for an uncertain stream of future payoffs.  For example, oil
              companies invest in exploration hoping to find valuable oil reserves;
              pharmaceutical firms invest in R&D hoping to develop valuable new drugs;
              manufacturing firms build plants in foreign countries to tap new markets or
              achieve significant cost reductions.  In these kinds of investments, the firm
              learns more and more about the value of the project as time passes - as
              exploration wells are drilled, clinical trials completed, supplier contracts
              negotiated - and uncertainties resolve.  A smart firm will adapt their
              investment and management strategies s these uncertainties resolve.  There are
              two major competing procedures for evaluating risky projects where managerial
              flexibility plays an important role:  one is option pricing theory, based on
              the no-arbitrage theory of financial markets, and the other is decision
              analysis, based on stochastic dynamic programming.  In previous work, the
              principal investigators developed a new procedure for evaluating risky projects
              that integrates these two approaches and applied this procedure on several real
              and gas investments.  One of the key lessons learned from these applications
              was the critical impact that the models of learning have on the values and
              optimal policies.  The goal of the current research project is to develop
              better models of learning about uncertainties over time and study their impact
              on the firm's optimal investment and management strategies.  Rather than
              address these questions in an abstract way, we plan to address them in the
              context of specific application related to valuing oil and gas investments,
              working with industry experts to ensure the appropriateness of the modeling
              assumptions.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
