Title       : Maa (Maasai) Lexicography and Text Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a9809387

Award Number: 9809387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Doris L. Payne dlpayne@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Maa (Maasai) language is currently spoken by up to 500,000 Maasai,
              Samburu, and Camus people in Kenya and Tanzania.  No linguistically adequate
              set of texts or dictionary of the language exist. The current project will
              produce computerized text and lexicography databases, with a comprehensive set
              of fields, such that a variety of dictionaries and text materials can
              eventually be published depending on the needs of various audiences, including
              linguists, anthropologists, historians, bilingual school teachers, and Maa
              speakers themselves. The lexicography database will include accurate
              information about the sound structure, morphology, and grammatical properties
              of each entry form; information about sentence types in which each word root
              can be used; and cultural and ethnographic information. Simultaneously, a
              separate verb database with morphological and syntactic information, already
              begun by the Principal Investigator, will be further elaborated, and syntactic
              hypotheses developed on the basis of previous work will be checked against new
              data.  The project will incorporate extensive information from a minimum of
              four Maa dialects during the funding period.  The first stage of the current
              project will focus on the variety of Maa spoken by the IlKeekonyokie section,
              which, geographically, is on the eastern-to-central part of the Kenyan Maasai
              area. The project will then expand to the IlWuasinkishu section, which lies on
              the western edge of the Kenyan territory. Thirdly, it will incorporate a North
              Maa dialect (Samburu or Camus), and then a Tanzanian variety, such as Arusa
              Maasai. These four varieties are chosen because of the Principal Investigator's
              past work on two of them and connections with native speakers, and geographic
              distribution from the north to south, and east to west extremes of the Maa
              area.   In all cultures there is both basic and specialized vocabulary which
              describes activities, traditions, cosmology, religion, and the myriad ways of
              life specific to that culture. These features cannot be thoroughly understood
              without an understanding of the vocabulary which expresses the concepts
              comprising the traditions of the culture. The extensive lexicographic and text
              database will be valuable documents for preserving and transmitting the
              cultural knowledge of the Maa people, who are being impacted by rapid cultural
              change at the end of the 20th Century.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
