Title       : RUI: Physiological and Biochemical Interactions of Thyroid Hormones with GABAa
               Receptors of the CNS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a9809943

Award Number: 9809943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260122             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph V. Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Joseph V. Martin  IBN 98-09943    The goal of the proposal is to clarify how
              thyroid hormones  influence the adult mammalian brain.  During growth and 
              development, hormones from the thyroid gland enter many cell  types (including
              brain cells) and alter protein synthesis.  In adulthood, the cellular metabolic
              rate is accelerated by  thyroid hormones entering cells of many tissues, but
              not in  the brain. However, some of the potentially most  debilitating
              complications of thyroid glandular disease in  adulthood are due to
              neurological disorders, ranging from  anxiety and sleep problems to seizures or
              coma.  The  preliminary evidence demonstrates that thyroid hormones bind  to
              and influence the function of brain GABAa receptors.   These proteins on the
              outside of neuronal membranes are  responsible for cellular effects of the
              major inhibitory  neurotransmitter (local chemical messenger between neurons), 
              gamma-aminobutyric acid or GABA.  Further preliminary work  indicates effects
              of thyroid hormones on the whole brain  electrical activity, as measured in the
              electroencephalogram  (EEG). Experiments will be performed in rats to determine
               the types of effects that thyroid hormones have on the GABAa  receptor binding
              and the subsequent cellular response. Small  amounts of thyroid hormones will
              be injected directly into  selected brain areas to ascertain the sensitivity of
              the  sites in mediating thyroid hormonal effects on EEG and  temperature
              regulation. The results of these studies will  elucidate the biological
              significance of a brain action of  thyroid hormones that more closely resembles
              the action of a  neurotransmitter than the typical action of thyroid hormones 
              in other tissues.
