Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Economic news and public perceptions of the U.S. Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9809467

Award Number: 9809467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7836               (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Aldrich aldrich@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                There are well established political science findings that the performance of
              the national economy influences public opinion and elections, yet little is
              understood about the causal path along which this influence travels.  Since
              evidence indicates the critical role of citizens' views of national economic
              performance in the process, more research is needed on the ways in which these
              views are formed.  This Doctoral Dissertation Research project examines the
              influence of mass media news reports upon public perceptions of the economy.  
              Two-dependent variables representing public perceptions are studied:  public
              evaluations of economic performance and salience of the economy as an important
              public issue.  This research provides new insights into the role of information
              flows in democratic processes.  Media content conveying messages from elite and
              journalistic sources is expected to exert an effect upon public opinion which
              is independent of the effects of actual objective measures of economic
              performance.  In order to asses this hypothesis, an original content analysis
              will be utilized to develop datasets representing economic news content from
              both television and newsprint.  Using these datasets along with time-series
              data representing actual economic conditions will allow testing for independent
              media effects on collective public opinion over a six-year period.  In
              addition, data from a panel survey will be used to investigate the sources of
              changes in the economic views of individuals over a two-year time period.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
