Title       : Enhancing Cross-Disciplinary Learning Limnological Research in an Environmental
               Studies Program at a Liberal Arts College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2001   
File        : a9809765

Award Number: 9809765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45500              (Estimated)
Investigator: John I. Garver Garverj@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grant E. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald T. Rodbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul T. Gremillion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Hagerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  GARVER  9809765    The Environmental Studies (ES) Program at Union College
              has a program-wide limnological focus, the Ballston Lake Initiative, which is
              designed to foster interdisciplinary teaching and cooperation among
              departments.  This Initiative is scientifically sound, provides interesting and
              challenging problems, and uses a study area that is convenient to campus.  This
              award addresses two fundamental issues of curricular development at Union
              College: lack of interdisciplinary teaching and research, and lack of a unified
              focus for the ES Program.  The Initiative is designed to encourage
              cross-disciplinary collaboration among faculty who, for the most part, have not
              been involved in interdisciplinary teaching or research.  The Initiative gives
              the ES program focus by integrating a common limnological theme into many of
              the ES course offerings.  By providing a framework for interaction, the
              Initiative will bring together faculty with a wide range of expertise and
              interests, thereby cultivating a more integrated approach to teaching.    The
              award offers the best chance of getting the faculty to interact and to inject
              this common limnological focus into the ES curriculum is through a coordinated
              summer research program in which student projects are mentored by faculty from
              two or more academic departments.  Faculty and student workshops are intended
              to maximize interaction between the faculty, and a winter seminar series is
              designed to give the program participants needed exposure to other scientific,
              political, and social aspects of lakes.    The Ballston Lake Initiative focuses
              on Ballston Lake as an environmental system that has evolved through time.  The
              Initiative includes an understanding of the formation of the lake basin,
              post-glacial sediment record geochemistry of  spring waters, record of climate
              change in lake sediments, wetland ecology, predator and prey relationships
              between the fauna, recreational use, historical land use and housing
              development, and watershed hydrology.   To accomplish the goal of fostering
              interdisciplinary teaching and cooperation between departments, six broadly
              defined interdisciplinary projects have been identified:  1) lake and wetlands
              flora and fauna; 2) watershed hydrology; 3) hydrology and chemistry of springs
              and spring communities; 4) lake sediment record in relation to lake evolution,
              climate change and land use; 5) historical land use, including development of
              camps and issues associated with water use; 6) monitoring instrumentation for
              climate, and lake water, and springs.  Collectively, these projects could
              involve collaboration and interaction between the departments of Geology,
              Biology, Chemistry, Civil Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Anthropology,
              and Sociology.
