Title       : Dissertation Research: MtDNA Analysis of the Anasazi (Ancestral Pueblo)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1998  
File        : a9809609

Award Number: 9809609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13200              (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. O'Connell james.oconnell@anthro.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              BCS-9809609

Under the direction of Dr. James O'Connell, Mr. Shawn Carlyle
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will extract MtDNA from ca.
              75 Anasazi skeletons which derive from key sites. The remains span the whole
              period of Anasazi prehistory as well geographic range covered by this group.
              Using established protocols mtDNA will be extracted and cleaned. PCR will be
              employed to amplify target fragments. Appropriate mtDNA fragments will then be
              digested with four different restriction enzymes at six locations and screened
              for a 9bp deletion in haplogroups hypothesized to be the `founding` haplogroups
              of all North and South Amerindians. These data will be used to resolve issues
              associated with the general genetic structure of the Anasazi peoples and, in
              combination with other comparable data, shed light on questions relating to the
              origins of the group and their relations with other similar entities.  Anasazi
              peoples inhabited the Southwestern US prehistorically and are likely the direct
              ancestors to Pueblo societies present in the region today. The Anasazi are well
              known archaeologically for the large multistory dwellings they constructed at
              sites such as Chaco Canyon and the road system which linked far-flung villages.
              With only a simple technology Anasazi populations flourished for centuries in
              an arid and unpredictable environment in a system which linked people and
              distributed food over hundreds of miles. While Anasazi peoples shared more
              traits in common with each other than with other prehistoric groups and thus
              stand distinct, a significant amount of internal variation existed and it is
              not clear how many subgroups may have existed. Likewise the origins of the
              Anasazi themselves are poorly known. Because aspects of their culture have
              closest counterparts in Middle America many prehistorians postulate that they
              moved into the Southwest USA from Mexico. However it is also possible that
              traits rather than people  moved. The genetic data which Mr. Carlyle collects
              will increase our understanding of these issues.  This research is important
              for several reasons. It will shed new light on the most important prehistoric
              Native American group in the U.S. Southwest. When set in a broader comparative
              context it will provide new information on the larger population structure of
              prehistoric North and Middle America. The project will also assist in training
              a promising young scientist.
