Title       : Experimental Studies of Incentive Effects, Expertise Effectsand Context Effects
               in Signalling Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9809538

Award Number: 9809538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $352432             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Cooper   (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Kagel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Signaling games involve strategic interactions between agents where one side
              of a market has incomplete information about the quality characteristics of
              agents on the other side of the market.  Models of signaling games have been
              applied to a wide variety of economic settings from marketing to educational
              decisions to strategic interactions between large corporations. Virtually all
              interesting signaling games have multiple equilibria (steady states), making it
              essential to introduce some sort of equilibrium refinements to narrow down the
              set of equilibria in order to predict behavior.  Economic theorists have
              derived a number of equilibrium refinements based on plausible actions that
              different types of agents may or may not take.    Although early experiments
              gave encouraging support for signaling-game refinements, later studies found
              violations for even the weakest of these criteria.  These later researchers
              concluded that subjects could best be modeled as having naive initial beliefs,
              only slowly learning to play an equilibrium.  That is, signaling game
              refinements (and formal game theory in general)  failed to generate accurate
              predications of subjects' behavior because the underlying assumptions of
              rationality were too strong.   A recent study of ours (Lo, Cooper, Kagel and
              Gu, 1997) suggests several reasons why the signaling game refinements should
              not be discarded too quickly.  We find that scaling up all payoffs by a factor
              of five significantly increased the frequency of strategic play, presumably due
              to heightened deductive reasoning stimulated by the higher payoffs. This
              suggests that the failure of equilibrium refinements in other experiments may
              be a function of low payoffs.  We also compared behavior by naive subjects
              (undergraduate students from China Textile University in Shanghai) with the
              behavior of more experienced subjects (textile firm managers from the Shanghai
              area).  This comparison was made for experiments using generic terminology
              (e.g. firm managers are `A players,` central planners are `B players,` etc.) 
              and for experiments in context (instructions designed to evoke the field
              settings in which managers would have encountered the ratchet effect).  While
              no significant differences were found between naive and expert subjects in
              generic sessions, LCKG observed that the presence of context significantly
              increased the level of strategic play for expert subjects but did not
              substantially affect naive subjects. LCKG hypothesize that experts may learn to
              think more deductively than naive players, but may only be able to draw upon
              this expertise if there is some context to act as a trigger.  Thus, signaling
              game refinements may do poorly in laboratory experiments either because
              subjects are naive or because subjects lack the context which allows them to
              call on expertise from other settings. Further, the existence of context
              effects reported in LCKG, in conjunction with what we know about the role of
              context from the cognitive psychology literature, suggests a number of possible
              interaction effects between context and learning that have so far been almost
              totally ignored in the economics literature.  To explore these issues, our
              strategy is to construct a new game - the college admissions game - that has a
              contextual framework familiar to the US college student population (the most
              convenient population to use as experimental subjects) and to conduct new
              experiments with this game.  Using several variations of this game, we study
              what effect context, incentives, and expertise, separately and together, have
              on learning and the emergence of equilibrium.  In addition to using more
              traditional experimental methods, we also employ a new team-play methodology
              for gathering verbal data from subjects; by analyzing this data, we hope to
              gain direct evidence about the reasoning processes of subjects and how these
              processes are affected by the experimental treatments.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
