Title       : Metal - Mediated Synthetic Routes to Conjugated Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9809518

Award Number: 9809518
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380835             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Don Tilley tilley@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9239,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to Prof. T. Don Tilley at the University of California at   Berkeley
              is supported by the Advanced Materials and Processing Program in   the
              Chemistry Division. The theme of the award is the metal mediated   synthesis of
              conjugated polymers based on silicon, tin and germanium. A   broad range of
              Group IV metal hydride chemistries will be explored.   Fundamental mechanisms
              of dehydrocoupling of silicon hydrides via   metal-mediated sigma metathesis
              will be investigated; new early   transition metal catalysts for
              dehydrocoupling and olefin polymerizations   will be probed; polystannanes,
              hyperbranched polystannanes and polysilane   networks will be prepared and
              their electronic properties investigated;   new polymers based on zirconocene
              catalyzed coupling ofdi-ynes and   dihaloarenes will be synthesized and
              characterized. For each new polymer   or oligomer prepared, photophysical and
              electrochemical studies will be   employed to assess possible optical and
              electronic properties.  New polymers containing metallic backbones transport
              electrons by a   fundamentally different process than traditional conjugated
              carbon-based   polymers and create new paradigms for unusual optical and
              electronic   behaviour. This research provides new materials which will exhibit
                electrical conductivity, electroluminescence, photoconductivity and  
              piezochromic properties and will have  potential application in light  
              emitting diodes, semiconductors and nonlinear optical devices.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
