Title       : Earthquakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9809583

Award Number: 9809583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Johnson kjohnson@ioc.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Discovery Science Center
	      2500 North Main Street
	      Santa Ana, CA  92705    /   -

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9809583
Johnson

Discovery Science Center plans to develop an exhibition
              entitled "Shake, Rattle and Roll" which is based on the topic of earthquakes, a
              highly relevant subject to the Southern California community.  The exhibit will
              be designed to engage the visitor in scientific query and lends itself through
              inquiry based instruction to accommodate for varied learning styles and gender
              equity.  Strong educational programs for families and school groups will be
              developed to support the exhibition.  Discovery Science Center plans to develop
              a 1500 square foot exhibition with seven to ten exhibits based on the Unifying
              Concepts and Processes and Science and Technology Standards as defined by
              National Science Education Standards (NSES).  The exhibition follows the
              engineering process and presents opportunities for families to engage in
              innovative problem identification.  A comprehensive educational program will
              provide teachers with workshops on earthquakes so that they gain knowledge and
              confidence in teaching the subject, provide teachers with resource kits
              containing a teacher's guide, reproducible materials and manipulatives that
              they may keep in order to teach their students, provide an interactive
              demonstration that will be performed by Science Center staff at students'
              schools and at the Science Center itself, and provide a public service by
              teaching earthquake preparedness and how to respond during and after an
              earthquake.  A Web page that can be used by the community, teachers, students
              and other science centers that will be based on earthquakes will be developed. 
              The exhibitions and programs will be fully evaluated by Discovery Science
              Center.  The Science Center will work in conjunction with the Federal Emergency
              Management Agency and a local advisory committee comprised of scientists,
              teachers, and experts in the field including the Southern California Earthquake
              Center and Caltech to develop the programs and exhibition.  It is estimated
              that 325,000 guests will visit Discovery Science Center annually and experience
              the Earthquake exhibit.  The program will also reach the community through
              outreach programs into schools and the Web site.

