Title       : Early State Expansion and Multiethnic Coexistence in the Ancient Andes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9809720

Award Number: 9809720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25691              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Goldstein psg@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Paul Goldstein and a team of
              graduate and undergraduate students will conduct archaeological survey in the
              Moquegua Valley, Peru. Both accounts by Spanish explorers as well as
              archaeological data suggest that this valley exerted an influence
              disproportionate to its size. Although this oasis is set in one of the world's
              driest deserts, irrigation has long permitted year-round cultivation of crops
              that are not available at higher elevations. Spanish historic documents state
              that colonists from highland polities with centers as much as 200 kilometers to
              the East sent settlers to the valley's middle elevations to cultivate maize,
              peppers and cotton to send back to their homelands. Dr. Goldstein and his team
              wish to determine how far this pattern extends back in time.   Three factors
              play major roles in the culture history of Peru. First, the country is
              characterized by strong altitudinal zonation and environments change rapidly
              from arid coastland desert, through mid latitudes, high Andean plateau and
              finally tropical eastern Amazonian lowland. Secondly, the archaeological record
              indicates the presence of strong regional traditions which continue for
              thousands of years in time. Finally, the a series of empires, of which the Inca
              was the most recent, emerged to consolidate large portions of Bolivia and Peru.
              Archaeologists wish to understand how these factors interacted. How did local
              traditions maintain at least a modicum of independence under a series of larger
              centralized regimes? How were empires and smaller groups organized to take
              advantage of the resources which different altitudinal zones offered?   The
              Moquegua Valley, because of its clear bounded nature and its rich resources
              offers an excellent venue to study such questions. Dr. Goldstein has conducted
              research in the region for several years and data indicate the imprint of all
              major empire expansions as well as a strong local tradition. He wishes to
              determine the types of interactions which occurred and believes that a
              multi-ethnic (live and let live) model best applies. With National Science
              Foundation support he will conduct one additional field season of work. He will
              complete a full scale survey of the valley and update a maps of sites and other
              cultural features. Surface material will be collected and on the basis of
              ceramics both date and cultural affiliation will be determined. Radiocarbon
              dates will provide absolute ages.  On this basis it will then be possible to
              reconstruct cultural interactions over time.  This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide insight into the social organization of a 
              early state level societies in a heterogeneous environmental context. It will
              yield data of interest to many archaeologists and provide training to both
              undergraduate and graduate students.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
