Title       : Choroid Plexus: A Newly-Discovered Site for Central Vasopressin Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1998    
File        : a9809907

Award Number: 9809907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Chodobski adam chodobski@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rhode Island Hospital
	      593 Eddy Street
	      Providence, RI  029034923    401/277-5121

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              98-09907  CHODOBSKI      Vasopressin or antidiuretic hormone is a
              "neurohormone," that is  a hormone produced by nerve cells ("neurons").  It was
              originally  found in specialized groups of neurons located in a region of the 
              brain termed the "hypothalamus".  These neurons send long thread-  like
              processes ("axonal fibers") to the pituitary gland where  their vasopressin is
              released into the blood stream. Two major  physiological actions of this
              neurohormone, as its names imply,  are the conservation of water and the
              maintenance of blood  pressure in response to the loss of body fluids.  Normal
              central  nervous system (CNS) function is critically dependent upon the 
              maintenance of an optimal composition  and volume of intra- and  extracellular
              fluids.  Small changes in these parameters can alter  neuronal signaling and
              information processing.  An increasing body  of evidence indicates that
              vasopressin is not only secreted into  the blood stream, but is also released
              within the CNS to regulate  brain fluid balance.  However, the sources of
              centrally-released  vasopressin are incompletely characterized.  Recent
              observations  by Dr. Chodobski and his collaborators indicate that one
              potential  source of this central vasopressin is the choroid plexus, an organ 
              that is located within the cerebral ventricles (fluid-filled  chambers inside
              the brain) and that is the primary site of  cerebrospinal fluid formation.  It
              is therefore hypothesized that  the choroid plexus-derived vasopressin is
              involved in the  regulation of fluid economy in the brain. The objectives of
              this  project are to elucidate the mechanisms underlying the synthesis, 
              release, and putative actions in the CNS of choroidal vasopressin.  To this
              end, choroid plexus cell culture systems and animal models  will be used.  The
              experiments will involve molecular, cellular,  and physiological approaches. 
              The studies proposed in this  application will generate data to fill the
              'information gap' in an  important area of neuronal microenvironmen t
              maintenance.
