Title       : Tool Development for Measurement-Based, Network-Oriented Wireless Channel
               Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a9809533

Award Number: 9809533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: San-Qi Li sanqi@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Channel modeling and network control have long been separate in wireless
              research. This is mainly because the existing channel modeling techniques are
              neither measurement-based nor network-oriented. They cannot characterize the
              great diversity of wireless channel dynamics, which are time-varying,
              frequency-selective, and highly dependent on many system factors such as noise,
              distance, mobile speed, channel bandwidth, power control, coding, fast and slow
              fading, etc. Also, they have largely ignored many important network dynamics,
              such as buffer capacity, data arrival statistics and quality of services.  In
              consequence, the significant impact of wireless channel dynamics on network
              packet-level performance cannot be evaluated, which impedes the development of
              effective network/channel control technologies to cope with wireless channel
              dynamics for performance improvement and quality of services. 
 
The proposed
              modeling technique is measurement-based and network-oriented, which provides a
              unique approach toward the integration of channel modeling and network control.
               The study will start with single-channel modeling to identify what are
              important channel statistics to end-to-end packet-level data performance, given
              a variety of channel dynamics, arrival data statistics and buffer allocations.
              Basic guidelines will then be developed for channel modeling to capture such
              important channel statistics. The study will help us to evaluate the
              effectiveness of new channel control technologies such as adaptive coding and
              power control to overall data performance improvement. The research will be
              further extended  to multi-channel modeling at network level, where multiple
              channels are shared by a pool of mobile users at different geographic locations
              with different driving patterns.  Both CDMA and TDMA networking technologies
              will be evaluated.  Other advanced network design issues such as buffer
              congestion control, priority scheduling and multiple access control will be
              examined.   The fundamental understanding of interactive roles played by
              channel dynamics, traffic behavior and network control will greatly help
              improve the performance of next generation wireless multimedia networks.  
              

Throughout the proposed study, a sophisticated wireless channel modeling
              tool will be developed, which can assist wireless engineers for network 
              analysis, control design and service planning.

