Title       : Problems in the Measurement of Prices and Productivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9809561

Award Number: 9809561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Gordon rjg@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1041,9178,9278,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The slow rate of growth in U. S. labor productivity in the last 25 years, in
              contrast to much faster growth in the previous half century, constitutes the
              much discussed `productivity slowdown.` Thus far the slowdown has eluded
              explanation by any theory based on a single cause, such as the behavior of
              energy prices, capital investment, infrastructure investment, government
              regulation, and educational test scores. More recently attention has focussed
              on the possibility that mis-measurement of price changes may partly or largely
              explain the slowdown. It has been conjectured that output growth is now more
              difficult to measure than previously, partly because computers are producing
              unmeasured intangible benefits, and as a result that inflation has been
              overstated and productivity growth understated more in recent decades than
              prior to the slowdown.  The novelty in this project is to turn the presumed
              direction of bias upside down by exploring the possibility that inflation may
              have been understated (or overstated by substantially less) in earlier decades
              prior to the slowdown. This possibility, which has not heretofore been
              systematically investigated, implies that productivity growth may have been
              overstated in the golden era (spanning the period between 1915 and 1972) when
              measured productivity growth was rapid. If this hypothesis is supported by this
              research, it would explain the slowdown at least in part by showing that
              productivity growth in recent decades does not compare so badly with that in
              the golden era as has previously been thought.  A set of research criteria
              developed for this project leads to the choice of shelter services (both rent
              and homeownership) as the central focus of the research, the aim of which is to
              develop new indexes of price and quality change for shelter over the full
              period from World War I to date. The project uncovers several sources of data
              suggesting that the official CPI for residential rent, which is the basis for
              the deflation of home ownership in the national income accounts, may
              substantially understate inflation in quality adjusted rents, particularly
              between 1930 and 1970. A useful byproduct of the research on the quality of
              residential shelter will be to provide new information to reassess the puzzle
              of negative productivity growth in the construction industry over the past
              three decades. The study of shelter prices will use several techniques to
              compile data on housing quality and prices. Several little-known studies
              covering the 1930 1970 period can be extended forward and backwards, using data
              on quality characteristics of rental apartments and houses from industry
              sources and consumer expenditure surveys for the earlier years, and existing
              government data from the Census of Housing and Current Housing Reports for the
              more recent period. Data will be analyzed using the analysis of variance or the
              hedonic regression approach, combining new estimates with coefficients from
              previous studies.  The research also provides evidence that the CPI may
              understate the historic inflation rate for apparel, another important component
              of consumer expenditure. Comparisons of average prices paid with matched model
              indexes from the same data source suggest the possibility of a much more rapid
              rate of apparel inflation than in the matched model indexes or in the CPI. If
              this possibility is validated by a hedonic regression study of apparel prices
              over long historical intervals, it would augment the research on shelter prices
              in altering the standard historical data on U. S. output and productivity
              growth, potentially reducing the growth of productivity between World War I and
              1970 and thus explaining part of the post 1970 productivity growth slowdown.
              The apparel research may also imply that previous matched model indexes for
              other products, as well as the many CPI components based on linking across
              model changes, may need to be reexamined.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
