Title       : Preserved Representation of Changed Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1998 
File        : a9809366

Award Number: 9809366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19977              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Simons dsimons@wjh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project investigates the visual representations of objects and scenes
              people construct as they view the world.  Although conscious experience
              suggests that we form a detailed representation of what we are looking at,
              recent findings that observers often fail to detect large changes to scenes
              from one view to the next (change blindness) have been interpreted as evidence
              we don't represent our visual surroundings in much detail.  This project
              examines an alternative hypothesis:  Although observers cannot consciously
              detect changes to the visual details of complex scenes, these details are
              nevertheless represented.  The experiments test this hypothesis by examining
              the nature of visual representations when change detection fails.  Two
              procedural innovations are used in the studies.  First, stimuli will be motion
              pictures rather than static scenes, to allow assessment of scene representation
              in a context closer to the real-world experiences of observers.  Second, eye
              movements will be monitored during change detection.  Eye movements should
              provide a more sensitive measure of scene representation, and will allow the
              role of attention in formation of scene representations to be examined.  These
              methods will be used to investigate whether failures of change detection imply
              the lack of a representation or simply the inaccessibility of a representation
              to awareness.  The results should add to our understanding of how the visual
              environment is represented from one view to the next, and how the
              representations contribute to our perception and awareness of a stable visual
              world.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
