Title       : Early Development of the Thymus/Growth Factors and Thyroid Hormones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9809876

Award Number: 9809876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise A. Rollins-Smith louise.rollins-smith@mcmail.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt U Med Ctr
	      Office of Biomedical Sciences
	      Nashville, TN  372322103    /   -

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9809876  Rollins-Smith  The studies proposed here will examine the role of
              specific hormones and growth factors on development of the immune system using
              an amphibian (frog) model system.  Why study frogs?  Frogs belong to an ancient
              class of vertebrates (animals with backbones) valued by naturalists around the
              world.  They have a complex neuroendocrine system that enables them to flourish
              in a variety of aquatic environments.  They also have a complex immune system
              that enables them to resist infection by disease organisms.  Amphibians undergo
              metamorphosis which involves the destruction and reorganization of the whole
              body including the immune system.  All higher vertebrates, including humans,
              are distantly related to frogs, and understanding the interactions of hormones
              and growth factors with the developing immune system in frogs may provide
              insight into these complex interactions in other species.  Another compelling
              reason to try to understand the neuroendocrine and immune systems of the frog
              is that naturalists have recently observed the decline in a number of frog
              species worldwide.  The causes for this alarming trend are not well-understood,
              but manmade disturbances to the ecosystem are suspected.  These disturbances
              may result in the impaired function of the frog's immune system with increased
              susceptibility to disease.  These studies also have the potential to assist in
              the training of developmental biologists and immunologists.
