Title       : Object Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1998 
File        : a9809386

Award Number: 9809386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daphne Bavelier daphne@bcs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project concerns the cognitive and neural mechanisms underlying the
              analysis of visual scenes. The aim is to uncover how the information initially
              gathered by the visual system is subsequently organized for use in thinking or
              acting.  To interact appropriately with the visual world one needs to keep
              track of specific objects over time, even if they move or are blocked from
              view.  The research focuses on the process whereby early visual information is
              organized into short term memory representations for objects (hereafter termed
              individuation).  The studies test the assumption that the phenomena of
              repetition blindness and the attentional blink occur during individuation and
              so can be used as tools to study the individuation process.  Repetition
              blindness is the failure to see or report the second occurrence of an item in a
              briefly-presented list.  One set of studies tests the assumption that
              repetition blindness reflects a constraint on establishment of short-term
              memory representations: two separate memory representations cannot be
              established for identical objects during a short period of time.  The
              attentional blink is the finding that the processing of an item hinders the
              processing of subsequent items for as long as a half-second.  Several studies
              test the view that the attentional blink occurs because establishing a memory
              representation for the first item uses the limited resources available for
              individuation and thereby hinders the processing of subsequent items.  The
              results of the studies will add to our understanding of how people identify,
              represent, and interact with objects in the visual world.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
