Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a9809483

Award Number: 9809483
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15363000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravindra N. Bhatt ravin@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Russel  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9177,9183,AMPP,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9809483
Russel
The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
              at Princeton University addresses fundamental problems in the science and
              engineering of complex materials.  Research in this Center, which has been
              named the Princeton Center for Complex Materials, is organized into four
              interdisciplinary research groups.  The Center also provides seed funding for
              new opportunities in materials research.  The Center supports efforts in
              materials education at all levels including summer undergraduate research
              experiences, a topical summer institute for graduate students working on
              materials-related areas, and outreach to the pre-college level via an
              internet-based software developed by the Center and prototyped in a nearby
              science museum.  The MRSEC also supports shared experimental facilities that
              are accessible to center participants and to outside users, and has strong
              research collaborations with industry and national laboratories.

A common
              theme in the four interdisciplinary research groups of the MRSEC is fundamental
              understanding of the links between molecular structure or mesoscopic texture
              and macroscopic properties with the goal of rationally designing materials for
              technological purposes.  One group investigates the unusual phases and
              excitations in low-dimensional electronic materials, including high temperature
              superconductors and semiconductor heterostructures.  A second group explores
              engineered structures based on semiconducting organic thin films for
              application to optoelectronic devices.  A third group pursues the materials
              science of organic molecules that order spontaneously in solutions or melts
              with an outlook on advanced lubricant and novel lithographic applications.  A
              fourth group emphasizes the development of nanostructured composites with
              improved mechanical and dielectric properties by mimicking biological composite
              materials.  Participants in the Center currently include 26 senior
              investigators, 8 postdoctoral associates, 16 graduate students, 14
              undergraduates, and 3 technicians and other support personnel.  Professor
              William B. Russel directs the MRSEC.

