Title       : US-Ghana Dissertation Enhancement: A Geochemical Model and Geomedical
               Implications of Elevated Groundwater Fluoride Levels in the Upper East Region
               of Ghana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9809957

Award Number: 9809957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Hess   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      P.O.Box 60220
	      Reno, NV  895060220    702/673-7311

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 5928,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation enhancement grant supports a graduate student, Mr. Braimah
              Apambire, working under the guidance of Dr. John Hess, Research Professor and
              Executive Director at the Water Resources Center with the University and
              Community College System of Nevada, to do field research in Ghana.  High levels
              of fluoride have been identified in the domestic water supplies in the Upper
              East Region (UER) of Ghana, and dental fluorosis (tooth mottling) is now
              occurring in children.  But little is known about the origin or concentrations
              of the fluoride in this region.  This project will combine hydrogeologic
              information from the UER with geochemical modeling to determine the source and
              distribution pattern of groundwater fluoride.  Mr. Apambire hypothesizes that: 
              1) sources of fluoride in the aquifers are florine-bearing minerals contained
              in the rocks underlying the area; 2) distribution of the fluoride in the
              aquifers is primarily influenced by the area's geology, the solubility of the
              mineral fluoride, and concentrations of various fluoride complexes; and 3)
              distribution of dental fluorosis is primarily a result of elevated
              concentrations of fluoride in the groundwaters.  Using multivariate statistical
              techniques, Mr. Apambire will analyze rock and water samples from the UER to
              determine the mineral sources in the aquifers and the geochemical controls on
              fluoride distribution.  Dental information on children and young adults from
              rural communities in the UER will be collected by a senior dental surgeon from
              the Bolgatanga Hospital, with assistance from Mr. Apambire and others.  This
              information will also be analyzed to identify correlations between the dental
              status of the different age and gender groups and the fluoride concentration
              levels in the groundwater.  Staff members in the Department of Geology at the
              University of Ghana and the dental unit at Bolgatanga Hospital will collaborate
              with Mr. Apambire on this project.

The results of this study will increase
              the knowledge about the geochemical origin of fluoride and the distribution
              patterns of groundwater fluoride.  The new information will be a valuable
              resource for policy makers, water resource managers, and dental health
              educators.  Additionally the grant will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong, independent research career.

ms and the
              Division of Earth Sciences are jointly providing funding for this project.

