Title       : Dissertation Research: An Assessment of Terminal Woodland Subsistence and
               Settlement in the Mobile-Tensaw Delta, Alabama
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9809613

Award Number: 9809613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tristram R. Kidder kidder@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Tristram Kidder, Mr. David Morgan will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological test excavations
              at 10 sites located in the Mobile-Tensaw Delta in Alabama. The goal of the
              research is to examine the settlement and subsistence strategy of Late Woodland
              (400 -1,100 AD) Native Americans who inhabited this region. Anthropologists
              disagree on the extent to which coastal resources such as fish and shell fish
              played important roles in prehistoric diet. Based on a worldwide ethnographic
              study, some argue that in terms of the energetic costs involved in obtaining
              and processing such food, the return is not sufficient to confer high value on
              such items. Others have focused on the density and dependability of such
              foodstuffs and argued that exactly the opposite was the case. While relatively
              good data are available from high latitudes, where marine mammals played an
              important dietary role, much less is known about far more densely inhabited
              temperate environments. Mr. Morgan's research will provide an important case
              study relevant to this question. The research is also important in a regional
              context. By Late Woodland times, agriculture was widespread in North America
              and many groups depended heavily on maize, squash as well as a range of less
              well known domesticates. In interior Alabama such plant remains are regularly
              recovered from sites of this age. However it is not known whether coastal
              peoples incorporated such resources into their diets and the data collected by
              Mr. Morgan will also address this issue. If domesticates are not present, this
              implies that available wild resources were sufficient. To accomplish this work,
              Mr. Morgan will place small test excavations in 10 sites distributed across two
              environmental settings. Ceramics will allow the relative dating of individual
              levels and faunal remains recovered will provide insight into length and
              seasons of occupation. Floatation analysis will permit the recovery of plant
              remains which will be analyzed to a species level.  This research is important
              for several reasons. It will provide information on a time period and
              geographical region which is relatively understudied. It will also shed
              additional light on prehistoric subsistence adaptation and assist in training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
