Title       : CARE: National Center for Sign Language and Gesture Resources (collaborative
               proposal)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1998 
File        : a9809340

Award Number: 9809340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $649999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol J. Neidle carol@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stan Sclaroff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The University of Pennsylvania and Boston University are collaborating on the
              establishment and maintenance of resources for research in sign language and
              gesture.  The goal of this project is to make available several different types
              of experimental resources and analyzed data to facilitate linguistic and
              computational research on signed languages and the gestural components of
              spoken languages.  Activities in the project include the following:  
  
   *
               A facility for collection of video-based language data will be established,
              equipped with synchronized               digital cameras to capture multiple
              views of the subject.

   *  A substantial corpus of American Sign Language
              video data will be collected from native signers and made        available in
              both compressed and uncompressed forms.

   *  Significant portions of the
              colleted data will be linguistically annotated.  The database of linguistic    
                          annotations will be made publicly available, along with the
              applications needed to access the database.

   *  Video data will be
              analyzed using computer-based algorithms, wtih analysis and software made
              publicly         available.

 Thus the project makes available sophisticated
              facilities for data collection, a standard protocol for such collection, and
              large amounts of language data.  The combination of linguistic and
              computational expertise in this project will ensure scientific integrity of
              data collection, and will result in useful data for researchers in a variety of
              fields.

