Title       : Phase 1 of Project SURGES, Support for Undergraduate Research in the Geological
               and Environmental Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a9809580

Award Number: 9809580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72998              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Matty david.j.matty@cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane M. Matty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric L. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen C. Benison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9809580
Stahl

Project SURGES is an effort to facilitate research by faculty
              and undergraduates at small colleges and comprehensive universities.  Surveys
              show that these institutions typically have modest equipment holdings.  When
              faculty need analyses, they make arrangements with research institutions or
              commercial labs.  In both cases, undergraduates do not see their samples being
              analyzed and become "disconnected" from the samples.  Cost and availability
              issues preclude research projects in laboratory sections of upper level
              classes.  The Central Michigan University Geology Department has diverse
              analytical equipment holdings.  CMU geology has a record of undergraduate
              research that reflects its incorporation into the curriculum.  The typical CMU
              geology graduate will have participated in three course research projects and
              completed an independent research project for Senior Thesis.  Project SURGES
              will open up CMU's analytical laboratories to faculty and students at other
              PUI's.  Through innovative use of interactive two-way video e-mail, the
              "connectivity" and "ownership" problems with other methods of out-sourcing
              analyses will be circumvented.  Off-campus faculty will schedule lectures or
              demonstrations originating from CMU's labs where their classes can follow the
              progress of their samples.  Students working on independent projects will make
              appointments with CMU faculty or staff to see their samples run or discuss
              results.  The goals of the 18-month pilot phase of Project SURGES are to: 1)
              develop the protocol by which faculty and undergraduates at other institutions
              can interactively access the analytical laboratories of the CMU Geology
              Department; 2) demonstrate the feasibility of this see you-see me protocol for
              independent undergraduate research projects and for original research course
              projects; and 3) produce web-based video tutorials and tours of the CMU geology
              analytical facilities suitable for enrichment of lower division students and
              instruction of majors and minors.

