Title       : Molecular Genetics of Nuclear Migration During Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9809937

Award Number: 9809937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345213             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice A. Fischer jaf@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The broad goal of the proposed research is to understand how organellar
              trafficking is regulated temporally and spatially during development. The
              developing Drosophila eye will be used as a model system and a gene called
              marbles (marb) will be used as a starting point. The marb gene product is
              required for particular nuclear migrations specific to differentiating cells in
              the developing eye; in eyes of flies with mutations in the marb gene,
              differentiating cells fail to undergo a stereotypical pattern of nuclear
              migrations, resulting in inappropriate cell shapes in the adult eye. There is
              evidence that MARB may be a cell type-specific component of a motor protein
              complex that facilitates nuclear migration.  Many independent marb mutations
              have been generated and the marb gene has been molecularly cloned. These
              materials will be used to achieve three specific goals, using a combination of
              molecular biology histology, genetics, and biochemistry. First, using an
              antibody to the MARB protein, the expression pattern and subcellular
              localization of MARB protein in the developing eye will be determined. Second,
              genetic screens will be employed to identify Drosophila genes that interact
              with marb genetically. Finally, biochemical assays will be performed in order
              to test MARB protein for physical interactions with particular cytoskeletal
              proteins and the products of appropriate genes identified in the genetic
              screens.  The identification of the marb gene provides the opportunity to study
              two critical cell biological problems from a unique starting point and in an
              ideal genetic system. First, active regulation of nuclear migration is a key
              feature of many important biological processes in vertebrates. For example,
              nuclear migration is required for cell migration in early human brain
              development; some brain disorders, like lissencephaly, result from defects in
              nuclear migration. Second, how molecular motor proteins attach to specific
              cargo is largely unknown. MARB protein may function as an adaptor protein that
              links the nucleus, either directly or indirectly, to a molecular motor. Almost
              without exception, every gene and biochemical pathway with an important role in
              Drosophila development exists and plays a similar role in human development.
