Title       : LExEn: Geochemical Constraints on the Ecology of the Deep Lineages Within the
               Bacteria and Archaea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1998 
File        : a9809136

Award Number: 9809136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355402             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna-Louise Reysenbach   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5418      OCE SPECIAL PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1075,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Reysenbach/Shock

	Studies over the past decade have revealed that life may
              have penetrated every possible niche where there is an exploitable source of
              energy. Moreover, life is a major geochemical force which apparently has
              effects over a wider range of environments than previously appreciated. Extreme
              environments such as those at high temperature hydrothermal vents offer a good
              example to the extent to which geochemistry can control or influence the
              distribution and physiology of microorganisms, and the extent to which the
              organisms can transform their geochemical environment. An integrated
              interdisciplinary approach is proposed using a combination of molecular
              ecological tools, biogeochemical measurements and standard microbiological
              methods to determine the community and geochemical dynamics in these
              ecosystems. Specifically, the objective of the study is to establish how deeply
              branching lineage of the Archea and Bacteria in high temperature ecosystems
              transform their geochemical environments. Field work will be conducted in
              Yellowstone National Park. Detailed geochemical and biological analyses along
              the temperature gradients will provide the framework for addressing specific
              questions regarding the growth and physiology of the members of the
              communities. The results of this study will provide a much needed baseline of
              ecological and geochemical data, and offer quantitative models of the
              geochemical bioenergetics associated with these high temperature ecosystems.
              With the elucidation of the key biogeochemical parameters it should be possible
              to predict the factors that determine the distribution, dynamics, and growth
              requirements of the deepest lineages within the Archea and Bacteria.
              Furthermore, this study will challenge our perspective of biogeochemical and
              microbiological processes, theories on the origins of life and provide
              predictions about life forms that may exist on other planets. 

