Title       : Biodiversity and Biogeochemistry of Antarctic Photosynthetic Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1998 
File        : a9809195

Award Number: 9809195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362696             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Madigan madigan@micro.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie A. Achenbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,9169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Madigan
Cold environments (average temperature 5 degrees Celsius or lower) make
              up greater than 90% of the earth's biosphere, yet relatively little is known
              about the diversity and ecological activities of cold-adapted microorganisms,
              in particular, photosynthetic microorganisms. The proposed research will
              explore permanently cold Antarctic habitats for their biodiversity of
              cold-adapted anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria. The research takes a phased
              approach to biodiversity including the enrichment and isolation of cultures of
              Antarctic photosynthetic bacteria, laboratory characterization of their major
              physiological, biochemical, and genetic features, and in situ study of
              biogeochemical reactions carried out by natural populations of these organisms.
              Using specific, nontraditional enrichment approaches, readily cultivable
              species of cold-adapted photosynthetic bacteria will be isolated in pure
              culture. The isolation methods to be used are not based on classical liquid
              enrichment but instead employ extincting dilution to ensure that both abundant
              as well as rare cultivable species are obtained. Variations in the enrichment
              approach will be used to isolate cold-adapted species with particularly well
              developed specialized metabolisms, such as autotrophic carbon dioxide fixation,
              nitrogen fixation and the photocatabolism of aromatic compounds. Isolates will
              be obtained from a series of enrichment cultures established at different
              temperatures and growth rate measurements and will be used to assess the
              ability to grow over a range of temperatures in order to determine which is
              merely psychrotrophic (cold tolerant) or actually psychrophilic (cold loving).
              Isolates will be phylogenetically characterized by 16s rRNA sequencing. Field
              research will include isolation of new cultures from stratified Antarctic lakes
              in the McMurdo Dry Valleys. The results of the research will strengthen the
              knowledge of photosynthetic diversity, yield novel organisms for agricultural
              and biotechnological use and for study of photosynthesis and related processes
              at low temperatures,and broaden the diversity of known psychrophilic and
              psychrotrophic prokaryotes, relevant modals for the study of exobiology.

