Title       : Workshop on Syllable Structure and Gesture Timing, Columbus,Ohio, September
               16-19, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9809046

Award Number: 9809046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10481              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Odden odden@ling.osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Osamu Fujimura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Linguistic utterances in their phonological aspect are traditionally
              represented as a con catenated linear string of phonemic segments. Beginning
              with research by Jakobson, Fant and Halle in the early 1950's, the concept of
              the distinctive feature was introduced as the minimal unit of phonological
              description, according to which a phoneme is a simultaneous bundle of bi narily
              valued phonetically defined features. In that conception, the phoneme is the
              minimal pho nological unit with temporal integration. The identification of the
              integral phonemic segment was largely supported by spectrographic
              discontinuities as observed in acoustic signals, in particular voice onset and
              offset along with articulatory implosions and explosion of stop consonants.
              However, the transition from one phoneme to the next is often represented in
              the speech signal as a continuous smooth spectral change with no apparent
              discontinuity. A serious challenge to the prevailing phoneme concatenation and
              coarticulation theory derives from articulatory data largely due to x ray
              microbe studies. As temporal details of articulatory gestures became avail
              able,.it was clear that the concept of simultaneity of articulatory gestures
              which manifest a given phoneme could not be maintained.  From the phonological
              perspective, there has been a steady intellectual progression from the linear
              generative theory of phonological representation where issues of articulatory
              ordering and segmentation were quite simple, to current nonlinear
              representations where the mapping between segments and features is quite
              relaxed, and highly articulated suprasegmental structures have been often
              assumed. A consequence of current nonlinear representational models, which
              allow single 'segments' to bear multiple values of a given feature, and which
              quite freely allow a single feature to be associated with many 'segments', is
              that one can meaningfully question the existence of the discrete 'segment' as a
              formal object. Indeed, the theory of feature geometry does not explicitly
              represent the notion of 'segment', and it has been argued that the traditional
              notion of segment does not correspond to any specific node or level of
              representation in current models. Nonlinear models have increasingly tended
              towards positing complex but internally timeless single 'segments' in place of
              clusters of segments. For example, it has been proposed by Duanmu for Chinese
              that there are no onset consonant clusters at all, and that such apparent se
              quences are single secondarily articulated segments ((k) inter alii).  The goal
              of this workshop is to focus on a particular domain which is central to the
              theo retical issues of representation, and seeks to evaluate competing theories
              of that domain, by looking at issues relating to the syllable, and to the
              'segment' as a phonological construct. The wide range of theoretical
              perspectives which exists regarding segments and their ordering renders it
              difficult to test empirical claims about possible consonant clusters. This
              workshop will assemble major leaders in relevant areas, to create a forum for
              up to date dis cussion considering different approaches to these problems.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
