Title       : Collaborative Research: Transaction Costs and the Choice Among Sales Procedures:
               Auction vs. Negotiated Sales of Private Timber and Cattle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a9809149

Award Number: 9809149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102039             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randal R. Rucker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Myles J. Watts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project examines in a general context the determinants of the choice made
              by sellers between an auction and a negotiation method of sale. The limited
              existing theoretical literature on this topic largely ignores variety of
              relevant transaction costs in determining sellers' choices. Analysis of the
              role played by transaction costs in the choice between auction and negotiated
              sales is the focus of this project. Among the transaction costs considered are
              presale measurement costs, the costs of the auction process itself, the costs
              of an auction associated with the constraints an auction imposes on the buyers'
              offers, contract enforcement costs, and possible principal-agent costs
              associated with the seller's decision to hire a consultant/auctioneer.  This
              project also examines empirically the determinants of individual sellers'
              choices between auctions and negotiated sales in two contexts-private timber
              and cattle sales. The particular empirical applications are chosen because both
              auctions and negotiations are commonly used in the industries. A data set has
              been collected for examining private timber sales. The data set contains
              detailed information on 360 timber sales from North Carolina and is comprised
              of approximately 50 percent auction and 50 percent negotiated sales.
              Preliminary analysis provides convincing evidence that the specified
              transaction costs are important determinants of the choice by private timber
              owners between auction and negotiated sales procedures.   The proposed study
              will greatly enhance our understanding of the choice among sales procedures,
              both conceptually and empirically.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
