Title       : Comparative Political Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9809177

Award Number: 9809177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214587             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Baron baron_david@gsb.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David  The objective of the project is to develop comparative theories of public
              policy from a political economy perspective; i.e., where the policy is chosen
              in a public institution embedded in a political system. The principal
              comparison will be between presidential and parliamentary systems with an
              emphasis on the influence of institutions and interests, the dynamics of the
              resulting policies, and their stability and efficiency. The political economy
              perspective takes into account the principal institutions of a political system
              and the representation of interests both within the political system through
              elections, for example, and through private actions such as lobbying and the
              provision of politically valuable resources to officeholders. The approach to
              be taken is to develop integrated political economy theories that incorporate
              political institutions and economic interests in a manner that allows for a
              comparison of policy choices both across political systems and across time. 
              The research program has four principal components. The first is the
              development of a dynamic theory of parliamentary systems that includes
              institutions and interest groups. The second is the development of a
              corresponding theory of presidential systems that incorporates the presidential
              veto and Senate filibuster of the U.S. system. The third component is the
              development of a theory of endogenous political parties and their role in
              parliamentary and presidential systems. The fourth component is an integrated
              theory of market competition and political action at the industry level as a
              means of linking public policy to its effects on economic rents and linking
              those rents to the strategies of interest groups in attempting to influence the
              choice of policies. Finally, the objective is to compare the theories to
              identify the role of institutions and the organization of interest on public
              policy choices.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
