Title       : Enhancing Geoscience Education and Public Outreach: Partnership Between the
               University of Pittsburgh and the Carnegie Museum of Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1998    
File        : a9809837

Award Number: 9809837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65492              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary C. Capo rcapo@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Crown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Donahue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold B. Rollins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Harbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                  CAPO  9809837    This award supports a partnership between
              the Carnegie Museum of Natural History (CMNH) and the University of Pittsburgh
              Department of Geology and Planetary Science (G&PS).  The primary objective of
              the partnership is to provide an understanding of geology and the environment,
              including the role of geologic processes on human activity, and the impact of
              humans on the biosphere, atmosphere, hydrosphere and global climate, to a broad
              spectrum of the general public.  CMNH has excellent facilities, a large and
              diverse audience, and a strong staff involved in Earth science research and
              exhibit development.  Collaboration with G&PS would expand this base of
              expertise to include an earth science group involved in research and teaching
              in three primary areas: (1) geologic and environmental hazards, (2) planetary
              science, and (3) plate tectonics.    This collaboration will take advantage of
              the strengths of both institutions to link graduate and undergraduate training
              with precollegiate aand non-classroom geoscience education.  Specifically, an
              integrated approach will be taken that involves partnering for (1) development
              of earth science-focused museum exhibits; (2) a distinguished geoscience
              lecture series aimed at the general public, and   (3) involvement of talented
              minority high school students as interns in this process.  These activities
              will enhance earth science education outside the classroom, involve students
              from high school to graduate level with interdisciplinary earth systems science
              research, and aid in development of programs to encourage minority high school
              students to pursue careers in geoscience.  Educational materials developed will
              be extended to a worldwide audience through WWW site development and
              interactive museum exhibits.
