Title       : LEXEN: Interactions Between Hyperthermophilic Communities and Silica
               Mineralization: Implications for Paleobiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9809471

Award Number: 9809471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherry L. Cady   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SETI Institute
	      2035 Landings Drive
	      Mountain View, CA  940430818    415/961-6633

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9809471
Cady

Hydrothermal deposits that form in the presence of heat-loving
              microbial communities are analogs for one of Earth's earliest ecosystems. 
              Molecular phylogenetic studies of extant life suggest that these earliest
              ecosystems were inhabited by hyperthermophiles (optimum growth temperatures >
              80?C), microorganisms that define life's upper temperature limit.  It remains
              debatable whether life evolved at high temperatures, or whether high
              temperature microorganisms were the only groups to survive the massive impact
              events of the 'late bombardment' period.  In either case, study of the
              potential for hydrothermal deposits to serve as important paleobiological
              repositories supports NSF's goal to understand how the products of early life
              on Earth are preserved in the geological record.  To maximize paleobiological
              interpretations of hyperthermophilic communities from ancient hydrothermal
              deposits requires an understanding of the processes by which hyperthermophilic
              biogenic signatures are initially preserved and subsequently altered by
              post-depositional diagenetic effects.  Biogenic signatures, the products of
              life that are preserved in the rock record, include microfossils,
              stromatolites, and chemofossils.  The primary objectives of the project are to
              identify the organosedimentary processes responsible for the preservation of
              hyperthermophilic biogenic signatures in high-temperature ecosystems, and to
              document how primary biogenic signatures are altered during early
              diagenesis.

To provide a framework within which the paleobiology of
              hyperthermophilic communities fossilized in siliceous hydrothermal deposits
              (thermal spring and especially epithermal deposits) can be properly
              interpreted, extant communities that occupy silica-depositing thermal springs
              will be characterized by molecular phylogeny and various electron beam-imaging
              methods.  Hyperthermophilic microfossils that display morphological fidelity
              will be investigated using spectroscopic imaging, diffraction, and low dose
              transmission imaging and analytical (EELS/EDS) electron microscopy to identify
              the mechanisms of fossilization.  To establish a baseline survey of the types
              of unique hyperthermophilic biomarker compounds preserved in natural siliceous
              hydrothermal deposits, samples with organically preserved hyperthermophilic
              remains will be analyzed for total organic carbon (TOC), 13C, lipid ratios, and
              biomarkers.  The organosedimentary interactions responsible for the
              morphological development of high-temperature siliceous sinter stromatolites
              will be investigated from the submicroscopic to macroscopic scale.  Field
              experiments, designed to produce sequentially biogenic and abiogenic siliceous
              hydrothermal deposits from natural hydrothermal fluids in a 'water tunnel' will
              be conducted at a geothermal power station in New Zealand.  Direct comparison
              of biogenic and abiogenic hydrothermal deposits from the submicroscopic to
              macroscale will provide a robust set of criteria for distinguishing the
              biogenicity of siliceous hydrothermal precipitates.  An improved ability to
              recognize and confidently assess in the rock record the biogenic signatures of
              hyperthermophilic communities will advance interpretations of the early fossil
              record of life on Earth and, potentially, on Mars.

