Title       : The Integration of Auditory and Visual Information During Spoken Language
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2001 
File        : a9809013

Award Number: 9809013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merrill F. Garrett garrett@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry P. Green  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Previous research has revealed that our ability to understand speech depends
              not only on the sound coming from a talker's mouth, but also on the ability to
              watch the talker's mouth and face.  For example, our ability to understand what
              a person is saying in a noisy environment such as an office or busy street is
              improved if we can watch the talker's face as well as listen to the voice. 
              These findings were originally seen as having important implications for
              improving speech recognition in individuals with moderate hearing losses.  More
              recently, research has shown that people with normal hearing combine auditory
              and visual information even in situations in which the auditory signal is clear
              and intact.  The implication of these studies is that recognition of speech
              depends not only on auditory information from the talker's voice but also
              visual information from the talker's mouth and face.  Clearly, speech
              recognition can occur without visual information, as evidenced by the impact
              the phone and radio have had on society, so why do even normal hearing
              individuals use visual information when it's available?  Moreover, how do they
              acquire this capability?  Is it learned or is it part of the basic endowment
              that all infants have for dealing with spoken language?  The studies we will
              carry out will provide information bearing on these questions.  We will examine
              how people with normal hearing combine auditory and visual information from a
              talker's face so as to recognize the individual sounds that make up words.  We
              will investigate this issue under a variety of conditions ranging from isolated
              syllables (such as `ba` and `da`), to whole words in sentence contexts.  Our
              goal is to provide additional information regarding how visual information is
              used to help recognize speech in normal listening situations.  The findings
              from this research should have practical as well as theoretical implications. 
              For example, considerable efforts are currently begin devoted towards improving
              the capabilities of computers to recognize speech, especially under noisy
              conditions such as the cockpit of an airplane.  Recent approaches to computer
              speech recognition are attempting to combine both auditory and visual
              information to improve the computer's accuracy.  Our results will help provide
              insight into computer models for combining (or integrating) the auditory and
              visual information. With respect to theory, our results should improve our
              understanding of how the brain works, especially with regard to the
              understanding of spoken language.  Finally, the stimuli and techniques
              developed in the proposed studies on adults can be used to determine how the
              ability to integrate auditory and visual information develops in young
              children.  Such findings are important for understanding both normal spoken
              language development, and language development in children who are blind or
              have moderate to severe hearing impairments.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
