Title       : The Effects of Welfare and Taxes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a9809425

Award Number: 9809425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227037             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Meyer bmeyer@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research involves two projects and several extensions.. The first examines
              the effects of recent welfare and tax changes on the labor supply and program
              participation of single mothers. A wide range of programs: federal and state
              Earned Income Tax Credits (EITCs), AFDC, Food Stamps, Medicaid, Child Care, and
              AFOC training programs is analyzed. Also analyzed is the period, 1984 1996, and
              at least two large micro data sets. In the past ten years there have been
              large, often unprecedented changes in these programs. There have also been
              unprecedented changes in the employment of single mothers, the primary group
              affected by these policies, that seem to be in large part due to these policy
              changes. The current work focuses mostly on policy effects on employment and to
              a lesser extent hours worked. In addition, focus is directed on hours worked,
              the effects of the program changes on program participation, and other
              outcomes. This first project encompasses in scope and time period much of the
              previous literature. Many of the large policy changes that are examined have
              not been previously studied and they offer an opportunity to evaluate a wide
              range of incentive effects.  The second large project analyzes the migration of
              welfare prone populations. There are very large differences across states in
              the generosity of welfare programs. The possibility of migration has an
              important influence on state policies and affects the well being of recipients.
              The extent of migration is important in assessing the biases in much research
              on welfare programs that uses cross state program differences to identify
              policy effects. This area of research has produced strongly conflicting
              results. Even in the absence of the conflicting results, much of the past
              research has important methodological flaws which call their results into
              question. Some of these methodological problems have been previously
              recognized, while others have not The extent of welfare induced migration is
              examined using several large micro data sets and alternative approaches.  Both
              of these projects have important methodological components. Both comparison
              group based methods.(sometimes called quasi experimental methods or natural
              experiments) and structural approaches are used. The work will elucidate the
              identifying assumptions and advantages and disadvantages of both structural and
              comparison group-based methods. In some cases, it is possible to integrate the
              best aspects of both approaches by estimating a structural model with
              transparent and plausibly exogenous sources of identifying variation. The
              research also will probe some of the reasons for the conflicting results of
              previous work.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                            
