Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Inner-City Price Differentials Revisited
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a9809232

Award Number: 9809232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben S. Bernanke bernanke@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pinelopi Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The assertion that inner city consumers face higher market prices for food
              than their more affluent counterparts has received mixed support since the late
              1960s. Recent inquiries into this question appear to reach a consensus that the
              poor indeed pay more for food. However, these studies utilize samples drawn on
              the basis of prior knowledge of unfair pricing strategies, proximity of
              volunteer surveyors, or another nonrandom method. The effect of these
              methodological errors in survey and sample design on the results obtained is
              unknown. This project revisits the issue of pricing structures by analyzing
              unpublished price level data collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for
              use in computing the Consumer Price Index to answer the question of whether
              prices are higher in poor, urban neighborhoods. The contribution of this 
              project is to analyze a large, statistically representative sample of stores in
              poor and affluent neighborhoods,  and  to test empirically the major arguments
              in support of a differential.  We examine rent seeking among store owners that
              is believed to result in discriminatory pricing strategies; the effect of store
              operating costs, transportation constraints, and lack of competition on prices;
              and the effect of concentrated poverty on pricing strategies.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
