Title       : ESH: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Climatic Variations During the Last Glaciation in
               Southwestern Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1998 
File        : a9809330

Award Number: 9809330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28075              (Estimated)
Investigator: Feng Sheng Hu fshu@life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9809330
Hu

We propose to study the history of late Quaternary environmental
              change preserved in Arolik Lake, southern Alaska, to obtain a paleoclimate
              record with centennial-scale resolution.  We already have two continuous
              6-to-8m-long cores from the lake, including one that extends back at least
              22,000 yr (22 14C ka).  Now we propose to return to the lake armed with
              geophysical equipment for obtaining more detailed bathymetric charts and
              subsurface stratigraphic profiles to place these and new cores into a
              basin-wide stratigraphic context, to identify features indicative of lake-level
              fluctuations, and to locate sites within the basin for additional coring where
              a longer record (>60 ka) might be obtainable.  We will also measure the
              sub-bottom stratigraphy at a second lake (Nimgun Lake), 26 km northwest of
              Arolik Lake, to locate targets for cores extending into the last full-glacial
              period.  All cores will be processed for basic physical parameters and the most
              promising core will be selected for concentrated study of complementary
              physical (grain size, bulk density, magnetic susceptibility), biochemical
              (organic carbon, biogenic silica), and ecological (pollen, diatoms) proxy
              climate indicators, and for geochronology (AMS 14C and tephrochronology).  The
              goal is to obtain centennial-scale resolution for the proxy-climate indicators.
               The analyses will be a collaborative effort by workers with experience in
              obtaining sediment cores and acoustic-stratigraphic data from lakes (Kaufman,
              Werner), and by experts in the analysis of pollen (Hu), diatoms (Smol), and
              tephra (Riehle) from southwestern Alaska.  The results will contribute to
              previous and on-going work by PALE researchers in Beringia whose goal is to
              provide highly resolved records of paleoclimate to compare with climate model
              simulations and with records from glacier ice and marine sediment.

Arolik
              Lake is in a good position to record paleoenvironmental changes.  Among other
              factors, the sedimentology of the lake should reflect changes in the regional
              glacial activity.  It is situated at the optimal distance from a source of
              eolian sediment derived from a late Wisconsin outwash plain: close enough to
              deliver a signal, but not so close as to overwhelm the lake deposits.  Nimgun
              Lake was fed distally by a small cirque glacier during the late Wisconsin. 
              Both lakes are within the area where we have conducted extensive research into
              the extent and timing of late Pleistocene glacier fluctuations, where previous
              studies in the adjacent lowlands provide an independent framework of Quaternary
              paleoenvironmental change, and where we are developing a tephrostratigraphy for
              precise intra-and inter-basinal stratigraphic correlation's.  The lakes are
              dammed by moraines of early Wisconsin age (~110 -60 ka).

Because lake
              sediments accumulate continuously over tens of thousands of years and are often
              dateable, they afford one of the best natural archives of past climate
              variability on the continents.  A continuous record of climate change extending
              back through the full-glacial period has not yet been obtained from
              southwestern Alaska, but is important for assessing whether the rapid climate
              oscillations known in marine and ice cores from North Atlantic region also
              affected continental regions of northwestern North America.  Assessing whether
              rapid climate changes occurred synchronously between these regions, or whether
              the spatial and temporal patterns are random, or even anti-phase, is
              fundamental to understanding the mechanisms that control climate oscillations. 
              Developing this understanding for the full-glacial period is important in
              southwestern Alaska because deglacial records (15-10 ka) are potentially
              influenced by regional-climatic effects resulting from the submergence of
              extensive continental shelf.

The record of full-glacial climate will also be
              used in a data-model comparison of a fundamental feature of atmospheric
              circulation simulated by global circulation models: The glacial anticyclone. 
              At 18 ka, the simulated anticyclone generates strong southerly flow that warms
              Alaska, especially during the winter.  A candidate for full-glacial warming in
              eastern Beringia is the so-called "Hanging Lake thermal event" dated in
              paleovegetation records in northern Alaska and western Canada at ~22-20 ka. 
              This interval is represented in the core from Arolik Lake by increased plant
              macrofossil abundance.  We will evaluate the hypothesis that this warming is
              attributable to the glacial anticyclone as simulated by global climate models
              by assessing the fossil (pollen, plant macrofossils, and diatoms) evidence for
              higher winter temperatures and increased snowfall (and therefore for reduced
              lake ice), and the physical evidence for glacier fluctuations.

