Title       : Decision Processes in Classification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1998    
File        : a9809303

Award Number: 9809303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120659             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerald D. Balakrishnan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The cognitive processes involved in virtually any kind of classification
              behavior (e.g., detecting alarms, identifying speech patterns, recognizing
              faces) can be subdivided into two kinds of mental operations: encoding
              (collecting information from the environment) and decision making (selecting a
              response to the environment).  Typically, the behavioral researcher can only
              observe the final output of the classification process (i.e., the observer's
              classification response), but is interested in identifying the origins of
              classification errors (i.e., poor information versus poor decision making).  A
              statistical analysis of some kind is therefore needed to separate the
              contributions of these two different stages to overall performance.  For the
              past several decades, the most popular analysis has come from a mathematical
              model known as signal detection theory.  Unfortunately, the validity of this
              particular analysis depends on some technical assumptions that are difficult to
              verify empirically.  Recently, I have developed and applied a new set of
              analyses that can be used for two-choice classification data (e.g., detection
              or discrimination of signals from noise) without relying on these technical
              assumptions.  The results of these new analyses suggest that signal detection
              theory's representation of the discrimination process is fundamentally flawed
              and that a new framework for classification is needed. The first set of studies
              involved in this research project will generalize these new methods to examine
              the structure of human classification processes in several other classification
              paradigms, including perceptual identification, recognition memory, and paired
              comparison.  The second set of studies is concerned with the reasons why human
              decision making processes are not optimal in the sense defined by signal
              detection theory and whether there are conditions under which these
              suboptimalities can be corrected.  The ability to understand and improve the
              decision making strategies of human observers should have important
              applications in a broad range of applied settings, including performance
              assessment and training, medical and clinical diagnosis, product quality
              monitoring, and air traffic control.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
