Title       : AFGE: Student Geoscience Research Opportunities (STUDENT GRO)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9809759

Award Number: 9809759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49042              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian S. E. Carmichael ian@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9809759
Carmichael

The University of California at Berkeley's Lawrence Hall
              of Science (LHS) proposes to initiate a project that will provide opportunities
              for urban secondary school students to participate in ongoing geoscience
              research efforts.  This two-year project-Student Geoscience Research
              Opportunities (STUDENT GRO)-will result in 1) Creation of 10 Student Radon
              Research Kits, containing all of the equipment necessary to conduct radon and
              meteorological research at school sites.  Together these kits will comprise a
              "lending library", which will provide opportunities for a multitude of students
              in grades 9-12 to collect, analyze, and display important geoscientific data;
              2) Production of an associated guide for teachers outlining the use of all
              equipment contained in the radon research kits.  This guide will also contain
              several inquiry-based classroom activities related to important geoscientific
              concepts, as well as data collection, analysis, and presentation; 3)
              Presentation of an annual Teacher Workshop that will support teachers in the
              use of the research kits; 4) Establishment of a World Wide Web site to be
              devoted to the publication of results derived from student radon research; and
              5) Establishment of the Geoscience Research Intern Program, a pilot program
              that will provide secondary students with an opportunity to work directly with
              geoscience researchers at the University of California at Berkeley and
              California State University at Hayward.  Experience gained through the
              execution of these activities will provide project staff with valuable insight
              that will inform our future development of geoscience education programs,
              provide insight and findings useful to others in the field of geoscience
              education, and constitute a solid foundation upon which to build more expanded
              programs.  The primary goal of the STUDENT GRO project is to develop resources
              that facilitate an improvement in geoscience understanding among secondary
              school students.  To accomplish this goal, the project will engage in
              activities that will result in an innovative program that meets the following
              objectives: a) derives benefits for both geoscience education and research; b)
              brings cutting edge research into classrooms; c) provides a means by which
              students may engage in research of real value to geoscientists; d) provides
              students and their teachers an opportunity to develop a greater working
              knowledge of the nature and conduct of scientific inquiry; e) emphasizes the
              interconnectedness of science, mathematics, and technology; f) provides
              teachers with an educational resource that fosters a high degree of active
              student involvement; g) taps student'natural curiosity; and h) encourages
              students to pursue careers in science.  Project staff will also develop a
              system of assessment that will facilitate effective measurement of
              participating student growth and development.  This will include the use of
              questionnaires and interviews to help assess the effect that student research
              activities have on the improvement of scientific literacy.  To ensure that the
              proposed project constitutes a significant contribution to science and
              mathematics education reform efforts currently underway across the country, all
              stages of its development will be informed by input from classroom teachers,
              students, nationally recognized educators, and scientists.

