Title       : US-South Africa Dissertation Enhancement: Demand for Primary Products from a
               Designated Conservation Area: The Case of Dwesa and Cwebe Nature Reserves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9809915

Award Number: 9809915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Wesley Burnett karlosk@mail.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1066,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US graduate student, Ms. Barbara
              Williams, working under the guidance of Professor Wesley Burnett, with the
              Department of Parks, Recreation, and Tourism Management at Clemson University,
              to conduct field research in South Africa on "Demand for Primary Products from
              a Designated Conservation Area:  The Case of Dwesa and Cwebe Nature Reserves." 
              These reserves contain some of the Wild Coast's (formerly Transkei) largest
              intact indigenous coastal forest, as well as an area of coastal landforms. In
              addition to being state forest reserves, they also serve as provincial nature
              and marine reserves, and contain a high degree of biodiversity.  In the past,
              rural communities bordering protected areas have often been denied access to
              resources essential to their livelihood.  Some African countries, including
              South Africa, are beginning to reorient their programs towards serving more of
              the interests of local communities, but little is known about the traditions
              and methods the villagers employ to identify, extract, and use primary
              resources from the protected areas.  Ms. Williams will conduct a case study in
              a representative community to gather indigenous knowledge-both historic and
              contemporary- from the local villagers and park officials about resource
              utilization in the nature reserves.  Her field research will identify the
              plants and products traditionally used by the villagers, the extraction methods
              used, and their traditional mechanisms for allocation and conservation of these
              resources.  She will then analyze this information to determine what impact
              these traditions presently have on everyday village life, and whether these
              traditions are being passed on to the next generation.  Archival research,
              participant observation, and in-depth interviews will be used to develop a
              model to deal with multiple land use.  Staff members from Department of
              Geography at Rhodes University will collaborate with Ms. Williams on this
              project.

The results of this study will provide new information on resource
              management of protected areas, which will be a valuable resource for resource
              managers and policy makers.  In addition, the results should be of interest to
              researchers in disciplines such as geography, ecology, and rural sociology. 
              This project will also support an international research experience very early
              in the career of an outstanding graduate student.


