Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of IT in High Tech Manufacturing: A
               Process Level Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9809214

Award Number: 9809214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ann H. Bostrom                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Kraemer kkraemer@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the last thirty years US manufacturers have come under enormous pressure to
              manufacture higher quality goods at lower cost. A traditional response has been
              to relocate production facilities to the Pacific Rim. While reducing production
              costs, it introduces new challenges in managerial coordination, especially as
              ever-shorter product development life-cycles and trends in design for
              manufacturability demand that product design and development (usually done in
              the US) become more tightly linked to the manufacturing process. Two of the
              most popular mechanisms for improving manufacturing operational efficiency over
              the last twenty years have been widespread use of computers and dissemination
              of world class manufacturing practices.  Sophisticated computer-based
              information technologies (ITs) have enabled firms to cut costs and improve
              quality through automation and improved intra- and inter-plant integration. 
              Information technologies such as electronic mail and video conferencing are
              used to reduce the negative effects of geographic distance on communication and
              amplify the positive effects of tapping into a world-wide base of operational
              expertise.  A number of people-based world class manufacturing practices have
              also become popular, including statistical process control, total quality
              management, and continuous improvement. Specific production techniques such as
              JIT and kanban are also widespread.  These technologies and practices not only
              improve coordination of product flows but also increase control over
              manufacturing processes by continuously reducing variability.  These higher
              levels of production control are absolutely critical to improved performance in
              such a dynamic and competitive market.  This study addresses how managers use
              information technologies and world class manufacturing practices for
              coordination of manufacturing activities, both within and between plants. Do
              investments in information technologies yield higher levels of performance, or,
              must they be accompanied by investments in 'people-based' world class
              practices? What is the nature of the impacts of these ITs and practices?  We
              investigate these issues via a field study of 30 plants constituting a majority
              of the world's production capacity in the disk drive industry. Fourteen plants
              have already been visited, yielding interesting preliminary results. We propose
              to visit an additional 16 plants to enable more powerful analyses can be
              performed. Data collection will involve use of survey instruments and
              structured interviews. Firms have already provided site access.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
