Title       : A Geminivirus DNA Replication Protein - Programming Its Plant Host
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2001    
File        : a9809953

Award Number: 9809953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Hanley-Bowdoin LINDA@BCHSERVER.BCH.NCSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9809953  Hanley-Bowdoin     Geminiviruses are a family of eukaryotic DNA viruses
              with single-stranded genomes that replicate through a rolling circle mechanism
              in nuclei of infected plant cells.  They have small genomes, encode one protein
              that is essential for their replication, and rely on the replication machinery
              of their hosts.  The overall goal of this research is to determine the
              mechanisms whereby geminiviruses recruit host DNA replication machinery.   The
              investigator showed that geminivirus infection induces the accumulation of the
              host DNA synthesis protein, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), in
              terminally differentiated plant cells.  PCNA RNA levels and promoter activity
              are also elevated in infected tissue, demonstrating that geminiviruses can
              activate transcription of genes encoding DNA synthesis proteins in quiescent
              plant cells.  The essential viral replication protein, AL1, is sufficient to
              induce the accumulation of PCNA in differentiated cells of transgenic plants,
              and thus may be analogous to the tumor antigen proteins of mammalian DNA
              viruses.  In animal systems, DNA tumor viruses induce replication machinery in
              their host through a combination of common mechanisms.  They encode proteins
              that directly activate transcription of genes encoding DNA synthesis proteins
              and/or interact with cell cycle regulatory factors to render quiescent cells
              competent for DNA replication.  The investigator will determine whether AL1
              uses similar or different mechanisms to induce PCNA transcription in
              differentiated plant cells by 1) determining whether interaction between AL1
              and the cell cycle regulatory factor, retinoblastoma protein, is required for
              PCNA transcription, 2) asking whether multiple domains of AL1 contribute to
              PCNA transcriptional activation, and 3) identifying other plant proteins that
              interact with AL1 for PCNA induction.   Geminiviruses are excellent model
              systems for studying eukaryotic DNA replication and cell cycle regulation,
              areas of study that have not been pursued extensively in plant systems.  The
              ultimate g oals of the project are to elucidate the pathway whereby
              geminiviruses modify and maintain their host plants in an optimal state for
              viral DNA replication and to relate this pathway to plant cell cycle and
              transcriptional regulatory processes.  The research will identify and begin to
              characterize components of the geminivirus/host regulatory network.  The long
              term objectives are to understand how each component functions during
              geminivirus infection and in normal cellular processes.  These experiments,
              which are based entirely on plant virus and host components, afford a rare
              opportunity to study plant cell cycle regulation directly.  They will also
              increase our understanding of the basic mechanisms whereby eukaryotic viruses
              modify cellular processes and may illustrate fundamental similarities and/or
              differences between plants and animals.
