Title       : REG: Imaging of Transition-State Microstructures in Surfactant Aggregates by
               Time-resolved Cryogenic Transmission Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9809286

Award Number: 9809286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arijit Bose bosea@egr.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT  CTS-9809286  A. Bose/U. of Rhode Island    The Department of
              Chemical Engineering at the University of Rhode Island will purchase an
              automated, pneumatically-driven mixing and microliter liquid delivery device,
              as well as modify our current Controlled Environment Vitrification System
              (CEVS) in order to image non-equilibrium microstructures in surfactant-based
              colloids.  The experiments represent part of an ongoing investigation of the
              dynamics of aggregate formation and breakup in these systems.  Following rapid
              mixing of feed solutions, the mixture will be delivered onto a holey carbon
              grid, then plunged past blotters into a cryogen after a controlled time delay. 
              This will permit specimen vitrification at predetermined times after mixing,
              while trapping aggregates in their native states.  These samples, with
              well-defined ages, will then be examined using cryogenic transmission electron
              microscopy, so that intermediate state structures can be identified directly.
              The proposed modification on the CEVS will give a critical and unique ability
              to image microstructures with a resolution of  tens of milliseconds
              (corresponding to one of the important relaxation times in many
              surfactant-based systems) and higher.    The experiments will enable
              identification of new, potentially useful, thermodynamically metastable or
              kinetically stable transition states.  Complementary experiments using a range
              of other techniques, including time-resolved small angle neutron scattering and
              time-resolved static and dynamic light scattering will also be conducted.  In
              conjunction with the cryo-TEM, the most complete picture of phase transition
              dynamics in surfactant colloidal systems to date will be able to be developed
              measurements will be made for a carefully selected set of single- and
              mixed-surfactant systems, over a range of  temperatures, salt and amphiphile
              concentrations, and initial states. The specific roles played by surfactant
              chemistry, architecture and solution conditions on the kinetics of sel
              f-assembly will be determined.  Key variables that can be used to modulate the
              dynamics of formation and breakup of aggregates, as well as transition-state
              structures, will be established.    These experiments will result in a
              comprehensive and generic understanding of the factors that control
              self-assembly and breakup of surfactant aggregates, and will lay the ground
              work for understanding aggregation in more complex molecular systems.  They
              will aid in the development of strategies for designing equilibrium, metastable
              or kinetically stable surfactant-base aggregates with lifetimes and
              morphologies tuned for specific applications such as encapsulation, drug
              delivery, contaminant removal and micellar ultrafiltration.  They will also
              provide important data for comparison with future simulations of structural
              transitions and dynamics.
