Title       : Postnatal Neurogenesis in the Mammalian Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9809905

Award Number: 9809905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204437             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Kalil rekalil@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Fedynyshyn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
		
Postnatal Neurogenesis in the Mammalian Brain
IBN # 9809905
Ronald
              Kalil

Lay Abstract

	For many years it has been thought that almost all of
              the neurons in the brain are produced before birth and that few, if any, new
              neurons are generated thereafter.  Although exceptions to this "rule" have been
              reported in some specialized regions of the brain such as the hippocampus, the
              generation of new neurons in these germinal regions follows the same set of
              steps that occur prenatally. This suggests that the germinal zones found in the
              adult brain may be specialized "holdover regions" from embryonic development. 
              Recently, however, it has it been reported that precursor cells, those cells
              that produce the neurons and other cell types in the brain during the
              development, can be isolated from the spinal cord and other areas of the mature
              brain that are neither near to nor associated with specialized germinal zones. 
              These recent findings suggest that neuronal precursor cells may be distributed
              widely in the brain, and this raises the possibility that under appropriate
              conditions these precursor cells may be induced to generate new neurons.

	In
              a previous series of experiments, Dr. Kalil has shown that when neurons in
              young brains are injured by cutting their axons, which disconnects these
              neurons from their target cells, that most of the injured neurons die, but that
              some of them appear to survive.  His work also has demonstrated in adult brains
              that almost all neurons that become disconnected from their target cells
              quickly die.  However, it appears that this cell death can be reduced
              significantly if specific proteins, known as neurotrophic factors, are
              administered soon after the injury.  

	In this project, Dr. Kalil will
              extend his earlier research by investigating whether neurons in young and adult
              brains that appear to have survived after having had their axons cut,  may
              instead be new neurons that have been produced in response to the injury.  Dr.
              Kalil will determine if new neurons have been generated in response to injury
              of the brain by using a marker that will label the DNA only in those cells that
              have divided after the injury.  He will combine the DNA labeling of cells that
              have divided with staining by specific antibodies that recognize only neurons,
              in order to identify whether cells that have divided are nerve cells or some
              other type of  brain cell.  Using the same methods, Dr. Kalil also will
              investigate whether the administration of neurotrophic factors to the brain
              will help to promote the generation of new nerve cells after injury.  If the
              results from this project demonstrate that the brain is capable of generating
              new neurons in response to injury, they will reveal that the brain retains a
              greater degree of plasticity after birth than has been thought possible. This
              will open new opportunities for developing tools that take advantage of this
              plasticity to assist the brain in repairing itself after being damaged.

