Title       : REG: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for the Study of Adsorbed Layers
               on Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9809053

Award Number: 9809053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83239              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ponisseril Somasundaran ps24@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan C. West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl C. Gryte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian A. Pethica  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas J. Turro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    ABSTRACT  CTS-9809053  Somasundaran, P.  Columbia U.    Surface
              modification of solids plays a vital role in many traditional and emerging
              industrial processes dependent upon interfacial phenomena such as adhesion,
              wetting, lubrication, electrodeposition, catalysis and aggregation/dispersion. 
              Chemical modification by adsorption offers an excellent means to control
              interfacial behavior of colloidal systems.  Past work on adsorption of
              surfactants and polymers on solid minerals has shown that interactions among
              these species leading to aggregation can have marked effects on interfacial
              behavior1.  Using a multipronged approach combining traditional techniques of
              adsorption, wettability and lubrication with advanced spectroscopic techniques
              of fluorescence, electron spin resonance and resonance Raman, we have proposed
              ionic surfactants to adsorb individually at low concentrations and in clusters
              at high concentrations (hemimicelles, admicelles, solloids)2,3.  Importantly,
              reorientation of adsorbed species has been proposed to occur under high
              concentrations.  Such reorientation and reconformation can have drastic
              effects, for example, in wettability and adhesion inorganics) are introduced
              into the system.  While fluorescence and electron.  Reconformation can also
              occur when additives (surfactants, polymers and spin resonance techniques have
              yielded information on such microproperties as polarity, viscosity and
              aggregation number of the clusters on solids, direct investigation on a
              molecular scale in the concentration range where surface aggregates evolve has
              not yet been done.  Studies conducted in the past have been carried out in the
              higher concentration ranges above critical micelle concentration4,5.     A
              promising innovation allowing such investigation is the development of scanning
                probe microscopy (SPM).  SPM is a generic name and at present it includes
              scanning   tunneling microscopy and atomic force microscopy.  Other SPM
              techniques under   development are scanning ion, magnetic f orce, photon
              scanning and thermal profiler   microscopy6.  The three dimensional
              topography-mapping capabilities of SPM    techniques at extremely high
              resolution (atomic scale) in vacuum, air, or liquid   environments are
              unparalleled.  The interaction force measurements in colloidal systems   are
              important both from a theoretical and practical point of view.  The interaction
              force   between the SPM tip and the sample can yield information which so far
              has not been   obtainable for dispersed systems.    The proposed acquisition of
              the atomic force microscope will enable us to directly probe the adsorbed layer
              in-situ and changes in its structure due to chemical and hydrodynamic factors. 
              This will markedly increase our investigative capability since the use of
              atomic force microscope concurrently with other techniques will enable us to
              develop an understanding of interfacial processes on a nanoscale.  Such
              information also leads to engineering capability to manipulate and control
              modification of surfaces by adsorption for optimum effect.
