Title       : SSC: "Summer Science Camp"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9450336

Award Number: 9450336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leroy O. Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450336  U of Tennessee Memphis  Memphis, TN  Moore, Leroy    "Summer
              Science Camp"    The University of Tennessee, Memphis Summer Science Camp
              (SSC), a  four-week, computer science and mathematics discovery project, 
              increases the awareness and curiosity of 50 underrepresented 7th  graders for
              Science, Engineering and Mathematics (SEM) careers.   based on the concept of
              "learning by doing," the SSC project design  is driven by the objective to
              increase their students' factual  knowledge and skills about algebra and
              science concepts via a  series of computer-based, interactive physical science
              experiments.    Assigned mentors, in an apprenticeship relationship,
              demonstrate  how the mathematics and science concepts are utilized in finding 
              solutions to problems in their research laboratories.  Student  support
              activities, including a parental component, increase the  students' perceptions
              about their own abilities, resulting in a  feeling of "I can do it."  Exposing
              students to a variety of SEM  practitioners (role models) and work sites, and
              demonstrating the  role of science and mathematics in work settings, further 
              stimulates students' interest in and enthusiasm about SEM careers.   An
              academic year Saturday Camp maintain student interest heightened  during the
              SSC, by engaging them in a "research" activity related  to minority health and
              social concerns.  The UT Memphis SSC feeds  into a local high school
              science/mathematics intervention, Project  ACHIEVE, designed to increase the
              pool of minorities prepared to  enter health professions.  Such collaboration
              with the project  "Project ACHIEVE" creates an educational pathway that fosters
               students' continued interest in and excitement about science and  math. 
              Following their SSC experience, students are tracked, via  the UT Memphis
              Minority Student Tracking System.  Given the  continued paucity of Black youth
              in this local setting who elect to  pursue science and math studies, the SSC is
              an important step in  stimulating them to become aw are of and become
              interested in  careers in science and math.
