Title       : CRO -- Season Two
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1995      
File        : a9450223

Award Number: 9450223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2747308            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel E. Schneider joel.schneider@sesameworkshop.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Franklin Getchell  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jeffrey Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie Kalins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Children's Workshop
	      
	      New York, NY  10023    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No. ESIE 94-50223  Proposal Name: CRO - SEASON TWO  PI:  Franklin
              Getchell  Total NSF Award:  $2,747,308  Anticipated Completion Date:  Fall,
              1994                              Abstract    Children's Television Workshop is
              producing the second  season of "CRO," an animated television series designed
              to  bring informal science education to Saturday morning  commercial
              television's large, demographically diverse  audience of children.  Each of
              eight new programs to be  broadcast on ABC has the goals of:  1)  entertaining
              six- to  eleven-year-old viewers while increasing their familiarity  with and
              interest in basic science and technology  principles, 2) stimulating viewers'
              interest in science and  technology by showing that they are not abstractions,
              but  integral parts of daily life, and 3) convincing youth that  discovering
              the workings of science and technology can be  fun.    In addition to the
              television series, CTW will develop and  distribute a range of supporting
              materials.  These include a  twelve-page activity book; a four-color, four-page
              user's  guide for informal science education leaders; two four-  color,
              sixteen-page comic books that include puzzles, brain  teasers, and simple
              experiments; an eight-panel activity  poster; and inclusion of "CRO" material
              in 3-2-1 Contact  magazine.  Part of the distribution of these materials will 
              be through CTW's partnerships with youth-serving  organizations such as YMCA's
              , 4-H Youth Development  Education, and Boys and Girls Clubs.  The series also
              will  be released on home video and CTW is considering development  of an
              interactive product based on the series.    Key staffing for season two will
              include Franklin Getchell  who will continue from season one as co-principal 
              investigator and Joel Schneider, who will replace Ed Atkins  as the other
              co-principal investigator.  Schneider will be  responsible for content
              development of both the television  series and of the ancillary materials. 
              Jeffrey Nelson,  formerly Executive Producer o f Square One TV, will join 
              "CRO" as Executive Producer.  ***
