Title       : SSC: "Science Summer Camp and Academic Year Follow-Up Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1996      
File        : a9450487

Award Number: 9450487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295416             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred S. Posmantier   (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman Shapiro  (Principal Investigator former)
              Carl M. Berkowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450487  CUNY Research Foundation  New York, NY  Shapiro, Norman and Carl
              Berkowitz    "Science Summer Camp and Academic Year Follow-Up Program"    This
              proposal for Summer Science Camp builds upon a successful  model and is
              designed to provide 300 (100 each year) academically  talented minority 7th and
              8th graders with the necessary support  and enrichment to successfully pass the
              entrance examination for  the New York City's specialized science high schools
              (Stuyvesant  High School, Bronx High School of Science, Brooklyn Technical High
               School).  This is achieved through a four-week summer preparatory  period
              followed by a one Saturday a month campus program.  The  four-week summer
              residential component serves as the foundation for  the introduction of the
              world of science, mathematics and  technology.  Through the development of a
              peer network, students  are introduced to academic excellence.  To reach the
              project goals,  students are introduced to more advanced concepts in science, 
              mathematics and technology.  In the summer, students are prepared  to take
              challenging courses at the high school level and are  introduced to the skills
              necessary for the New york City  specialized science high school.  This project
              introduces the  necessary support systems and familiarizes the students with
              career  opportunities in mathematics, science and engineering.  Students  are
              also introduced to the special opportunities of the specialized  high schools
              and other special high school programs.  Following the  summer component is a
              City College of New York Academic year on-  campus program.  This phase will
              include academic activities,  special lectures, sharing time where each student
              receives the  support of peers and mentors.  In addition the principal staff
              will  meet with the participating student's school principal and guidance 
              counselor, informing them of the students program participation in  order to
              ensure that the student receives the necessary school  support.  Meetings will
              also be held w ith parents on-campus.   Students will also be provided with
              advisement on attending the New  York City specialized science high schools and
              other special high  school programs.  The project objectives include:  1)
              increasing  the number of minority students that apply into the three New York 
              City specialized science and technology high schools; 2)  encouraging highly
              able youngsters to develop their math, science  and verbal skills in order to
              increase their prospects for  admission into New York City special science and
              technology high  schools; 3) strengthening participants positive attitudes
              toward  science, mathematics, and technology subjects; 4) increasing the  pool
              of participants considering careers in science, mathematics  and engineering;
              5) providing personal, career, academic and  financial-aid counseling; and 6)
              introducing and testing new  enrichment curriculum for wider application.  The
              project  evaluation will be directed to determine the extent that the  project
              goals and objectives are achieved by the individual  participants.
