Title       : Learning Chemistry By Doing What Chemists Do
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1993  
File        : a9450701

Award Number: 9450701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brock Spencer spencer@beloit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Oxtoby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Swartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry R. Mohrig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Truman Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beloit College
	      
	      Beloit, WI  53511    608/365-3391

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450701  Spencer                                                                
                      Chemists investigate problems important to society in teams that  apply
              chemical concepts and modern technologies to answer  challenging questions.  We
              propose to restructure the first two  years of chemistry so that all students
              experience directly how  chemists do chemistry.  We will develop, test, and
              implement  theme-based courses that start with important interdisciplinary 
              problems and use open-ended group projects to apply chemical  principles and
              techniques to their solution.  Relevance, learning  chemistry by using it, and
              a cooperative learning environment will  better serve  students with diverse
              learning styles and the  non-scientists, pre-professionals, and other science
              majors who  comprise the vast majority in those first two years.  
              Interdisciplinary themes will require continuing contact with other 
              disciplines and with  scientists in industry and government.   Restructuring
              will require better articulation with curricula in  related disciplines and in
              the sequence and content of upper-level  chemistry courses.  The participating
              liberal arts colleges  (Beloit, Carleton, Colorado,  Grinnell, Hope, Kalamazoo,
              Knox,  Lawrence, Macalester, Rhodes, St. Olaf, Wooster) and research 
              universities (Chicago, Washington - St. Louis) already have  experience working
              together on chemistry curricular reform.  By  collaborating with Project
              Kaleidoscope, they will be able to  involve a much more diverse group of
              schools in making systemic and  sustainable changes in undergraduate chemistry
              education.
