Title       : Using a Workshop Approach and Real Applications to Teach Calculus with Review
               Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1994 
File        : a9450746

Award Number: 9450746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100505             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy B. Hastings baxter@dickinson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Priscilla W. Laws  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450746  Baxter                                             Workshop Calculus
              with Review I and II is a unique sequence of  courses which integrates a review
              of fundamental concepts needed to  explore ideas in calculus with the study of
              concepts normally  encountered in Calculus I.  Materials have been developed
              with  support from the NSF ILI program and the U.S. Department of  Education
              FIPSE program.  The goals of this two-year assessment  project are to: (1)
              identify a list of "community norms" - that is,  a list of key concepts
              students who take an integrated pre-  calculus/calculus sequence are expected
              to know; (2) design and  implement internal and external assessment tools to
              evaluate  student learning gains and attitudes, with a particular emphasis on 
              the impact of technology; and, (3) track student retention rates,  continuation
              rates, and performance in subsequent mathematics  classes and classes in other
              disciplines that have a calculus  prerequisite.   Materials are being beta
              tested in a variety of  settings and developers are assisting colleagues in
              adapting the  materials for use at their institutions.  Based on outcomes of
              the  assessments undertaken by this project, the Workshop Calculus with  I and
              II instructional materials will be refined and published for  widespread
              dissemination.  The results of the project will be  published and the
              assessment tools will be distributed.   Workshop Calculus with Review I and II
              is a integration of pre-  calculus concepts with Calculus I material and is
              designed for  students who are not prepared to enter Calculus I.  The sequence 
              provides a gateway into the traditional calculus sequence.  In the  Workshop
              environment, lectures are replaced by interactive  teaching, where students
              learn by doing and by reflecting on what  they have done.  In the workshop
              environment, lectures are replaced  by interactive teaching in which no formal
              distinction is made  between classroom and laboratory work.  In class, students
              explore  mathematical ideas  on their own and discover their own approaches  to
              solving problems, using technology as appropriate and by working 
              collaboratively on tasks in their Student Activity Guides.
