Title       : PPD: Full Inclusion in Nonformal Science Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1994     
File        : a9450144

Award Number: 9450144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willis D. Copeland copeland@edstar.gse.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1201,9177,9253,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD 94 50144 University of California @ Santa Barbara Willis Copeland, Principal
              Investigator    Full Inclusion in Nonformal Science Centers           & 
              ABSTRACT   Efforts to improve career development opportunities in science for
              people with disabilities have traditionally focused on science education in the
              public schools.  This limited focus has commonly overlooked a large and
              potentially effective arena for such career development.  Nonformal science
              education experiences such as those offered by "science centers"   museums,
              nature centers, zoos, aquaria, parks, and visitor's centers    have been
              reported by scientists to have had considerable formative influences on early
              development of their careers.  Educators in these science centers, however,
              typically have not been trained to apply knowledge pertinent to work with
              students with disabilities.  The purpose of this project is to remedy this
              oversight by providing instructional materials and conferences for science
              center staff concerning inclusion of people with disabilities in science
              activities.  Major activities of the project will be to: (1) assemble,
              synthesize and translate information pertinent to the education of people with
              disabilities in nonformal science centers; (2) produce a Resource Guide
              presenting pertinent information emerging from a symposium on  educational and
              legal issues pertaining to the full inclusion of people with diverse abilities
              and needs; (3) conduct a conference for science center educators to disseminate
              the information developed from the symposium and contained in the Resource
              Guide to assist these educators in serving people with disabilities
              effectively; (4) distribute the Resource Guide to all science centers in
              California; and (5) negotiate with a commercial publisher for national
              distribution of the Resource Guide.  Project staff will convene a symposium of
              15 people with complementary experience and expertise to develop a conceptual
              plan for the Resource Guide.  The group will include science center educators,
              representatives from disability related organizations, and experts in science
              education of students with disabilities.  The participants will recommend
              materials for the Resource Guide and develop a conceptual organization for the
              material.  The project will commission three articles for inclusion in the
              Resource Guide to synthesize knowledge about science education of students with
              disabilities into a format appropriate for science center educators.  Project
              staff will compile and edit the Resource Guide containing the three articles
              and the materials identified by the symposium participants.  The project will
              use three strategies to disseminate the assembled information to the target
              audience of science center educators: (1) a dissemination conference for 200
              science center educators; (2) printing of the Resource Guide to be distributed
              to science centers in California; and (3) pursuit of commercial publication of
              the      h)          0*0*0*         Resource Guide for national distribution. 
              The project will undertake an extensive evaluation effort which will collect
              initial formative data on practices and attitudes of science center educators
              to guide the development and conduct of the project and summative data to
              assess the project's success. ***                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
