Title       : SSC: "Summer Science Camp for Minority Students"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1995  
File        : a9450428

Award Number: 9450428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187401             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin W. LeMaster elemaster@panam.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nikos Kiritsis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Pan American
	      1201 West University Dr
	      Edinburg, TX  785392909    956/381-2011

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450428  U of Texas Pan American  Edinburg, TX  Kiritsis, Nick    "Summer
              Science Camp For Minority Students"    The University of Texas Pan American
              (UTPA) and the Edinburg  Consolidated Independent School District (ECISD) are
              collaborating  in the organization of a commuter Summer Science Camp (SSC) for
              50  entering ninth graders.  The ECISD is located in the Lower Rio  Grande
              Valley of Texas (18 miles from US-Mexico border) and has a  student population
              of about 17,000 of which 94.56% are Hispanic,  5.28% are Whites and 0.16%
              others.  The SSC is held at UTPA and its  primary objectives are: a) to expose
              student participants to  practical every day math and science, b) to encourage
              its  participants towards Math, Science and Engineering related careers,  c) to
              provide its participants with valuable career information, d)  to expose them
              to successful role models from their own community  and e) to provide them with
              a realistic idea about the world they  live in.  The SSC at UTPA concentrates
              in the Physical Sciences  (Chemistry and Physics), Mathematics and their
              applications in  Engineering.  Lesson activities incorporate the use of
              teamwork for  an intensive "hands-on" experience.  The camp runs for 27 days 
              including 4 Saturdays.  A typical day starts at 7:30 am with the  students'
              arrival at UTPA and ends at 4:45 pm with the students'  departure.  The
              instructional activities of the camp are held in  the morning and the research
              methodology activities along with  several student project activities and
              tutoring are held in the  afternoon.    The instructional activities
              concentrate on the relationship  between mathematics, physics, chemistry,
              engineering and the  surroundings.  They cover the following four subjects: a) 
              mathematics, b) chemistry, c) physics and d) computer literacy.   The afternoon
              projects involve: a) the construction and testing of  model robots, b) a
              Mini-science Network and c) model bridge  building.  The research methodology
              part of the daily schedule  includes co llege level experiments which are
              performed for the  students by UTPA engineering faculty.  The students take
              data,  manipulate them and write a summative report.  Three experiments  are
              performed: a) investigation of a Laminar Boundary Layer, b)  Flow Through a
              Clear Venturi Section and c) Computer Aided Design  and Computer Aided
              Manufacturing on Small Lathes and Milling  Machines.  The career exploration
              activities of the SSC explore and  measure the career awareness level of the
              participants, educate  them about mathematics, science and engineering related
              careers and  show them that they have the potential to pursue one.  Under these
               activities, the student participants take the Strong Interest  Inventory test
              twice, the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude  Battery test and the National
              Engineering Aptitude Search test.   The students also have the opportunity to
              interact with scientists  and engineering in the work place when they follow
              them through a  typical morning.  During the two field trips, the students
              visit  sites such as: the Central power and Light power plant in Corpus 
              Christi, Tx, the USDA Laboratories in Weslaco, Tx, the Magnetic  Resonance
              Imaging Center in McAllen, TX and others.  Two days are  also allocated to
              presentations by local scientists and engineers  which are followed by
              discussions.  Upon completion of the SSC, the  students organize "Science
              Clubs" in their own high schools and  compete in several science competitions. 
              The "Science Clubs"  organize regular visits of the SSC participants to
              elementary and  junior high schools to familiarize the younger students with
              the  SSC activities.  Students visits to local industrial sites and 
              presentations by local scientists and engineers continue throughout  the
              regular academic year.  The SSC staff is comprised of three  UTPA engineering
              faculty, three high school teachers, one high  school professional counselor
              and 10 student workers (5  undergraduate UTPA students and 5 high school
              students).
