Title       : Making Scientific Concepts Come Alive Through Historical Dramatizations and
               Active Student Learning Strategies: A History-of-Science Approach to High
               School Physical Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1998 
File        : a9450235

Award Number: 9450235
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1189563            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Becker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WestEd
	      730 Harrison Street
	      San Francisco, CA  94107    415/565-3070

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450235  Becker    The Southwest Regional Laboratory(SWRL) proposes to develop, 
              produce, field-test, refine, evaluate, and disseminate a  series of eight
              instructional modules for secondary school  physical science or general
              science.  Each module builds  upon a video-taped portrayal of a selected
              episode in the  history of science which is rich in conceptual challenge, 
              conflicting points of view and cultural context.  The units  will include
              statics, kinematics, dynamics, electricity and  magnetism, heat, light, the
              structure of matter, and modern  problems in physical science.  Some of the
              portrayals will  include building the Brooklyn Bridge, Galileo's observations 
              of falling bodies, Emilie du Chatelet and Voltaire's studies  of collisions,
              Count Rumford's experiments with heat,  Newton's optics, Marie and Pierre
              Curie's experiments with  radiation.  Issues of stability and change, scale and
               structure, and systems and interactions will be central to  the development of
              the materials for each unit.  The  materials should motivate students who have
              shown little  interest in science, challenge their conceptions of the 
              structure and workings of the physical world and build  greater understanding
              of the process and culture of  scientific activity.  The videos are
              supplemented with  student reading selections with both excerpts from original 
              documents and modern interpretive text. Protocols for group  and individual
              projects including cooperative learning  activities, student presentations and
              laboratory  investigations and teacher guides for class discussion and  debate
              are also provided.  The videos are produced by KCET;  Evaluation is carried out
              at SWRL      ***
