Title       : Development of a Core Facility for Biotechnology Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1996      
File        : a9450578

Award Number: 9450578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Ma   (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy S. Tracy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Weissman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Landreth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yongyut Rojanasakul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              OSR-9450578  Ma  Development of a Core Facility for Biotechnology Research  The
              proposed activity is to establish a core facility for research  and development
              in biotechnology at the West Virginia University  Robert C. Byrd (WVU-RCB)
              Health Sciences Center under the current  federal Good Manufacturing/Laboratory
              Practice (GMP/GLP)  regulations. Formation of a GMP/GLP facility would be 
              cost-intensive, but would also greatly improve research  infrastructure at West
              Virginia University, and strongly enhance  our ability to obtain research
              grants from both federal and  industrial sources. Because such a facility
              consists of federally  approved laboratories for product development and
              characterization,  this facility would also have the capacity to participate in
               collaborative commercial ventures with private sector biotechnology 
              companies. Due to the extensive costs associated with the  establishment of a
              complete GMP center, the requested funding from  the EPSCoR Experimental
              Systemic Initiative program will be used to  develop a start-up facility to
              include: 1) a GLP laboratory to  characterize chemical and biological
              materials, such as for quality  control of starting materials and/or
              biotechnological products; 2)  a cell culture laboratory to develop methods for
              cell biology  research and the screening of xenobiotic biotransformation; and
              3)  a small-scale manufacturing facility to produce biotechnological  reagents
              and polymeric and lipid membrane-derived systems for  cellular targeting of
              bioactive compounds. This core facility will  be used for long term stimulation
              of competitive research at the  WVU-RCB Health Sciences Center and serves as a
              base for future  establishment of a full GMP facility to foster
              biotechnological  development in West Virginia.    The anticipated outcome of
              the proposed activity is three-fold. The first  is to promote multidisciplinary
              research by combining cellular targeting  strategies, physicochemical and
              molecular biological methods in studies  such as those  included in the current
              proposal. The second is to  establish the GMP/GLP laboratories as planned to
              support future  development in industrial applications of biological research
              and  technology/knowledge transfer to the private sectors. Thirdly, this core 
              facility will be used for long term development of competitive research  and
              funding by federal and/or industrial sources.
