Title       : MPWG: The Douglass Science Institute Program Series: Encouraging Precollege
               Women to Persist in Math and Science Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  1996  
File        : a9450588

Award Number: 9450588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lola E. Rogers                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99786              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen F. Mappen emappen@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michelle O. Rosynsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450588  Mappen    The Douglass Science Institute (DSI) Program Series provides
              in-depth "hands-on" mathematics  and science experiences in a single-sex
              environment for high school women to encourage their  persistence in
              mathematics and science studies.  It is planned as a multi-year intervention
              effort.   Research and general literature on the underrepresentation of women
              in the mathematics,  science, and engineering pipeline, as well as on the
              education of girls, provide evidence that  intervention programs during the
              high school years are essential to reverse the attrition of girls  from
              mathematics and science studies.  Differential treatment, lack of
              encouragement, and of  knowledge about career options in mathematics and
              science, lead to negative attitudes towards  these disciplines, limited
              participation in curricular and extracurricular mathematics and science 
              activities, and lower achievement rates.    The Series is offered by the
              Douglass Project for Rutgers Women in Math, Science, and  Engineering, and is
              held at Douglass College, the women's undergraduate unit of Rutgers, The  State
              University of New Jersey.  The Program Series is a student-centered model that
              provides  a continuum of "hands-on" involvement in mathematics, science, and
              engineering, as well as  motivational activities, for high school women over a
              four-year period.  Students begin the  program during the summer preceeding the
              ninth grade, and will be able to continue with it over  the following three
              summers.  The program for ninth graders is the initial phase of the series.  
              Students who complete the ninth grade program are encouraged to apply for
              programs which will  take placed during the summers preceding their tenth,
              eleventh, and twelfth grade years.  The  Series incorporates many of the
              characteristics which have been found to be integral components  of "exemplary"
              intervention programs, including "hand-on" instruction and cooperative group 
              work, a multi-year, residential experience on a college campus, rol e models,
              and activities for  parents.  Funding from NSF will be used for evaluation and
              modification of the 10th grade  program (to be offered for the first time in
              1994), and for development of the first year of the  11th grade program (1995).
               The segment for Ninth Grade Women is funded primarily by the  AT&T Foundation.
               (Other supporters of the Program Series include the Merck Institute for 
              Science Education, the William Randolph Hearst Foundation, the R.W. Johnson
              Pharmaceutical  Research Institute, and the Schering-Plough Foundation.)   The
              Series can serve as model for  others in efforts to increase the numbers of
              young women in the mathematics, science, and  engineering.  ***
