Title       : SSC: "CUNY Headstart for College Continuum Summer Science Camp"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9450429

Award Number: 9450429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183498             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack M. Schlein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jason Finkelstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Concepcion R. Wibrowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY York College
	      94-20 Guy R. Brewer Boulevard
	      Jamaica, NY  11451    718/262-2060

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450429  CUNY York College  Jamaica, NY  Schlein, Jack, Jason Finkelstein
              and Concepcion Wibrowski    "CUNY Headstart for College Continuum Summer
              Science Camp"    The office of Academic Affairs of the City University of New
              York  and York College of CUNY, in collaboration with the New York City  Public
              Schools, propose to develop and implement a Head Start for  College Continuum
              (HSCC) Summer Science Camp (SSC) for  underachieving minority eighth-grade
              students who aspire to go to  college.  The proposal request of $139,970 for
              three summers will  serve 150 students--a cohort of 50 students each July--from
              1995 to  1997.  The HSCC Summer Science Camp (SSC) objectives will include  1)
              strengthening the commitment of early adolescents to remain in  school and go
              on to college; 2) illustrating the importance of  science, math and
              communication skills in our lives; 3) exposing  students to a broad range of
              participatory activities in science,  math, technology, age-appropriate
              research strategies and  interactions with minority mentors, role midels and
              practicing  scientists, engineers and mathematicians; 4) offering students 
              information and guidance in the career exploration process  including the
              academic preparation necessary for a variety of  professions; and 5)
              heightening student awareness of science,  mathematics and teaching as
              potential career choices.    The HSCC summer camp will provide a 4-week total
              immersion in  science, engineering and math (SEM).  Students' perception of SEM
               in their daily lives will be guided through study of commonplace  devices such
              as clocks, radios, and cameras.  At camp's end, they  will know why such
              devices are important scientific products.   Motivation to learn will be driven
              by students' curiosity and their  need to know why such devices work.  During
              morning  (interdisciplinary) laboratory classes, they will learn problem- 
              solving strategies in small cooperative learning groups.  In the  afternoon,
              they will "do" research projects, telecommunicati on  networking and construct
              devices related to each week's scientific  theme.  Parental involvement will be
              promoted throughout the  program.  HSCC campers will be enveloped in an ongoing
              supportive  environment that rewards students' competence.  They will gather 
              information regarding SEM career options and requirements during  interactions
              with practicing SEM role models at the college, on  weekly trips, at the NY
              State Job and Career Center and at  worksites.  Students will be guided by
              undergraduate SEM mentors  who will work with them daily.  The two-year HSCC
              follow-up program  of alternating mentoring and precollege experiences will
              reinforce,  strengthen and extend SSC objectives and their impact on students. 
               Campers ability to successfully negotiate significant turning  points in their
              lives can begin the summer before they enter HSCC  giving them a better chance
              to realize their potential in SEM and  teaching careers.  ***
