Title       : RCMS: RESEARCH INITIATION FOR SCIENCE EXCELLENCE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9450388

Award Number: 9450388
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. McHenry                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $539200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest W. Robb erobb@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ajay K. Bose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maghar S. Manhas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9132,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450388  Robb    Early introduction to research is a most effective means for
              inducing young people to choose careers in science or  medicine.  In the
              Research Initiation for Science Excellence (RISE) program, we propose bringing
              minority  (African-American and Hispanic) students into an intensive research
              environment, starting as freshmen or  sophomores in college or as high school
              senior.  Approximately 15 such students -- the RISE scholars -- will be 
              selected each year for the five years off the project.    Approximately 9
              students each year will be chose from students at Stevens Institute of
              Technology, an engineering  and science college in Hoboken, NJ and from the
              College of St. Elizabeth, a liberal arts college for women in  Morristown, NJ. 
              The remainder will be chosen from high school seniors in two inner city
              districts, Union City  and Jersey City, NJ.    The RISE scholars will receive
              stipends enabling them to participate in UPTAM (Undergraduate Projects in 
              Technology and Medicine), a 10-week residential summer research program at
              Stevens.  In addition to individual  research projects in biology, chemistry,
              and medical technology, the UPTAM participants take part in seminars and 
              colloquia, trips to research establishments, and a short course in presentation
              training.  This highly successful  program has, in its 22 year history,
              introduced over 300 college students to research.  Nearly all of these have
              gone  on to graduate or medical school.    In the past, some individual
              minority students (including some very talented high school students) have been
               successful UPTAM participants.  This proposal seeks to institutionalize the
              recruitment of minority participants on  a larger scale.    Minority students
              often find it difficult to thrive in an intense academic or research
              environment because of  inadequate training in laboratory techniques and
              deficiencies in science and mathematics background.  We are  proposing academic
              year research initiation training in laboratory and instrumen tal techniques to
              help remedy this.   Other tutoring, retention, and counseling programs for
              minority students are already available at Stevens.    Stipends for the RISE
              scholars, which along with support for summer research supervisors make up the
              major part  of the funds requested, are a necessity, since these students would
              otherwise have to take summer jobs.  Selection  as a RISE scholar will entail
              support for three summers.  Along with the academic year research and other
              proposed  activities, this should culminate in the senior year with the writing
              of an undergraduate honors thesis.    The success of this program can be easily
              evaluated, since the graduation rate of minority students in college is  known.
               We anticipate a much higher graduation rate for the RISE scholars, with many
              of them continuing on for  graduate or professional training in science.    We
              plan to continue the RISE program after the conclusion of the NSF support at
              about the same level (15 students  per year).  With demonstrated success, RISE
              scholarships should be attractive to corporate donors and to  foundations
              committed to increasing minority participation in the sciences.  Several
              potential donors, including  Hoffmann-La Roche, Schering-Plough, and Sandoz,
              who are collaborating with us on research programs for  undergraduates and
              precollege students, have already expressed interest.
