Title       : SSC: "Summer Microscopy Institute for Middle School Students"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1995      
File        : a9450302

Award Number: 9450302
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Annette M. Saturnelli asaturne@newburgh.k12.ny.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Newburgh City Sch Dist
	      124 Grand Street
	      Newburgh, NY  12550    845/563-7428

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450302  Newburgh Enlarged City School Dist.  Newburgh, NY  Saturnelli,
              Annette    "Summer Microscopy Institute For Middle School Students"    This
              program is designed to provide 50 minority 7th grade students  with the goal
              orientation needed for success.  As individual  aspires to reach a goal, only
              if he/she believes it can happen.   The goal creates the appetite for learning.
               An environment (a  uniquely designed high-technology, simulated research and 
              development facility) has been created where students will engaged  in
              problem-solving projects and provided with opportunities for  sustained
              interaction with minority role models so that they may  begin to imagine
              themselves in these roles, project themselves into  the future, and visualize
              themselves as scientists, engineers, and  science teachers.  In addition, as
              science teaching/mentoring  experience will be provided for 8 minority high
              school students,  members of the New York State Science Honor Society and
              currently  enrolled in higher level science courses.  An inservice course will 
              be conducted that will enable teachers to acquire appropriate  strategies for
              teaching science in a multi-cultural setting to  minority students and to
              develop and implement intervention  strategies for a awakening interest in and
              increasing participation  of minority students in science.  The program also
              includes  activities for the parents of the students.  The proposal focuses  on
              teams of students, equipped with advanced technology, who are  engaged in
              integrated science and math problem-solving research  appropriate for students
              entering the 7th grade.  The approach  takes advantage of and encourages the
              students' imagination and  natural curiosity with the world.  At the core of
              this learning  environment are two scanning electron microscopes, a scanning 
              tunneling microscope, and a transmission electron microscope  (already donated
              by, or on loan from, our industry/higher education  partners).  The
              interactiveness of the microscopes emphasiz es  visual and kinesthetic learning
              and addresses the need for a mode  of learning congruent with the student's
              perception of what science  education should be like today.
