Title       : SSC: "The Atlanta Science Summer Camp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9450318

Award Number: 9450318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179659             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn W. Keys   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450318  Georgia State University  Atlanta, GA  Keys, Carolyn    "The
              Atlanta Science Summer Camp"    The Atlanta Summer Science Camp is designed to
              involve minority  middle school students in an in-depth program of science and
              math  activities, career exploration, and reflection.  Three years of  programs
              are proposed, each with a different theme: environmental  sciences; space and
              atmospheric sciences; and plants, genetics, and  food.  It is anticipated that
              this three-year program will serve as  a prototype for the development of many
              more camps which will serve  students throughout the city of Atlanta.  Three
              major conceptual  components guide the design of camp activities: (1)
              collaborative  social interactions in science, engineering, and mathematics;
              (2)  the relationship between science, engineering, and mathematics and  the
              quality of human life; and (3) student authentic inquiry.   Instructional
              activities will emphasize: cooperative learning;  interactions with scientist
              in their work places; student design  and implementation of investigations;
              field and outdoor  experiences; "real world" contexts for learning; and
              supportive  scaffolds.  Students will participate in a variety of projects in 
              which they learn to ask questions, make predictions, design  studies, analyze
              data, and reflect on results.  Instruction on  technology as a tool for science
              and engineering will be included.   Career exploration will be integrated with
              field trips and  projects.  A special feature of this camp is the provision for
               comprehensive teacher education in cooperative learning, authentic 
              investigation, constructivism, technology, and authentic  assessment.  This
              project is being sponsored by the Aslant  Math/Science Collaborative Leadership
              Team including members from  the city of Atlanta, Atlanta Public Schools,
              Georgia State  University, Georgia Institute of Technology, Clark Atlanta 
              University, and Jimmy Carter's Atlanta Project.
