Title       : Proposal to Develop WINSM Consortium Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1994 
File        : a9450573

Award Number: 9450573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Anderson                     
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Swenson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bonita M. Neas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Perna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9450573  Swenson  Proposal to Develop WINSM Consortium Infrastructure  Seven
              universities from Wyoming, Idaho, North Dakota, South  Dakota, and Montana
              propose to work together on an intensive one-  year program to build the
              foundation for the WINSM Consortium.    The WINSM Consortium, for the first
              time, brings together five  EPSCoR states which have much in common, including
              low population  density, similar geographic and climatic conditions and natural
               resource-based economies which are currently in transition.  The  Consortium
              enables the five states to collectively pursue  opportunities in science,
              technology, and economic development  which might otherwise be beyond their
              individual capabilities or  available resources, with the overall goal of
              improving the  quality and effectiveness of the five state's science and 
              technology infrastructure.    During the funding period of this one-year
              proposal to NSF  EPSCoR, WINSM plans to establish the foundation necessary for
              the  five states to more effectively build on common strengths,  address common
              problems, and explore common opportunities in  science, technology, and
              industrial interaction. To this end,  this proposal will provide the start-up
              funding needed to: (1)   provide technical assistance to both faculty research
              teams and  small businesses throughout the region to develop and pursue 
              funding for research and technology transfer programs; and (2)   initiate
              working relationships with the Idaho National  Engineering Laboratory (INEL),
              other government facilities, and  with industry to help the Consortium meet its
              goals.    It is envisioned that at the end of this one-year funding period, 
              two to three major research initiatives will be developed by the  WINSM
              Consortium, including one which will develop regionally  appropriate
              environmental technologies involving the Idaho  National Engineering
              Laboratory, and another which will address  rural manufacturing development.  A
              number of smaller inter-and  intra-state research programs ar e also
              anticipated as a result of  this start-up activity.  In addition, the
              administrative  framework needed to sustain long-term collaboration between the
               five states will be in place.
