Title       : MPWG: Experiment Based Physics for Girls in Elementary and Middle Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9450533

Award Number: 9450533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dawn M. Pickard                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99790              (Estimated)
Investigator: Meera Chandrasekhar meerac@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca Q. Litherland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450533  Chandrasekhar    The project is a collaboration between the
              investigator, a  professor in the Physics Department at the University of
              Missouri,  and the Science Coordinator of the Columbia Public School  system. 
              This third year funding will permit development and  implementation of an
              experiment-based, hands-on program which will  introduce girls in the 5th, 6th
              and 7th grades to the physical  sciences.  For units in Optics, Sound,
              Electricity, Magnetism and  Mechanics, and Energy/Rockets, a series of modules
              will be  developed.  Each will develop a concept (e.g., the reflection of 
              light) through a series of logically sequential games, simple  experiments,
              building of gadgets, toys, art projects, and  laboratory experiments using
              simple scientific equipment and "gee  whiz" exploratorium-style exhibits.  By
              introducing the girls to  a number of different ways of observing and using the
              same  concepts, we will allow them to see how a simple concept is  developed on
              a logical basis to understand complex scientific  phenomena.  Through this
              program, we expect to motivate the girls  by conveying that science is fun, but
              more importantly,  familiarizing them with simple scientific equipment,
              developing  their building and experimenting skills, and their capabilities of 
              logical reasoning.    This effort initially was set up for grades 5 and 6 as an
               extra-curricular program, meeting twice a week for four weeks.  By  the end of
              the 1993-94 academic year, the Optics unit will have  been tested in seven of
              the eighteen schools, and the Mechanics  unit in two schools.  The Sound and
              Electricity/Magnetism units  will be ready for testing in the Fall 1994.  The
              popularity of the  program among girls, parents, and teachers has resulted in
              this  proposal to expand the effort to integrate some of the material  into the
              regular curriculum for grades 5,6 and 7, in addition to   to including the 7th
              graders in Columbia's new middle schools.  The  project's expansion led to the
              following additional acti vities for  this third year:  (a) reorganization of
              the material by grade  levels and its classification as curricular and extra-
              or  co-curricular; (b) integration of the material into the grades 5-7 
              curriculum; (c) establishing co-curricular activities in the new  middle
              schools (grades 6-7); (d) training for teachers in grades  5-7; and (e)
              development of modules for one new unit on energy and  rockets.  ***
