Title       : RCMS: Research Careers for Minority Scholars Program at City College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1997  
File        : a9450353

Award Number: 9450353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neville Parker parker@tidis0.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9132,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450353  Parker    RCMS at the City College of the City University of New York,
              Phase II    In the second phase of RCMS funding, City College of the City
              University of New York proposes an ongoing  comprehensive effort aimed at
              encouraging minority students to enter research careers in engineering and 
              science, beginning with the recruitment of potential RCMS Scholars from City
              College undergraduates and  culminating in their placement in appropriate
              doctoral programs.  The hear of the program to shaping the next  generation of
              minority researchers in Phase II will continue to be a four-year multifaceted
              approach based on a  careful balancing of enrichment programs, research
              experience, academic counseling, professional counseling,  communications
              development, community awareness, summer internships, and graduate school
              counseling.    RCMS shall of course continue to draw on the resources of the
              many existing special programs for outstanding  students at the College, but
              the RCMS Scholars will continue to have many additional opportunities for
              academic  enrichment.  Through their involvement with faculty mentors, RCMS
              scholars continue to be given first-hand  experience with scientific research. 
              In addition, RCMS will continue to provide an environment where Scholars  can
              become actively involved members of a close-knit community of scholars and
              students from several  disciplines.  RCMS Scholars, both among themselves and
              along with scholars from similar program, will  participate in a number of
              activities that draw them together as a group, teaching and learning from one
              another,  as well as from the faculty, each Scholar guided and supported in a
              wide range of experiences that comprise his  or her apprenticeship as a
              prospective researcher.  Moreover, the program not only will benefit the
              intended  group of RCMS Scholars and increase the probability that they will
              pursue careers as researchers, but will also  enrich the academic experience of
              all students and faculty at the College.  This eff ort to recruit researchers
              is  envisioned as at once the hub of various special activities on campus and
              as a means of bringing into clearer  focus a great many key issues in the
              effort to increase the numbers of minority researchers in science and 
              engineering.    RCMS shall also continue to draw on other resources by
              continuing to forge collaborative relationships with  colleges, universities,
              research laboratories and community-based organizations.  With a highly
              successful  summer internship program already in place with several
              universities across the United States, RCMS is already  well positioned to
              significantly expand on the summer internship program.    RCMS, in Phase II,
              will maintain a steady state of 60 RCMS undergraduate scholars as well as 15
              "AMP  Affiliates" -- New York Alliance undergraduate students transferring from
              community colleges to the RCMS.   The total cost of the project over a four
              year period will be $2,514,845, with NSF providing $1,669,663, City  College
              contributing $545,212, and CUNY-AMP providing $300,000 for "AMP Affiliates,"
              with $30,000 for  supplies.  RCMS will in turn provide ancillary support to all
              AMP students at City College consisting of  enrichment activities, counseling,
              mentoring, communications workshops, monthly scholars' meetings and the  like. 
              RCMS will also seek out additional funding.    An evaluation will be conducted
              to learn the extend to which the program has been successful in identifying and
               fostering the development of students who go on to careers as research
              scientists and engineering.  This  assessment will involve direct measurement
              of the impact of the program upon students and learning from  mentors and other
              associated faculty how they view the program's accomplishments.  To these ends,
              pre- and  post-program evaluation instruments will be designed, applied, and
              analyzed.
