Title       : Practical Numerical Algorithms for Large Eigenvalue Computations (Mathematics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9450081

Award Number: 9450081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110815             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane K. Cullum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on devising and analyzing practical  numerical algorithms
              for the solution of large nonsymmetric  eigenvalue problems.  Such problems
              arise frequently in the  numerical simulation or analysis of physical or
              man-made systems in  many different disciplines.  The algorithms are based upon
              Lanczos  recursions, are not application specific but will be tested on 
              matrices arising in various applications.  Arnoldi algorithms will  also be
              considered but only as they relate to Lanczos algorithms.   The basic forms of
              both these types of methods do not explicitly  transform the iteration matrix,
              and this is crucial for very large  matrices.  These algorithms are of interest
              because they appear to  be able to compute other portions of the spectrum in
              addition to  the magnitude dominant eigenvalues, and preliminary numerical 
              experiments indicate that this is a very promising approach.  There  are
              however many open questions about both the applicability and  viability of
              nonsymmetric Lanczos procedures.  Therefore, the  overall goals of this
              research are understanding the strengths and  weaknesses of both of these types
              of methods, their applicability,  and what is required to obtain practical
              robust Lanczos algorithms.  This research will be a combination of analysis and
              extensive  numerical experiments.    Three types of interactive activities
              being carried out are:  (1)  A graduate course on practical numerical
              algorithms for large scale  eigenvalue problems; (2) A 'field-directed'
              interdisciplinary  seminar with a significant proportion of women speakers; and
              (3) A  brown bag lunch series for women students only, designed to serve  as
              counselling sessions on any topics proposed by the students.
