Title       : PPD: Engaging, Recruiting, Retaining Students with Disabilities in SEM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1996  
File        : a9450019

Award Number: 9450019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1418141            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Barner barner@eecis.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Foulds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1203,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD   #9450019 University of Delaware Kenneth Barner, Principal Investigator
              "Engaging, Recruiting, Retaining Students with disabilities in Science,
              Engineering, and Math"        &  ABSTRACT   This Experimental Project addresses
              the inclusion of individuals with disabilities in science, engineering and math
              (SEM) education.  The goal of the project is to engage, recruit, and retain
              individuals with disabilities in SEM educational programs so that the current
              under representation of these individuals in both SEM educational programs and
              professions will be reversed.  The project attempts to demonstrate a model
              comprised of specific activities that will eliminate the attitudinal, physical,
              and curriculum barriers that combine to keep individuals with disabilities from
              pursuing SEM studies and careers.  Six project tasks have been designed to
              attack the barriers to full inclusion in SEM education.  (1) Conduct of
              regional outreach programs:  Families, counselors, and faculty will be given
              awaremess training, solutions seminars, and abilities demonstrations.  These
              activities will be designed to provide the targeted audiences with relevant
              information concerning the impediments faced by people with disabilities and
              many practical and technolgy based solutions used by individuals with
              disabilities to overcome the impediments and to participate actively in SEM. 
              In addition, individuals and their schools will receive technical assistance in
              overcoming their barriers.  (2) Conduct of extracurricular SEM programs: 
              Existing extracurricular SEM programs will b3 updated to allow participation by
              all students.  Students with Disabilities will then be enrolled in the updated
              programs and c amps.  These extra curricula activities will serve to provide
              positive SEM experimeences that should lead to increased numbers of students
              with disabilities who are interested and engaged in SEM studies.  (3)
              Establishment of electronic mentoring:  A mentoring program based on electronic
              communication will be established.  Students, faculty, and professional with
              disabilities and SEM interests will communicate, exchage ideas, and access SEM
              resources through the Internet.  (4) Development of a cirtual laboratory:  A
              virtual SEM laboratory will be designed and tested.  This computer based
              laboratory will minimize the physical requirments and allow all students access
              to laboratory equipment through the integratioon of instrumentation and the use
              of simulation solftware with powerful workstations.  This laboraotry will be
              used in existing University of Delaware SEM courses to offer laboratory
              experiences to a wide range of students.  It will not be a special laboratory
              restricted to individuals with disabilities, rather it will be a general
              laboratory that is designed to be useable by everyone.      h)          0*0*0* 
                      (5) Development of accessible inquiry based SEM educational
              experiences:  An inquiry based approach to SEM problem solving that is
              accessible to all students will be developed.  The problem solving approach to
              pre college level SEM education will be packaged and disseminated so that all
              students will be able to share equally in SEM curricula.  (6) Conduct of
              information dissemination:  The approach taken throughout this project is to
              maximize the use of existing programs that can be modified and made accessible.
               The regional outreach, extra curricular experiences, and mentoring can be
              replicated in most regions of the nation.   The design of new laboratories and
              curricula will be disseminated to a number of organizations interested in
              improving SEM education for the population in general.  The results of his
              project are intended to influence other organizations to make thei r improved
              curricula accessible.  Together, the six areas of project activity are meant to
              form a comprehensive model for increasing the number of individuals with
              disabilities in SEM.  Results of each task will be documented and disseminated
              extensively. ***                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
