Title       : AMP: OKLAHOMA STATE ALLIANCE for MINORITY PARTICIPATION in SCIENCE, ENGINEERING,
               and MATHEMATICS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9450355

Award Number: 9450355
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4605354            (Estimated)
Investigator: Earl D. Mitchell   (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9350355  Mitchell    The Oklahoma Alliance for Minority Participation in
              Science, Engineering And Mathematics  (OKAMP-SEM), comprising twenty-seven
              universities and colleges within the state of  Oklahoma, has been established
              to address the critical under-supply of minority students  pursuing degrees in
              SEM.  The participating institutions include three research universities, 
              Oklahoma State University, University of Oklahoma, and University of  Tulsa;
              Langston  University, Oklahoma's Historically Black University; one large
              metropolitan and urban  university, University of Central Oklahoma, nine
              regional universities of the state system; eleven  two-year colleges including
              Bacone College, a private American Indian College and three other  private
              colleges and universities.   The alliance will also consist of corporate and
              community  based organizations including representations from tribal entities. 
              The 1990 U.S. Census shows  Oklahoma to have the highest American Indian
              population in the United States (8% American  Indian, 7.4% African American,
              2.7% Hispanic and 1.1% Asian/Pacific Islanders).  The  Alliance institutions
              together enroll over 2000 minority students with undergraduate majors in  SEM. 
              The three research universities have over 150 minority students pursuing
              graduate study  in these fields.  Oklahoma has the largest proportion of
              American Indian students of any state.   Southeastern and Northeastern Oklahoma
              State Universities have the highest enrollment in the  state and confer more
              B.S. degrees to American Indians respectively than any institution in the 
              United States.  The primary objective of this program is to have a 15% increase
              annually of the  number of underrepresented minorities enrolled and graduating
              in SEM fields of study moreover  to increase the number of graduate students in
              these fields.  The activities that will be carried  out under the Alliance
              represent logical extensions to support the goals and objectives of the 
              OKAMP-SEM as outlined by NSF and to support  programs that are currently in
              operation in one  or more of the units of OKAMP-SEM.  A major component of the
              program is identification,  recruitment and retention of these underrepresented
              student groups.  The specific components  of this program are 1) a Summer
              Bridge Program for students who have graduated from high  school and are
              entering SEM programs immediately following their graduation and for students 
              who are transferring from a two year to a four year institution, 2) an academic
              year scholarship  program for students chosen as OKAMP-SEM Scholars and 3) a
              Summer Internship designer  to give OKAMP-SEM Students a research experience. 
              The request for $4.99 million is  supported by $1.73 million in funds committed
              from the participating institutions.  The progress  and success of the program
              will be documented by monitoring the student progress and by  tracking the
              students over time.  A quantitative summary along with a narrative report on
              the  individual and group success of participants will be disseminated through
              brochures and  publicity.  Because this is a state alliance, it will serve as a
              model that can be used by other  states to form similar consortia.
