Title       : RCMS: RESEARCH CAREERS FOR MINORITY SCHOLARS AT TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1995      
File        : a9450300

Award Number: 9450300
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $994000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karan L. Watson watson@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail E. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cesar O. Malave  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450300  Watson    Research Careers for Minority Scholarsat Texas A&M University
                 The primary focus of the Research Careers for Minority Scholars (RCMS)
              Program at Texas A&M  University (TAMU) is to increase the number of minority
              students in science, engineering and math  (SEM) and in the social and
              behavioral sciences (SBS) disciplines who graduate at the B.S. level with 
              strong, comprehensive research experience and enter graduate programs leading
              to careers in  academic, government or industry.  Far too few minorities attend
              graduate school in most fields, but  especially in SEM fields.  National data
              shows that approximately 20% of SEM students attend  graduate school
              immediately following the reception of their Bachelor Degree each year, but
              because  minority enrollments in graduate school are so low we would like to at
              least double that percentage.    The proposed five-year funding will support 70
              RCMS students, 60 will be supported in the SEM  disciplines and 10 in the NSF
              supported SBS disciplines.  Participants in the RCMS program at  TAMU are
              selected from undergraduate under-represented minority students at Texas A&M 
              University who have a GPA of 3.0 or greater.  Half of the students in the
              program over the past five  years have been minority women.      Junior and
              Senior students are actively involved in research projects with faculty
              mentors.  They also  service as role models through their involvement in RCMS
              outreach activities to public schools with  high minority enrollments. 
              Freshmen and sophomore participants attend a  variety of seminars  designed to
              introduce them to the research opportunities available nationally and at TAMU. 
              These  seminars are hosted by faculty research mentors, senior minority
              scholars, representatives from other  research institutions, and professional
              from private sectors.    Other core activities of the RCMS program include
              participation in faculty mentorship, presentations  at the RCMS/AMP Research
              Symposium. special Research Problem Courses, AS URT ( A Seminar in  University
              Research and Teaching), RCMS Meetings (GRE Preparations, Summer Internships, 
              Fellowships), RCMS/AMP Student Teaming in Research, and Ph.D. Pipeline
              Bridging.    TEES will be matching funds with PI, Co-PI, Graduate Student and
              program Coordinator salaries and  fringe benefits.  TEES will also match 45% of
              the modified total direct cost.    We propose to get more undergraduate who are
              under-represented minorities to graduate with a B.S.  and enter graduate school
              in one of the SEM/SBS disciplines.  This RCMS program will be a  continuation
              of a five year program that was implemented in 1989.  130 students 
              participated in that  program and  52% have graduated with a  B.S. with 44% of
              them currently enrolled in a graduate  program and 13% are currently working on
              a Ph.D.    Participants will present their research project findings at a
              conference/symposium to faculty,  administrators, industry supports and program
              directors.  The program coordinator and PI's will also  present the RCMS
              program at conferences such as ASEE, NAMEPA.
