Title       : SSC: "The Biosphere of Tomorrow-Summer Science Camp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1994    
File        : a9450492

Award Number: 9450492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290644             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herb Bryce   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mike Reed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Seattle Central Cmty Col
	      1701 Broadway
	      Seattle, WA  981222413    206/587-3800

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9450492  Seattle Central Community College  Seattle, WA  Bryce, Herb and
              Teresa Tipton    "The Biosphere Of Tomorrow-Summer Science Camp"    The
              Biosphere Of Tomorrow is a partnership of the Seattle Central  Community
              College, The Seattle School District, and The Breakfast  Group in conjunction
              with Seattle area businesses to implement a  four-week exploratory summer
              science camp for underrepresented male  and female middle-school students.  The
              camp will utilize classroom  and lab facilities at Seattle Central Community
              College.  The goal  of the program is to motivate underachieving minority
              students to  pursue science, math and technology studies as they continue in 
              school.  Activities are designed to increase awareness of the  region's
              environment and how urbanization has affected water  quality in the Puget Sound
              region.  The camp will serve  approximately 75 students recruited from Seattle
              area middle  schools with the assistance of counselors, teachers, community 
              organizations, case workers, churches and parents.  Careers in  Electronics,
              Engineering, Computer Science, Biotechnology and  Environmental Science have
              been targeted for their job growth  potential in Washington state.    The
              Biosphere Of Tomorrow integrates activities in life, earth and  physical
              sciences with math and computers to current social and  environmental issues. 
              Principles from these areas will be linked  to daily life through experiments,
              design problems,field studies  and collaborative group problem-solving
              activities.  Sessions will  be held six hours a day, Monday through Thursday,
              with Fridays  devoted to field studies.  Students rotate in teams attending
              team-  taught sessions with professionals from the representative fields.   The
              camp will focus on water quality, exploring the hydrologic  cycle, watershed
              management, conservation, pollution, and hazardous  waste disposal.  Uses of
              water, including the generation of  electricity and its role in the economic
              vitality of the region  will be explored.  S tudents will conduct longitudinal
              site studies  examining impacts to water quality.  Water samples will be 
              collected and analyzed from four diverse sites in Puget Sound.  An  overnight
              "Camp-In" will be held at the Pacific Science Center.   Years two and three,
              students will grow bacteria that produce  plastic naturally and learn how to
              extract DNA from cultures.   Results from site studies will be utilized from
              year to year  tracing impacts to water quality in the region over time. 
              Problem-  solving exercises, probability, statistics, entering data into 
              spreadsheets and graphs, and visual documentation will integrate  lab
              activities with math and computer studies.  Students will learn  software
              authoring skills in order to produce a multi-media  presentation and display of
              their group's results for a culminating  event open to the public.  Hot lunches
              and daily transportation are  provided.  At the end of the camp, students are
              recognized with a  certificate and take-home science kit.  Two scholarships to
              camps  at the Pacific Science Center will be awarded to a boy and a girl 
              selected by faculty.    Teaching Assistants will recruited from high school and
              college  minority science programs including Math, Engineering, Science 
              Achievement (MESA), and the Minority Teaching Academy to work with  community
              mentors in the camp.  Career assistance workshops, a  parent outreach event and
              follow-u  activities during the school  year are included to reinforce and
              support the efforts of the  program.  A corresponding in-service teacher
              training institute  will be offered to fifteen Washington state teachers to
              develop  culturally relevant, anti-bias science teaching strategies with at- 
              risk students.  ***
