Title       : Advanced Communications Mentor Network for Enhancing Research Competitiveness in
               Maine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9450568

Award Number: 9450568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Anderson                     
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Terry Shehata shehata@mstf.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Thibeault  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert M. Kidd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry Bourgeois  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Maine Sci & Technol Fdn
	      P. O. Box 707
	      Augusta, ME  043320707    207/621-6350

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,9139,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 568  Thibeault  Advanced Communications Mentor Network for Enhancing
              Research     The Maine Science and Technology Foundation (MSTF), in 
              collaboration with the Maine Development Foundation and the Maine  Department
              of Economic and Community Development, proposes a pilot  network that will
              provide one-on-one mentor firm-researcher  clusters for access and utilization
              of advanced communication  technologies.  The immediate goals of this project
              are:    o  Identify, develop, and implement user-specific solutions  involving
              the application of advanced communication tools to  increase research and
              technology development productivity and  competitiveness.    o  Evaluate
              approaches by which the research and development  productivity and
              competitiveness of end-users in a cluster  partnership are enhanced through
              applications of advanced  communications tools.    o  Foster extended
              industry/faculty collaborations among cluster  members.    o  Evaluate the
              efficacy and sustainability of local mentoring  capabilities for advanced
              communications in the Portland, Orono,  and Presque Isle regions in Maine.    o
               Develop and implement a systematic approach to maximizing the  creation and
              sharing of knowledge available with Maine, as well as  throughout the world.   
              With assistance from the host institution and mentors, each  industry/faculty
              cluster will be exposed to a variety of advanced  communications technologies
              which support four key task areas; they  are basic tasks, but capture what
              needs to occur more often in  Maine:  (a) mail and file transfer; (b)
              informational retrieval and  bulletin board development; (c) teleconferencing
              technology use  related to collaborative research and development partnerships 
              among business, higher education, and not-for-profit research  organizations;
              and (d) distance-based research and employment.   Cluster members would develop
              research collaboration opportunities  to be supported by appropriate advanced
              communication technologies  they would select after a n intensive awareness
              process.  Each  collaborative pilot research proposal would be peer reviewed
              under  the direction of the Research Excellence Partnership, Maine  EPSCoR's
              Steering Committee.  Funds would be made available, on a  competitive basis, to
              go through a planning effort with the end  point of developing a comprehensive
              proposal to an appropriate  federal agency.  A component of the effort would
              specifically  encourage submission to the Small Business Innovation Research 
              (SBIR) and the Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) programs.             
                                                                                             
                          Senior Program Director
