Title       : AMP: ALL-NATIONS ALLIANCE FOR AMERICAN INDIANS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9450369

Award Number: 9450369
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5280560            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph F. McDonald   (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Salish Kootenai Coll
	      P O BOX 117
	      Pablo, MT  598550117    406/675-4800

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9450369  Young    American Indians are the least represented of all minorities
              in Science, Engineering and  Mathematics (SEM).  The overall goal of this
              project is to establish a comprehensive interactive  All-Nations Alliance and
              network to increase substantially the quality and quantity of American  Indians
              receiving baccalaureate degrees and graduate degrees in SEM.  The foundation of
              this  alliance is 24 participating tribal colleges located in the following
              nine (9) states: MT, WA, ND,  SD, NE, MN, MI, WI, KS.  The tribal colleges are
              the functional units of the alliance  developing and implementing project
              activities, recruiting and selecting students, tracking  students, maintaining
              a comprehensive telecommunications network, establishing retention  programs,
              and providing student support services.  The alliance will develop and
              implement  innovative programs with input from both the Indian community and
              the SEM community to  enhance matriculation of American Indian students at the
              following three critical transition  points:  (1) high school to college
              (tribal/community/four-year); (2) two-year college  (tribal/community) to
              four-year SEM degree-granting institutions; and (3) four-year institutions  to
              doctoral degree-granting programs in SEM fields.  Tribal colleges will develop
              a pipeline  network by establishing linkages with local middle/high schools and
              four-year SEM degree-  granting institutions.  Through this unique longitudinal
              pipeline networking program, the All-  Nations Alliance proposes to increase
              the numbers of American Indians receiving baccalaureate  and doctoral degrees
              in science and engineering by six to ten-fold by the year 2000.  One of the 
              objectives of this proposal is to reduce by a least one half the
              dropout/stopout rate for American  Indians in the education pipeline with
              effective retention programs.  The All-Nations Alliance  will be supervised by
              a Governing Board and administered by two institutions: Salish Kootenai 
              College (SKC), a tribal college, and M ontana State University (MSU), a SEM
              degree-granting  institution.  Initially, SKC, working closely with 23 tribal
              colleges, will be responsible for  programmatic activities and MSU will be
              responsible for fiscal management.  By Years 4 and  5 of the five year program,
              both programmatic and fiscal management will be transferred to  SKC and the
              participating tribal colleges.  The All-Nations Alliance will establish a
              collaborative  network of research scientists at universities and research
              laboratories to serve as mentors for  American Indian students.  In addition,
              the alliance will establish productive linkages and  partnerships with other
              SEM-based programs, businesses, industry, organizations, state/federal 
              agencies and foundations.  The two lead institutions, SKC and MSU, offer a
              comprehensive  array of in-kind contributions to the project.  Additional
              sources of support for this project in  cost sharing/matching have been
              identified by the tribal colleges through other grants and  foundations. 
              Project evaluation and assessment will be a continuous process and will follow
              the  NSF User Friendly Handbook.  A seven (7) person Extramural Peer Evaluation
              Team will  conduct periodic detailed evaluations of program activities,
              accomplishments, and identify  specific needs and deficiencies.  Information on
              successful programs will be disseminated to  other institutions via monthly
              newsletters, telecommunications, video tapes, and annual reports.  ***
