Title       : 21st Century Scholars for 21st Century Careers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0220841

Award Number: 0220841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380168             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane T. Warren diane.warren@jcjc.cc.ms.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herman Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy Graves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jones County Junior Colleg
	      900 South Court Street
	      Ellisville, MS  39437    601/477-4115

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing a scholarship program for students entering the
              degree programs developed through the activities of The Southeast Consortium
              for Advanced Network Technology Education (SCANTE). The level of intensity of
              these advanced network technology degree programs dictates that students in
              these programs devote a great deal of time to their studies. In addition,
              work-based learning experiences give students the necessary job experience to
              enter into the workforce and/or further their education. Full time faculty
              educated and trained by the SCANTE activities direct this project.

The
              project objectives are to:
1. Increase the numbers of well educated and
              skilled employees in technical areas of national need by targeting recruitment
              efforts toward females, minorities, nontraditional students, and
              first-generation college students;
2. Improve educational opportunities for
              students in the following disciplines: Advanced Computer Network Technology ---
              Local Area Networking, Wide Area Networking; Computer Programming; Internet
              Development Technologies; Computer Servicing Technology; and Telecommunications
              Technology;
3. Increase retention of students to degree achievement (A.A.S. or
              an A.A. degree) by providing mentoring and work-based learning experiences;
4.
              Increase success in transfer of students into baccalaureate degree programs by
              increasing the initial communication between the student and the faculty in the
              baccalaureate degree program;
5. Improve student support programs through
              faculty, industry, and peer mentoring of students; successful student
              participation in work-based learning opportunities; on campus student seminars
              focusing on workplace behaviors, attitudes, and dress; and
6. Strengthen
              partnerships between Jones County Junior College and the industries in the
              southeastern United States through participation of the industries in JCJC job
              fairs, work-based learning opportunities, mentoring of students, and the hiring
              of graduates; participation of industries in student field trips and
              presentations to student organizations.

