Title       : Modeling Adsorption in Complex Porous Structures: Equilibrium, Hysteresis and
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0220835

Award Number: 0220835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299794             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Monson monson@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1238,5209,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Peter A. Monson, University of Massachusetts - Amherst

"Modeling Adsorption
              in Complex Porous Structures: Equilibrium, Hysteresis and Dynamics"

This
              research will use molecular modeling to understand the behavior of fluids
              confined in porous materials with complex pore structures. The primary goal is
              to develop a more refined understanding of how the combined effects of
              molecular interactions and the structure of the porous material over several
              length scales yield particular kinds of adsorption behavior. This understanding
              is central to important applications such as separations and catalysis, as well
              as in porous materials characterization. A combination of dynamical as well as
              equilibrium modeling techniques is a central feature of this project. Two
              complementary areas of research are planned.

In the first area the PI is
              concerned with coarse-grained lattice models of adsorption/desorption in
              complex pore structures. The goal of this work is to develop a framework for
              understanding the relationship between adsorption measurements and the porous
              material microstructure - particularly for states in the capillary condensation
              and hysteresis regime. The recent work has shown that coarse-grained lattice
              models provide important insights into hysteresis and the PI seeks to build on
              this in several ways. In the proposed work the PI will extend the range of
              materials that can be treated by this approach, including applications to a
              variety of mesoporous silica materials, and apply the approach to analysis of
              intrusion/extrusion hysteresis in mercury porosimetry.

The second research
              area is concerned with the dynamics of adsorption and desorption. The PI's goal
              here is to use simulations that mimic dynamic uptake experiments to investigate
              the stability of states in the hysteresis region. The PI has used this approach
              to establish the significance of the hysteresis loops encountered in Monte
              Carlo simulations and to investigate the role of pore blocking in hysteresis.
              The proposed work deals with dynamical simulations of coarse-grained lattice
              models as well as application to mercury porosimetry. The PI also plans to
              extend these techniques to the study of wetting dynamics in confined geometries
              in the context of nanotechnology applications.

Broader Impact: The research
              while fundamental is closely linked with application, especially in the context
              of porous materials characterization. Traditionally engineers and others using
              porous materials have had to view the porous material microstructure using
              rather imprecise quantities like the pore volume, surface area and pore size
              distribution. It is anticipated that the project could provide a foundation for
              a new approaches to the characterization of porous materials. There is
              substantial potential impact in applications of porous materials ranging from
              traditional areas such as catalysis and separations to emerging areas in
              nanotechnology.

The research program has a strong educational component
              through the involvement of graduate students, postdoctoral scholars and
              undergraduates. The students regularly attend and present their work at major
              conferences. Research group meetings are designed in part to develop the
              ability of students to communicate their research achievements, and our
              graduate students participate in teaching undergraduate courses as an
              educational requirement of their degree program. 

The project features
              collaboration with industry (Quantachrome Corporation) as well as an
              international collaboration with researchers at the Technical University of
              Berlin, Germany.

