Title       : Advancing Science in Central-South Texas - ASICST
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0220742

Award Number: 0220742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dick Whipple dwhipple@swtjc.cc.tx.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Swink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Blaine Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manuel Alejandro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Messinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas Jr College
	      Garnerfield Road
	      Uvalde, TX  78801    830/278-4401

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Southwest Texas Junior College (SWTJC) serves a vast rural region encompassing
              eleven counties (16,812 square miles) and is home to 215,000 residents. The
              vast majority of residents are Hispanic reflecting the College's 78% Hispanic
              student population. Located in the extreme southwest corner of the state of
              Texas, the area is characterized by high poverty, high illiteracy, low
              educational attainment, high unemployment, is the poorest in the state and one
              of the poorest in the nation. Southwest Texas Junior College is a comprehensive
              open-door institution that provides quality Associate Degree and Certificate
              programs with campuses located in Crystal City, Del Rio, Eagle Pass and Uvalde,
              Texas. 

This project creates a Scholarship program to be awarded to students
              in the discipline areas of Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics.
              Thirty scholarships are awarded each year at $1,515 per semester ( $3,030 per
              year). Award recipients are selected on the basis of low-income guidelines, a
              submitted application, interview and written statement and assessment of career
              goals. A campus ASICST Scholarship Committee selects qualified students for
              awards. Awarded students must maintain a 3.0 GPA and continue in a Computer
              Science, Engineering or Mathematics career path until graduation to remain
              eligible for continued assistance.

The goal of this project is to encourage
              and enable academically talented, financially disadvantaged persons to enter
              the high technology workforce following completion of an associate,
              baccalaureate, or graduate degree in Computer Science, Engineering or
              Mathematics. The project uses a combination of expanded scholarship
              opportunities, a rigorous recruitment plan, mentor-designed workshops, industry
              involvement, career placement and student support structures delivering
              services such as academic enrichment, advising, tutoring, mentoring and career
              exploration. The specific objectives are to; 1) decrease the attrition rate for
              students between the first and second years, with 90% (27) of spring semester
              scholarship recipients returning to school the following fall semester; 2)
              eighty percent (24) of scholarship awardees complete an Associate Degree
              program; and 3) 75% (18) transfer to a four-year institution to continue their
              studies. Scholarships are renewable for two years at Southwest Texas Junior
              College and two years at a four-year institution of their choice to complete a
              Baccalaureate Degree in Computer Science, Engineering or Mathematics.

