Title       : Control of Patterns in Systems With Large Numbers of Actuators and Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0220314

Award Number: 0220314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wijesuriya P. Dayawansa daya@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the emergence of micro electromechanical systems, we are fast approaching
              the days of having to understand how to control nonlinear systems containing
              massive numbers of actuators and sensors. Next generation applications such as
              holographic data storage devices, and wavelength division multiplexing, will
              require novel precision analog control methodology. At the same time,
              scientists are only beginning to get a glimpse of information processing
              activities in the brains of higher animals. It is argued that understanding
              control theoretic aspects of pattern generation in massive actuator/sensor
              arrays is central to successfully tackling these challenging technological
              problems. Representative patterns of interest will be solitary waves,
              stationary impulses, travelling waves, and spiral waves. Existing theories
              explain the stability of these patterns, but fail to address how to control
              them. A research program focussing
on controlling these patterns in desirable
              ways is outlined in the proposal. Primary mathematical tools will be (a) wave
              generation in networks with symmetry, (b) theory of solitons, (c) spiral waves,
              and (d) actuator-inhibitor equations. It is argued that feedback control
              techniques outlined in each case can advance the state-of art significantly, by
              discussing potential applications in the control of arrays of micro
              electromechanical systems, understanding signal processing aspects of the brain
              of primitive animals, and as template models of spiking networks.


