Title       : Intent and Consequence: Forestry Institutions and Community Management in
               Indonesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0220408

Award Number: 0220408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1525               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Dove michael.dove@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project will investigate how and why good intentions
              of forest co-management initiatives in Indonesia lead to unintended
              consequences. It will examine the institutional culture of and relationships
              between organizations involved in co-management, and map how these initiatives
              provide an arena to strengthen, negotiate and contest claims to forest
              resources at the local level. The Center for International Forestry Research
              (CIFOR) and its co-management initiative in East Kalimantan will be the focal
              points through which these issues are examined. The study seeks to understand
              the process of knowledge production about forests and forest dependent
              communities in Indonesia, as well as the consequences of that knowledge for
              forest dependent communities. Research objectives are as follows: (1) to
              document the processes of and identify the factors that affect selecting,
              implementing and reporting research on forest co-management in Indonesia by
              CIFOR; (2) to trace the types and flows of information between CIFOR and other
              actors at local, regional and national levels; (3) to examine how local level
              actors negotiate and contest rights and claims to forest resources and
              determine how CIFOR's co-management initiative affects these contestations and
              negotiations; (4) to compare the consequences of CIFOR's intervention with the
              initiative's intentions; and (5) to contribute to a broader theoretical
              understanding of the culture and political economy of institutions that produce
              knowledge about forests and forest dependent people. Meeting these objectives
              requires an ethnographic focus on how knowledge is produced, used and
              transformed. Over a 12-month period, multi-sited research will be conducted in
              Indonesia, employing the following methods: participant observation,
              semi-structured and open-ended interviews, and content analysis of documents.
              Using this set of methods will allow triangulation of interview, observational
              and documentary data collected from multiple sources, as well as the analysis
              of the continuities and disjunctures between data sources. On a logistical
              level, collaborating with CIFOR provides the necessary access to conduct this
              study successfully.
This study will contribute to theoretical debates
              concerned the culture and political economy of knowledge producing
              institutions, and the effects of that knowledge at global, national and local
              levels. Investigating the institutional culture of a forestry institution fills
              a major gap in the literature on development and environmental institutions. It
              also contributes to the science studies literature by investigating the nexus
              of science and management, and moving from the laboratory sciences, which has
              been most examined, to the field sciences and their application, which has been
              least studied. While most studies of forestry institution interventions at the
              village level limit their scope to village level dynamics, this study
              integrates an understanding of an intervention at the village level with an
              investigation of the institutional culture that gave rise to it, as well as
              analyzes the interplay between village and institutional realities. In doing
              so, it interrogates the assumed boundaries between western knowledge and its
              non-western subjects and between experts and those ostensibly in need of
              expertise.

