Title       : ITR: Privacy in Database-As-A-Service (DAS) Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0220069

Award Number: 0220069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharad Mehrotra sharad@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene Tsudik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,1686,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Rapid advances in networking and Internet technologies has fueled the emergence
              of the "software as a service" model for enterprise computing that enables
              organizations to outsource many Information Technology (IT) services. This
              model allows organizations to concentrate on their core business instead of
              sustaining large investments in IT. IT outsourcing results in savings from the
              economies of scale due to leveraging of hardware, software, personnel, as well
              as maintenance and upgrade costs. Outsourcing is a common practice in
              Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) and Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
              domains and it is gaining popularity in basic services such as email, storage
              and disaster protection.

This research will explore the data privacy
              challenges that arise in outsourcing data management services. Data management
              systems are among the most common, expensive, and complex software systems used
              by almost all types of organizations. In the envisioned "database as a service"
              (DAS) model, the client's data resides on the premises of the service provider
              and is accessed using SQL queries. Since clients' data as a very valuable
              asset, the service provider must implement sufficient security measures to
              guarantee data privacy. The research will explore the resulting challenges: (1)
              Privacy protection from malicious outsiders: protecting service providers from
              theft of customer data (e.g., hackers breaking into a provider's site and
              scanning all disks). (2) Privacy protection from database service providers:
              assuring that clients' encrypted data cannot be decrypted at the service
              provider. Thus, techniques to evaluate queries over encrypted data at the
              service provider need to be developed. (3) Ensuring Integrity of the Results:
              developing scalable techniques to ensure that the service provider returns
              exactly the right answer set to the client's query.
