Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships and Student Support
               Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0220628

Award Number: 0220628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Taryn M. Bayles tbayles@gl.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne M. Spence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valeri P. Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Florian A. Potra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia Morrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This four-year project increases educational opportunities at the University of
              Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) for low-income, academically talented
              students by providing scholarships and supplemental academic and student
              support services for 36 full-time students in bachelor's degree programs in
              computer science (CMSC), mathematics and statistics (MATH), chemical
              engineering (ENCH), mechanical engineering (ENME), computer engineering (CMPE),
              and information systems (IFSM). Support services include peer mentoring,
              faculty advisement, tutoring, a one-week summer orientation and career
              identification experience, and informal learning opportunities. This model is
              one that builds upon the program success of the Community College of Baltimore
              County (CCBC) CSEMS project which began in summer 2001 and is going to provide
              a doorway for easy transfer for CCBC's computer science, engineering and
              mathematics CSEMS students to UMBC's quality four-year programs.

Objectives
              include the recruitment, enrollment, graduation, and work placement of
              increased numbers of students, particularly underrepresented groups. Women are
              targeted as they are both underrepresented in computer science and engineering
              programs and over-represented in the pool of economically disadvantaged
              students at UMBC. The project also fosters an informal consortium relationship
              between UMBC and CCBC. An independent external evaluator oversees the project
              and provides data analysis on all measurable outcomes.

