Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics (CSEM) Scholarships for the 21st
               Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0220547

Award Number: 0220547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah J. Hwang dh27@evansville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joe A. Stickles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Evansville
	      P O BOX 329
	      Evansville, IN  477020329    812/477-6241

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics (CSEM)
              Scholarships for the 21st Century Program is to enable talented, economically
              challenged students to obtain undergraduate degrees in computer science,
              engineering, mathematics, or Internet technology allowing them to enter the
              workforce in their chosen field or to enter post-graduate school. The program
              has the following objectives: 
(1) Recruit talented, economically challenged
              students, particularly from our Tri-State region, and especially minorities and
              women, into majors in the CSEM disciplines. 
(2) Retain such students in these
              programs through the sophomore year and beyond. 
(3) Strengthen the current
              variety of support services for these students. 
(4) Supply ample
              opportunities for these students to engage in professional development. By
              achieving these objectives, more students will enroll and graduate in the CSEM
              disciplines at the University of Evansville.

The program offers the
              incentive of financial support for economically-challenged students, plus many
              support services and professional opportunities that increase the likelihood
              that these students will graduate with degrees in the CSEM disciplines. There
              are 40 scholarships of $2500 each year for two years being awarded to freshman
              and sophomore students. The University is continuing these scholarships to
              qualified students for their remaining junior and senior years. Recipients are
              selected by a Scholarship committee on the basis of their academic record (high
              school GPA and class rank, SAT or ACT score) and potential for success in a
              CSEM discipline as evidenced by a written essay and a letter of
              recommendation.

Students have access to the University programs and support
              services currently in place including the EXCEL Student Academic Success
              Center, the Office of Career Services, and various professional student
              organizations and conferences. In addition, to provide cameraderie among the
              CSEM Scholars, the program offers two activities specifically for the CSEM
              scholars each semester. 

