Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Design and Implementaion of RF MEMS Components
               for Wireless Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2002    
File        : a0220352

Award Number: 0220352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohammed I. El-Naggar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : W223      STATE-REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0220352
Elnaggar

Description:  This award is to support a collaborative
              project between Dr. Mohammed I. El-Naggar, Department of Electrical
              Engineering, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio and Dr. Hamed El-Simary,
              Electronics Research Institute, Cairo, Egypt.  The two investigators will focus
              their research on the microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and their interface
              circuit.  They aim to integrate passive components permitted by MEMS technology
              to implement an integrated RF system on a chip, including the integration of
              sensors and the electronics circuits on the same chip.  The deliverables from
              the various work-packages of this project will have an application in the area
              of RF circuits, which is important for industrial purposes.  

Scope:  MEMS
              technology permits the fabrication of complex mechanical shapes on a micron
              scale, and it allows production of capacitive sensors, high-Q (Quality factor)
              resonant structures for oscillators, mixers, and filters. It also allows
              fabrication of variable capacitors and suspended inductor for high frequency
              tuned oscillators. The US PI has the facilities and expertise to develop such
              devices. The project will involve design activities by the Egyptian team and
              fabrication and testing by the U.S. team.  It will facilitate transfer of
              technical know-how to Egypt and also intellectual transfer to the U.S.  The two
              teams have already done some work in this area.  Participation by industry is
              expected in assessing the degree of improvement of components.  The project
              will involve one U.S. graduate student and exchanges of visits by the Egyptian
              and the U.S. investigators. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt
              Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
              countries to carry out these cooperative activities.

