Title       : Scholarships for Undergraduate Mathematics Majors: A High-Technology Workforce
               Development Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0220430

Award Number: 0220430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Astor env-partners@comcast.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Seonja Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fairleigh Dickinson Univ
	      1000 River Road
	      Teaneck, NJ  076661996    201/692-2221

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project supports students in Fairleigh Dickinson University's (FDU) new
              program in applied mathematics. FDU's current undergraduate enrollment in the
              mathematical and computer sciences is 135 fulltime students. Approximately one
              half of these undergraduates are academically talented, but financially needy
              (as per the criteria defined by the U.S. Department of Education). FDU actively
              recruits in the New York City metropolitan area, an area of high population
              density near inner city secondary schools. Students who participate in the new
              mathematics program come from the current FDU population, from regional high
              schools and from community colleges as transfer students. 

The objectives of
              the mathematics program are to encourage and enable qualified students to enter
              the high technology workforce following completion of their BS degrees. This
              emphasis was selected by an FDU university committee because of several
              intersecting factors: 1) The northern NJ/NYC metropolitan area contains dozens
              of medium-to-large potential industrial partners who have a documented need for
              this type 
of workforce. These organizations include Merck, Pfizer,
              Bristol-Meyers Squibb (pharmaceuticals), and ISO, Aetna, Prudential and other
              casualty and life insurance firms; 2) The U.S. demographics strongly indicate a
              growing need for such a national technology workforce to keep pace with foreign
              competition in medical, pharmaceutical and actuarial research and production;
              3) There has been an ongoing national decline in numbers of students entering
              the mathematical sciences. The possible high-technology workforce shortfall in
              this strong growth area appears to be increasing. A survey of schools in the
              region revealed there are few applied and computational mathematics programs
              currently offered by regional universities. There are none that specifically
              train students to enter the high-technology workforce as statisticians or
              actuaries immediately following receipt of an undergraduate mathematics degree.
              
 

