Title       : ITR: A Completely Integrated Processor-Memory-Interconnect Architecture for Data
               Intensive Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0220106

Award Number: 0220106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandeep K. Gupta sandeep@poisson.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Luc Gaudiot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1659,1686,9215,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A new, completely-integrated processor-memory-interconnect
              (CI-PMI)
architecture model suitable for a range of
              data-intensive
applications is proposed. Compared to the existing
              processor-in-memory
(PIM) architectures, the proposed CI-PMI approach
              integrates more
completely the processing, memory, and interconnect. This is
              achieved
by starting with the classical architecture of high capacity
              memory,
namely, a binary tree of decoders with memory modules as leaves,
              laid
out as an H-tree. In the proposed model, copies of one or more types
of
              application-specific computing elements are added at different
levels of the
              memory decoder tree, desired functionality added to the
memory decoders to
              augment their role as interconnects as well as to
support desired computation,
              and, if necessary, additional interconnects
added between the
              application-specific processors, the memory modules,
and the decoders. The
              proposed architecture will be developed and
demonstrated for a data-intensive
              application, namely motion estimation
for MPEG encoding.

The results of the
              proposed research will be used to augment one
advanced class, to be taught at
              USC as well as UCI. The class will
take a top-down view of advanced
              processor-in-memory architectures
including those developed in this
              project.

The proposed research will advance the state of the art in
              computer
architecture, VLSI, and VLSI CAD, leading to faster and cheaper
              designs
for day to day computation and information retrieval, exchange,
              and
management.


