Title       : ITR: Cooperative Communication Schemes for Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0220287

Award Number: 0220287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tan F. Wong twong@ece.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Shea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yuguang Fang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In a wireless network, multiple communications devices in close proximity form a
              natural distributed antenna array. If a group of such devices transmit and
              receive in some cooperative manner, then the system performance can be
              significantly improved. This researchexplores techniques for cooperative
              transmission and reception using multiple devices. This cooperative
              communication approach is differentfrom traditional array processing because
              the distributed nature of
the communication nodes calls for network-oriented
              design approaches and processing algorithms. In particular, techniques that
              allow distributed and asynchronous processing that utilizes information
              provided by other nodes in a cluster will be considered.

For cooperative
              transmission, distributed space-time coding will be employed to take advantage
              of transmit diversity provided by the distributed array. One crucial issue for
              distributed space-time coding is that only rough synchronization between the
              nodes can be achieved. Hence space-time coding in an asynchronous setting needs
              to be considered. This leads to research on asynchronous diversity and coding
              gain analysis, symbol waveform design, and tradeoff between the complexity of
              transmitter synchronization and complexity of the decoding process.

For
              cooperative reception, distributed iterative decoding will be employed to
              obtain diversity advantage in reception. In this approach, multiple nodes form
              a distributed antenna array by collaboratively processing a received signal. By
              exchanging information in a distributed decoding process, the nodes are able to
              extract diversity from the channel and decode the message. The main obstacle to
              this approach is that there is a vast amount of information that can be
shared
              between the nodes. This problem can be solved by using iterative decoding to
              extract important information from the received signal at each node, and only
              this information is passed to other nodes. Each node will then utilize the
              information from other nodes to perform further decoding to obtain the
              diversity advantage provided by the additional information. The objective is to
              develop distributed processing techniques that allow us to obtain the maximum
              degree of
diversity advantage from the signals received at multiple receiving
              nodes, while requiring a minimum amount of information exchange between the
              nodes.

In order to make the above cooperative communication schemes work, a
              control signaling strategy has to be designed to allow sharing of information
              between nodes. More importantly, the physical-layer communication performance
              of the proposed system will be dependent on
the control signaling strategy.
              Therefore this signaling design problem will be attacked by a cross-layer
              design approach.

Analytical guidelines for designing systems employing the
              proposed cooperative communication schemes will be developed.  The expected
              results of this research can be utilized in many different commercial and
              military communication networks, such as cellular and sensor networks.

