Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Sub-Grid Spatial and Temporal
               Variability on Modeled Evaporation Fluxes in Arctic Coastal Plain Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0220944

Award Number: 0220944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7750               (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen S. Hope   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1303,1324,1352,5219,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Evaporation is a key link between the surface energy, carbon and water balances
              of Arctic tundra ecosystems. Because of the sensitivity of Arctic ecosystems to
              future change, understanding the links between changes in the surface energy,
              carbon and water balances are important for predicting the impacts of climate
              change on the global water, energy and carbon cycles. Given that the
              evaporation process is acutely non-linear, using time and space averaged inputs
              in evaporation models may potentially lead to significant errors. It is
              hypothesized that heterogeneity associated with permafrost dynamics, soil
              moisture, vegetation (vascular/non-vascular) and the occurrence of free water
              bodies (lakes) leads to large uncertainties in model estimates of evaporation
              where time and area averaged inputs are used.  This doctoral dissertation
              research project will investigate the significance of sub-grid spatial and
              temporal heterogeneity on modeled evaporation estimates at scales ranging from
              landscape (1 km2) to regions (100 km2) in Arctic Coastal Plain ecosystems. The
              significance of these effects will be examined within the framework of the
              BIOME-BGC model adapted to Arctic ecosystems. BIOME-BGC is a widely used
              ecophysiological process model designed to compute water, carbon and nutrient
              fluxes at a variety of scales. Data for model inputs, calibration, and
              validation will be derived from a combination of eddy flux tower, eddy flux
              aircraft, field, and satellite remotely sensed data. A field based, high
              resolution, geographic information system map will be developed at each eddy
              flux tower locations for improving representations of vegetation and soil
              moisture in model estimates of evaporative fluxes. While improving our
              understandings of the controls over the evaporation process in Arctic coastal
              plain ecosystems, this research provides the foundation for adapting a regional
              model of the energy, carbon, and water cycles to Arctic ecosystems.  

Arctic
              ecosystems are of particular importance to global climate change studies due to
              their sensitivity to temperature change and potential positive feedbacks that
              may amplify warming across the globe. This study seeks to integrate and
              synthesize knowledge of evaporation (a key component of the climate system) at
              multiple scales in order to improve model predictions in Arctic ecosystems.
              Additionally, this research is expected to increase our knowledge of the
              complex interactions among the atmosphere, soils, biota, and permafrost in
              Arctic ecosystems. Finally, results from this study may be used as a basis for
              developing and implementing a complete carbon, water, and nitrogen model for
              improving our understanding of the affects of climate change in Arctic tundra
              regions.   As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
              also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.


