Title       : Collaborative Research: Development of a Combined in Situ Particle Imaging
               Velocimeter /Fluorescence Imaging System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0220379

Award Number: 0220379
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra Isern                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $638757             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jules S. Jaffe jules@mpl.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Franks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PIs propose to build a new system that will image multiple wavelengths of
              fluoresced and scattered light and perform stereo particle image velocimetry
              (3D PIV) measurements. These data will enable maps of fluid flow and derived
              quantities such as strain rate, vorticity, and the dissipation rate of
              turbulent kinetic energy to be produced. Measurements will be made on identical
              scales (20 x 20 x 0.6 cm with 100 um resolution), nearly simultaneously,
              allowing in situ 3D mapping of biological distributions to microscale physical
              flows. It is proposed that the multiple imaging wavelengths will allow a degree
              of taxonomic discrimination among fluorescent particles, while the
              side-scattered light will provide images of all particles that scatter the
              excitation irradiance including most of the phytoplankton appearing in the
              fluorescence images, as well as zooplankton. The 3D PIV-multispectral imaging
              fluorometer will be mounted on a free-falling platform with a suite of
              auxiliary instruments and a water sampler for image ground-truthing that has
              already been constructed and shown to provide undisturbed views of plankton in
              the water column. Images will be captured in a plane extending below the
              platform to obtain distributions unaffected by the platform. Shipboard
              epifluorescence microscopy will be used to identify dominant organisms in the
              images.
Relating microscale distributions of plankton to microscale physical
              dynamics in the ocean has been largely limited by a lack of technology. The
              combination of multiple-wavelength imaging and PIV will allow in situ
              investigations of fluorescent particle/bulk fluorescence relationships,
              microscale distributions of plankton in relation to microscale flows, spatial
              relationships of grazers and primary producers, and physical mechanisms
              underlying fine- and microscale biological patchiness. This instrument is an
              enhancement of an existing 2D imaging fluorometer developed by the PIs that has
              only one sensing wavelength, and does not gather simultaneous physical data on
              the same scales as the fluorescence images.

