Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program (CSEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0220800

Award Number: 0220800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395256             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Sims john.sims@mcmail.maricopa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Achs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Nunez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Hodgkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Maricopa County CC Distric
	      2411 W 14th St
	      Tempe, AZ  852816941    480/731-8031

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This scholarship program serves students attending two of the ten community
              colleges of the Maricopa County Community College District (MCCCD). The goal is
              to recruit academically talented but financial disadvantaged students into the
              high technology disciplines, while providing a solid support system to help
              them succeed through degree completion and/or transfer to a four-year
              institution. The two community colleges combine their resources to enhance
              student success. Phoenix College brings an expertise in providing a solid
              infrastructure of student support services designed to promote academic
              success. Mesa Community College brings a history of curricular reform in the
              STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) disciplines and its
              unique relationships with the business community through its Business &
              Industry Institute.

Together these colleges will work towards the following
              scholarship program objectives:
(a) 90% of computer science, engineering, or
              mathematics (CSEMS) scholarship recipients make satisfactory progress in their
              program of study (12 credit hours completed with a cumulative GPA of 2.5 or
              better).
(b) 100% of recipients participate in 90% of CSEMS special
              events/activities during the semester for which they receive scholarship
              support.
(c) 85% of CSEMS scholarship recipients make satisfactory progress
              towards their educational goals (i.e., be enrolled as full-time students at a
              community college in the following semester, transfer to a university, or have
              met the requirements for/been awarded an AAS or AS degree in the targeted
              programs).
(d) One-third of CSEMS scholarship recipients are from groups that
              are traditionally underrepresented in CSEMS (women, persons with disabilities,
              Hispanic, African-American, Native American).

A CSEMS Faculty Advisor, CSEMS
              Faculty Mentors, and a CSEMS Advisory Committee that includes representation
              from financial aid, student support services, and industry representatives are
              guiding the program.  Each scholarship recipient works with the CSEMS Faculty
              Advisor to develop an Individual Education Plan. Support services include
              campus orientations (including financial aid, counseling services, advisement,
              and career centers), college visitation days, industry visits, monthly CSEMS
              support activities, and an ongoing monthly relationship with each CSEMS
              recipient's assigned CSEMS Faculty Mentor. The CSEMS Faculty Mentor not only
              monitors progress, but also works with the scholarship recipient to identify
              additional resources, such as tutoring or internship opportunities.
