Title       : Race, Ethnicity and Science: The Case of Lung Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0220237

Award Number: 0220237
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44310              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lundy Braun Lundy_Braun@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 0220237 -- Race, Ethnicity, and Science: The Case of Lung Function
Lundy
              Braun, Brown University

This award is for a professional development
              fellowship designed to enable the principal investigator (Lundy Braun) to
              acquire advanced background training in science and technology studies in order
              to study the practices by which biomedicine produces, naturalizes, and
              legitimizes notions of racial and ethnic difference.   The training takes place
              with Evelynn Hammonds, historian of science in the Science, Technology,
              and
Science Department at MIT.  Elements of the training program include
              learning the methods and modes of analysis of historical Research through
              coursework; directed reading; and participation in relevant workshops,
              colloquia, and activities of the newly established Center for the Study of
              Diversity in Science, Technology, and Medicine at MIT.  The research activities
              focus on several issues:
 i) how the technology of lung function testing has
              been deployed to produce
knowledge about race and ethnicity from the mid-19th
              century to the present; 
ii) the ways in which notions of difference became
              embedded in the practices of pulmonary and occupational medicine and why they
              have remained invisible to practitioners; 
iii) the relationship between
              popular and scientific theories of race and ethnicity; and iv) the
              socio-political consequences of the knowledge produced.

This research has
              several interrelated components. The first involves an examination of the
              explanations provided in the primary scientific literature for observed racial
              and ethnic differences in lung function. The second part of the project
              involves mapping the circulation of ideas on racial difference in lung anatomy,
              capacity, and disease in scientific disciplines -- physical anthropology,
              medicine, statistics, and epidemiology -- and popular culture, through an
              analysis of the scientific literature, conference proceedings, textbooks,
              popular journals, and newspapers. The third part examines contemporary
              understandings of the meaning of racial difference in lung function and the
              implications of those understandings in the medical subspecialties of
              occupational and pulmonary medicine through interviews with researchers,
              clinicians, and trade unionists. 

The research is to be presented at the
              annual meeting of the Society for the Social Studies of Science and should lead
              to several papers published in academic journals.  Braun also plans to develop
              a course on race and science to be offered at Brown University for
              undergraduate students on her return.  She intends to integrate science studies
              approaches into her teaching of basic science to lay people.

