Title       : Collaborative Research: INSTANT, International Nusantara STratification ANd
               Transport Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0220382

Award Number: 0220382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $924247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Sprintall jsprintall@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0219782/0220382 Gordon/Sprintall

The Indonesian Throughflow (ITF) links two
              oceans and in so doing provides a pathway for modifying the stratification
              within each of these oceans as well as sea-air fluxes that impact on such
              climate phenomena as ENSO and the Asian Monsoon. While a number of measurement
              programs have recently been undertaken in the Indonesian region, a serious
              shortcoming is their lack of temporal coherence: the data cover different time
              periods and depths in the different passages of the complex pathways linking
              the Pacific and Indian Oceans. This has lead to ambiguity of the mean and
              variable nature of the ITF, and of the transformation of the thermohaline and
              transport profiles within the interior seas. The INSTANT program, involving
              contributions of 6 countries (USA, France, Netherlands, Australia, Indonesia,
              Japan), will finally measure in a coordinated fashion the ITF in the key
              throughflow passages (Makassar Strait, Lifamatola Passage, Lombok Strait, Ombai
              Strait and Timor Passage) simultaneously. The measurements span a 3 year period
              beginning in August 2003. The INSTANT objectives are: 1) To determine the full
              depth velocity and property structure of the Throughflow and its associated
              heat and freshwater flux; 2) To resolve the annual, seasonal, and intraseasonal
              characteristics of the ITF transport and property flux; 3) To investigate the
              storage and modification of the ITF waters within the internal Indonesian seas,
              from their Pacific source characteristics to the Indonesian Throughflow water
              exported into the Indian Ocean; and 4) To contribute to the design of a
              cost-effective, long-term monitoring strategy for the ITF. The intellectual
              merit and broader impact of INSTANT is clear: a quantitative view of the ITF
              will be gained and this will establish the basis for a long term "proxy"
              monitoring system, as required to capture the low frequency ITF variability.
              The ITF waters are known to play an integral part in the global thermohaline
              circulation and in the inter-basin transfer of climate signals and their
              anomalies. The benefit to the broader oceanographic community will be to
              finally allow the ITF to be faithfully simulated within ocean and climate
              models. In addition, INSTANT will involve education for a graduate student, and
              will offer research opportunities and training to undergraduates in both
              Indonesia and the US.


