Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Holocene Climatic and Ecologic History of the
               Northern Great Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0220966

Award Number: 0220966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Cathy L. Whitlock whitlock@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1324,1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this doctoral dissertation research project are to reconstruct
              the climate, vegetation, and fire history in the northern Great Basin from an
              examination of fossil pollen and charcoal records contained in lake-sediment
              cores.  The Great Basin is a region of diverse topography, vegetation, and
              climate, and as such it provides an excellent opportunity to study the response
              of ecosystems to a wide array of environmental changes in the past.  By
              focusing on three lake sites at different elevations, this study will (1)
              elucidate the response of vegetation and fire regimes to changes in effective
              moisture, temperature, and other bioclimatic variables; (2) reconstruct the
              biogeographic history of important conifer species growing at different
              elevations; and (3) apply modern pollen-climate relations in western North
              America to identify the magnitude of past climate and vegetation changes.  Past
              changes in vegetation will be determined by changes in the relative and
              absolute abundances of pollen types in stratigraphic records.  The presence of
              plant macrofossils in the cores will help confirm species identifications in
              cases where the pollen cannot.  Variations in past fire activity will be
              inferred from changes in the rates of macroscopic charcoal accumulation in
              contiguous samples.  Interpretation of the fossil pollen data in terms of past
              climate and vegetation will be based on the quantitative relationship between
              modern pollen data and present-day climate information.  The chronology of
              environmental changes will be developed from a series of radiocarbon dates and
              lead-210 dates, as well as the age of known tephra layers.  The products of
              this study will be a better understanding of Holocene forest development at
              different elevations in the northern Great Basin, and information on the role
              of fire and climate in the ecological history.

The results of this research
              will contribute to a better understanding of (1) the effects of global climate
              change, past and present, on regional vegetation patterns and fire regimes in
              the Great Basin; (2) modern pollen-climate relations and their use in the
              reconstruction of past climates; and (3) the environmental controls on human
              activities in the northern Great Basin during the Holocene.  Since 1988, the
              western U.S. has experienced a number of large, stand-replacing fires.  In the
              year 2000 over 8 million acres burned in the U.S., and in the first six months
              of 2002 there have been ~2.5 million acres consumed by wildland fires.  Many of
              these fires may be attributable to anomalously dry conditions throughout the
              west.  Heightened fire activity is predicted in models of future climate
              change, and the best analogue for these conditions may be past periods when the
              climate was warmer- and drier-than-present.  By understanding the linkages
              between climate, vegetation, and fire in the past, recent fire events can be
              placed within a context of natural variations occurring on
              decadal-to-millennial time scales.  Information on the natural range of
              variability will help land-use managers in the United States develop strategies
              that consider forest sensitivity to climate change and disturbance regimes. 
              The use of modern pollen and climate analogues will improve our ability to
              reconstruct past climate conditions from fossil pollen records.  Pollen data
              are the primary terrestrial database used to reconstruct past climate, so this
              refinement is an important contribution to paleoclimatology and geography. 
              Finally, this study will contribute to archeology by providing an environmental
              backdrop for cultural changes in the Great Basin.  Periods of drought, for
              example, seem to be associated with changes in subsistence patterns in this
              region.  This research will help to clarify these relationships.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

