Title       : Investigation and Documentation of Three Endangered Languages in China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0220354

Award Number: 0220354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fengxiang Li   (Principal Investigator current)
              Graham Thurgood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Chico Res Fdtn
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Chico, CA  959290870    530/898-5700

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Fengxiang Li and Graham Thurgood
              will conduct two years of linguistic research on three endangered languages in
              China: Tsat, an Austronesian language of Hainan Province; Anong, a
              Tibeto-Burman language of Yunnan Province; and Oroqen, a Tungusic language of
              Inner Mongolia and Heilongjiang Province in northeast China. Although these
              languages are undergoing rapid change because of their close contact with
              Chinese, they are geographically separated, typologically different, and
              genetically distinct. Comparison of them is a rare opportunity to study how
              very different languages change under intense contact, not with a variety of
              different languages, but with the same language. American scholars will work
              with Chinese specialists in these languages whose detailed but unpublished
              records predate the most intense contact and continue to the modern era. The
              PIs will translate the existing Chinese descriptions, incorporating new
              material to fill gaps. In collaboration with Chinese linguists, the PIs will
              then update analyses based on the data collected in summer fieldwork trips. A
              comprehensive reference grammar for each language will be produced at the end
              of the project period. 

This research is significant for three inter-related
              areas of linguistics: language change, typology, and history. In terms of
              language change, the project investigates effects of dialectal variation,
              patterns of bilingualism, intense contact of three distinct languages with the
              same superstratum language, and language obsolescence on structural shift.
              Typological studies are often based on well-known and better studied languages.
              This project will address that imbalance with typological information about
              minority languages in China. In all three cases, but especially for Anong and
              Oroqen, this project will provide more accurate assessment of the genetic
              affiliations within their respective language families. In addition, this
              documentation is urgent because the speakers of these languages are beginning
              to disappear and the Chinese linguists who worked on their earlier stages have
              begun to retire. Every time another language dies, aspects of culture are lost.
              For example, thousands of years of the history of a people can only be accessed
              through study of their language. The project also brings American and Chinese
              linguists together to save part of their mutual heritage.

