Title       : Scholarships for Academic Recruiting and Retention
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0220631

Award Number: 0220631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374423             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahmoud Abd-allah mabdallah@csu.ces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Marcus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central State University
	      
	      Wilberforce, OH  45384    513/376-6011

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Proposal #:	0220631
PI:		Mahmoud Abd-allah
Institution:	Central State
              University
Title:		Scholarships for Academic Recruiting and
              Retention


This project, called "Scholarships for Academic Recruiting and
              Retention (SARR)", provides scholarships to increase recruitment and retention,
              and graduation rates for computer science, engineering and mathematics
              students. The key elements of the project are: 1) a scholarship awards program;
              2) intensified recruitment of community college students; 3) a broader base of
              student research and design experiences both on campus and in off campus
              internships; 4) a set of support services to help scholarship recipients
              succeed academically and facilitate the next steps toward achieving their
              career goals. The program initially accommodates 25 science, engineering and
              mathematics scholars in the first year and 28 scholars for each of the last
              three years.

CSU has a number of existing activities and resources that
              provide a sound foundation for the proposed program. These include a
              comprehensive tutoring program, a supplemental instruction program, a first-
              web-based course applicability system that allows community college students to
              quickly assess course equivalencies and academic ranking for CSU programs, and
              a learning communities program that facilitates student collaborative study to
              improve academic performance. 

CSU has established standards for the
              scholarship awards to provide entry to students who are just beginning to
              realize their potential, while strongly motivating them to push for and to
              sustain higher levels of academic achievement. SARR provides a network of
              support services for the scholarship recipients to assist them in overcoming
              any problems that might impede their progress, and to smooth the way to meet
              their academic and career objectives. The core of the support network is the
              assignment of faculty mentors to scholarship recipients. These mentors are
              charged with tracking and reporting on the progress of their students
              throughout their undergraduate residence, and for five years beyond. Mentors
              also counsel students on academic and aptitude matters, and guide them in
              maximizing their educational experiences and career opportunities. Other
              elements of the support network provide assistance in finding other sources of
              financial support if needed, facilitate student participation in internship
              opportunities, provide entry level career placement assistance, and provide
              graduate/professional school entry guidance and assistance.


