Title       : Scholarship Program in Computer Science and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0220716

Award Number: 0220716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Woodworth woodwrth@ithaca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wanda Dann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Conklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Sternstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ithaca College
	      Danby Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/274-3111

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During the first year, the project team plans to award scholarships to twelve
              first 
year students who are enrolled in a mathematics or a computer science
              major. 
The scholarships are renewed each year for up to a total of four
              years. During the 
second year of the project, an additional six scholarships
              are awarded to sophomore 
majors students to support and encourage them to
              change their majors to math or 
computer science. These scholarships are
              renewed for a total of three years. The `
awards are renewed as long as
              students make satisfactory academic progress and 
remain within the
              major.

The primary goal of this scholarship program is to increase the
              number of and the
retention of majors in computer science, computer
              information systems and 
mathematics. Because our curricula provide a solid
              theoretical and practical 
foundation for careers in these fields, increasing
              the number of majors will have 
the effect of increasing the number of skilled
              and knowledgeable workers 
qualified for many high-tech jobs. A secondary, but
              equally important, goal is to 
increase the number of women and minority
              majors. This is especially important 
in computing where women and minorities
              are traditionally under represented. To 
meet these goals, the project team is
              enhancing existing student support systems 
and extend existing research and
              project opportunities to provide training and job 
experiences. 

Ithaca
              College has extensive recruiting programs through the admissions office 
and
              the Higher Educational Opportunity Program (HEOP). The latter program
              
specifically targets minority recruiting. Both of these programs provide
              additional 
support for new initiatives such as this scholarship program.
              Faculty members are 
traveling to selected high schools to inform faculty and
              staff about these 
scholarships. The project team is providing printed and
              on-line materials to 
prospective students, and is encouraging prospective
              students to communicate 
directly with mathematics and computer science
              faculty. The selection of students 
for the program is made by a team that is
              composed of two faculty from mathematics, 
two faculty from computer science
              and one academic advisor staff member from 
the student Adacemic Advising
              office . Students Academic qualifications data are 
provided by the admissions
              office, and financial need data are provided by the financial 
aid office.
              Combining the requested scholarships with college funds and other federal
              
funds, we aim to meet 100% of financial need while minimizing loans.
              

Support for matriculated students to remain in a mathematics or computer
              science 
major is provided through many venues. Upper level students serve as
              teaching and 
lab assistants in open labs during evening and weekend hours and
              in walk-in 
help rooms. Courses are available to provide academic
              prerequisites for students who 
are lacking some specific skills. Additional
              opportunities for faculty and upper-level 
student mentoring especially for
              women and minorities have been established. 
Real-world experiences are
              provided within courses and by providing the students 
with relevant work
              experiences, e.g., as assistants in courses and computer laboratories. 
The
              project team plans to establish a networking program between recent graduates
              
and current undergraduates to provide regular communication channels to
              support 
mentoring. Processes are in place to aid and ensure that students
              effectively use the 
services provided by career planning function at Ithaca
              College.
