Title       : Dissertation Research: The Genetics of Malarial Selection in Sub-Saharan Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0220737

Award Number: 0220737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Hammer mhammer@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The nearly complete sequence of the human genome has greatly enhanced our
              understanding of human genetics.  This single reference sequence, however, is
              not able to capture the extent and nature of human genetic variation.  Efforts
              are now are shifting to describing patterns of variation across populations and
              regions of the genome particularly as it relates to human genetic diseases. 
              Disease association studies are proving useful in identifying individuals at
              risk for certain diseases; however, much of human genomic variation is not
              related to disease.  Patterns of variation can be shaped by natural selection
              (e.g. on variants in disease-related genes) and historical processes (e.g.,
              migration and genetic drift).  Natural selection affects variation associated
              with a specific gene or set of genes.  Additionally, regions associated with a
              given disease comprise a relatively small portion of the entire genome. 
              Historical processes, on the other hand, affect the entire genome.  While a
              clearer picture of human evolutionary history is emerging, it is not known to
              what extent historical processes have shaped patterns of variation at disease
              genes.  This study will assess the role of historical processes in shaping
              variation at genes conferring resistance to the infectious disease,
              malaria.
Each year malaria affects ~500 million people and kills ~2 million
              with the vast majority of these deaths occurring in Africa.  Alternate forms
              (alleles) of the beta-globin and G6PD genes are known to confer resistance to
              malaria and these alleles are found at high frequencies in populations residing
              in malarial environments.  Interestingly the same alleles that confer
              resistance to malaria can also cause inherited diseases (i.e., sickle cell
              anemia, G6PD deficiency).  The question is what is the relative role of natural
              selection and historical processes in shaping patterns of variation in and
              around these genes?  To address this the reseachers will perform a two-way
              controlled comparison of patterns of DNA sequence variation in these two genes
              in four African populations with different susceptibility to malaria as a
              selective agent.  Two of the four populations (the Luo and Dogon) occupy
              regions of sub-Saharan Africa that are strongly impacted by malaria, and two
              populations (the San and Southeastern Bantus) live outside malaria areas. 
              Additionally, to dissect the role of historical processes in shaping variation
              in these populations, DNA sequences of two other gene regions that are not
              affected by malaria will be determined.  One of these regions is on the tip of
              chromosome 16 (16p13.3) and the other is within an intron of Duchenne Muscular
              Dystrophy gene (Dmd intron 44) on the X chromosome.  This experimental design
              should provide a sound hypothesis-testing framework for distinguishing those
              forces that act a single gene from those that affect the whole genome. 
              Furthermore, collaborations with researchers at the Center for Disease Control
              in Atlanta and at the Kenya Medical Research Institute in Nairobi, Kenya, as
              well as the involvement of students from the University of Arizona and Pima
              Community College, will enhance the intellectual and training environment of
              this research.

