Title       : Rooted in the Timeless, with Eyes on the Future: A Student Support Project in
               Computer Science and Math
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0220541

Award Number: 0220541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391812             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max Hailperin max@gustavus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the program is to develop a student support and scholarship
              program that builds on established relationships with local industry and with
              alumni. Students selected for the program based on financial need and academic
              potential receive annual grants of $3125, for up to three years, as
              encouragement to complete a degree in computer science or mathematics. These
              grants are used to reduce the loan and employment portions of the students'
              financial aid packages, rather than to replace grants from other sources. Thus,
              they provide substantial economic incentive to the students. Each of the four
              years of the program, 31 students majoring in computer science or mathematics
              are selected. Individual students are eligible beginning in their second year,
              and receive funding for up to three years, provided they continue to meet the
              eligibility criteria. In addition to meeting financial need and nationality
              criteria, the student must demonstrate the potential for academic
              success.

Students in the program receive individual guidance from faculty
              and student support professionals, including the College's full-service Career
              Center. However, the most noteworthy aspects of the student support are those
              that connect outside of the College. Each year, students in the program are
              taken on trips to visit at least two companies in the region and talk with
              alumni there. Additionally, alumni employed at a wider sampling of employers
              participate in an annual "round table" discussion held at Gustavus. Last, but
              not least, alumni volunteers stay in touch with a few students each, in order
              to provide individualized mentoring. Frequent contacts with local industry, and
              in particular with alumni, provide the reminder that an exciting career awaits
              those who are well prepared.



