Title       : ITR: A Formal Framework for Systematic Protocol Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0220001

Award Number: 0220001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431086             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andras Farago farago@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Violet R. Syrotiuk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental challenge in network  design is how to choose  the right protocol,
               with   the  right   parameter  settings,   for  some  given circumstances. A
              key problem that lacks a systematic formal  framework is the scalability  issue
              in the  design space: networks  rapidly grow not  only  in  size  and 
              heterogeneity,  but  also  in  the number of available design  choices, such 
              as the  right protocol  to select, or just setting the right parameters for a
              given protocol.

To help remedy this situation we propose MERIT, a formal
              framework for systematically  assessing  protocols  in  dynamic  scenarios. 
              The key novelty  of  the researcher's solution  is  its  inherent scalability:
              rather than comparing the  different protocols  directly, the researchers
              compute an  inherent measure of  the protocol.  Using this  measure the
              researchers  define a  spectrum,
called a MERIT spectrum, for  the protocol
              that characterizes it  in a way that  ensures comparability  with other 
              protocols without porting them to the same platform. In addition, we develop a
              systematic way of analyzing these spectra.

While  the  traditional 
              qualitative  and  quantitative  measures  areinformative,  they  do  not 
              provide  a  satisfactory  framework for a systematic and unified comparison of
              protocols. For example, as  shown in the literature, the resulting ranking
              often strongly depends on the chosen simulation model.  The researchers take a 
              new, orthogonal direction  in the assessment  of  routing  protocols  in 
              MERIT. Specifically, the MERITframework provides  a systematic  and general 
              way to  rank any  given routing protocol  by comparing  it to  a theoretical, 
              yet efficiently computable, optimum  in its  own system,  rather than  to a 
              competing protocol.

For the problem of  routing in a mobile  ad hoc network,
              the researchers show that the theoretical optimum can be meaningfully defined
              and computed.  The basis of the researchers approach is a characterization
              based on the ratio of  the MEan ``Real'' to the ``Ideal'' cosT, or MERIT, of
              the protocol, and the researchers call the measure  the MERIT ratio.  The MERIT
              ratio  as a function  of
some parameters defines the MERIT spectrum of the
              protocol, yielding a multi-faceted representation of protocol
              effectiveness.

The successful preliminary theoretical and experimental
              results of the MERIT framework have encouraged  the researchers to develop
              three  primary research directions: (1) Further development  of the
              mathematical model  in the MERIT framework, with special  emphasis on creating
              formal  methods to analyze MERIT spectra. (2) Creating a software tool for the
              systematic study of routing  protocols using the  MERIT framework. (3) 
              Extensive experimentation   with real routing   protocols   to capture and
              systematically compare their  behaviour through analyzing  their
              MERITspectra.

Regarding the broader impact of the project, the contributions
              combine to impact the research in the field of dynamic networks. For mobile ad
              hoc networks, there is an impact in both theoretical model development and 
              also  simulation  based  performance  analysis. The three primary research 
              directions  of  the  project  are  appropriate to help train graduate students
              to become highly skilled to conduct both theoretical work with  strong
              mathematical  foundations, as  well as  experimental
work using realistic
              network  models in simulation. The  methodologies will  also be  introduced 
              into  the  graduate  curriculum as well as research seminars that may also
              involve students from underrepresented groups. While the original motivation
              for MERIT was to assess  routing
protocols in mobile ad hoc  networks, the
              methods are also  applicable to other dynamic scenarios. Thus, the benefit to
              society, in  addition to the production of well educated and skilled 
              rofessionals, is  that networks will run more efficiently since MERIT provides
              a  methodology
to select the right protocol for the job. The results will be 
              broadly disseminated  in  conference  and  journal  papers,  as  well  as book
              chapters.


