Title       : Industrial and Engineering Technology Scholarship Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2002    
File        : a0220802

Award Number: 0220802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Nance   (Principal Investigator current)
              William Hailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kentucky Community & Techn
	      2624 Administration Park Drive
	      Lexington, KY  405114092    859/246-

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Industry & Engineering Technology (I&ET) Scholarship project is identifying,
              recruiting, graduating and placing in jobs related to the degree discipline 12
              students with the Associate of Applied Science degree in I&ET. The project
              doubles the number of students who typically graduate from the program in any
              given year and enables the college to address a significant local industrial
              need, as well as serve a traditionally underserved population of low income
              academically talented students. Within the past year, three new
              light-manufacturing plants have opened in the college's service area. Data
              compiled by local economic development officials indicate that these plants
              alone create a need for approximately 1,000 new jobs during the next five
              years, many of which require high technology skills. The I&ET program prepares
              graduates for the kind of high technology skills these new employers
              demand.

A unique feature of the I&ET Scholarship Project is that it makes
              use of existing federally funded outreach and student support programs already
              in place at the college that have been operating successfully since the 1980s
              and whose target populations are identical to the target population for I&ET
              scholarship recipients: low income, traditionally underrepresented,
              academically talented students. I&ET faculty collaborate with the staff of
              these existing federal programs, Upward Bound (UB) and Educational Talent
              Search (ETS), to recruit and select project participants. Once enrolled, I&ET
              faculty collaborate with Student Support
Services (SSS) staff to develop a
              comprehensive Individual Education Plan for each student that serves as a
              blueprint for academic success. Successful retention and support strategies are
              then incorporated in the plan so that students become part of a learning
              community who succeed in the classroom and persist to graduation. I&ET faculty
              and industry representatives then collaborate with the college's Placement
              Office staff to ensure that all graduates receive job search training and are
              successfully placed within six months of graduation. Since the inception of the
              I&ET program, 100% of its graduates have been successfully placed in jobs
              related to the discipline.
