Title       : Engineering and Computer Science Scholarships at the University of
               Massachusetts, Dartmouth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0220643

Award Number: 0220643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tesfay Meressi tmeressi@umassd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Farhad Azadivar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nixon A. Pendergrass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project provides a unique opportunity for talented but
              financially
disadvantaged high school students from Southeastern Massachusetts
              to enter and complete 
an innovative education program in computer science,
              civil, mechanical, electrical, and 
computer engineering disciplines at the
              University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth (UMD). 
Residents of Southeastern
              Massachusetts are going through a major economic transition 
that resulted
              from almost total loss of textile industry in the United States. This region
              was 
once one of the richest communities in the nation, but it is now home for
              mostly working 
class population with first generation college attendees. UMD
              is well known for providing 
one of the best undergraduate engineering
              programs in northeast United States. However, 
it still loses the battle for
              attracting highly qualified students who cannot afford college 
on their
              own.

UMD has developed a strategic plan to play a major role in the economic
              revival of the 
region. As part of this plan, the University has established
              an Advanced Technology and 
Manufacturing Center (ATMC). ATMC assists
              technology based companies in the region 
to develop new products and
              processes and helps them commercialize university-
developed technologies.
              While ATMC has a staff of professionals, it also employs a good 
number of
              student interns who function as junior engineers on its projects.

This
              project combines internship opportunities available at the ATMC with an
              NSF
supported Foundation Coalition program that has been established for
              freshmen and 
sophomores in the College of Engineering at UMD. This
              combination provides a unique 
educational opportunity for students with
              financial needs. Students admitted through 
CSEMS spend their first two years
              in the College of Engineering's integrated math/
science/engineering
              curriculum and are supported by NSF scholarships. In their last 
two years,
              they join the ATMC as interns. During their ten hours a week internship at
              
the ATMC, CSEMS students are not only gain invaluable experience, they also
              earn 
internship salaries that are higher than what they receive during the
              first two years 
work study program. With this plan, CSEMS students are
              trained similar to that of 
medical school students who get experience in
              teaching hospitals.

In order to take maximum advantage of this scholarship
              program, we plan for a project 
cycle of six years funded by a combination of
              NSF and private industry. During the first 
three years we admit three cohorts
              of twenty students each. By the end of the four-year 
NSF project period, each
              student is supported by NSF funds for the first two years of 
his/her
              education. During the last two years, each student is supported by industry
              
projects at ATMC. To accomplish the objectives of this project a partnership
              has been 
developed with eighteen of the area high schools, and a contact
              person has been 
identified for each school. All schools have expressed their
              enthusiasm to identify 
qualified students for this program. In addition, a
              set of programs and activities has 
been planned to add to the exceptional
              features of this project.
