Title       : Apex Predators in the Central Pacific: An Ecosystem Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0220941

Award Number: 0220941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Kitchell kitchell@mhub.limnology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy E. Essington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The current levels of mortality owing to fisheries are  unlike  anything  in 
              the  long evolutionary  history  of  exploited  species  and,  therefore,  that
               fisheries  are  a  powerful  ecological  force.  
Understanding fishery
              effects as causes of perturbation offers important lessons about  the 
              ecological processes that regulate structure and function of pelagic
              ecosystems.   
	The previous project, Apex Predators in Pelagic Ecosystems,
              focused on trophic interactions in the central north  Pacific  (CNP)  ecosystem
               based  on  modeling  analyses  at  three  scales:    bioenergetics  of
              individual  fish  species,  predator-prey  interactions  and  ecosystem 
              models.    The ecological effects of 
long-line fisheries for tunas,
              billfishes and sharks has been a consistent theme in all three areas of model
              development.   The major lessons were that:  1.  Characterizing trophic
              ontogeny was a key component to building effective models for  this  system  of
               strongly overlapping use of prey resources and intra-guild predation, and 2. 
              Fisheries have become and continue as the main cause of change in trophic
              structure of the CNP.  This project will support continuation and expansion of
              the first project.  Dr. Kitchell and collaborators will develop models that 
              can  evaluate  the  role  of  fishery  effects  in  food  web  dynamics, 
              expand  that  to  include interactions  with  large-scale  environmental 
              effects  such  as  those  due  to  ENSO,  PDO,  and/or  climate change dynamics
              and use the consequent models as a basis for evaluating resource management
              policies that can change ecosystem structure and function.  Three major
              objectives will be pursued: 
	Experimental Approach to  Modeling.    They have
              developed a model of trophic interactions  and 
fishery effects for the
              central north Pacific (CNP) based, in part, on merging population-scale data
              with food  web  information  and  the  history  of  fishery  development.    An
              ecological analogue exists  in  the central south Pacific (CSP) where fishery
              development occurred at a later time.  The researchers will use the CNP
              approach to develop a CSP model, then conduct the equivalent of an independent,
              replicate analysis of the 
trophic changes owing to fishery development. 
              Merging these models creates a single tool that allows evaluation of local
              effects expressed in a large-scale context.  Characterizing fisheries as the
              equivalent of 
new  predators  allows  an  evaluation  of  .strong 
              interactions  in  food  webs  and  the  complex  feedback mechanisms that
              emerge from fishery effects. 
	Modeling to Include Environmental Drivers. 
              They will implement environmental forcing due to 
ENSO, PDO and/or global
              change effects expressed in our models of the CNP, CSP and a similar model 
of
              the eastern tropical Pacific (ETP) developed through collaboration sponsored by
              the National Center 
for  Ecological  Analysis  and  Synthesis  (NCEAS).   
              The investigators will use statistical approaches that evaluate anomalies in
              the population data as the basis for differentiating effects of the fisheries
              from those of the 
environmental forcing  that  alters  primary  production 
              rates  and  its  expression  in  production of higher 
trophic levels.
              
	Bycatch and  Ecological Interactions.    Major conservation  issues  revolve
               around  bycatch  of 
threatened or endangered turtles, birds, sharks and
              billfishes in these pelagic ecosystems.  Dr, Kitchell and co-workers will use a
              "scenarios" approach to simulation of alternative management actions, the
              likely responses of changes in fishery  exploitation  processes,  their 
              consequent  ecological  changes  and  their  socioeconomic 
consequences.  The
              basic Ecosim model now includes the capacity to evaluate the latter using
              inputs of 
fish prices plus weighting for goals based on employment,
              conservation and/or ecosystem management. 


