Title       : Interactions in Yeast Pre-mRNA Splicing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0220425

Award Number: 0220425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie W. Ruby sruby@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U New Mexico Hlth Sci Ctr
	      HSSB - 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  871315041    505/272-6264

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Gene expression in nearly all eukaryotes requires the excision of introns from
              nuclear precursor messenger RNAs (pre-mRNAs) to produce functional mRNAs.  The
              introns are excised by the spliceosome, which is a very large, macromolecular
              complex composed of five small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) and many
              proteins.  Each snRNP is itself composed of a small nuclear RNA (snRNA) and
              several proteins.  A fundamental question regarding pre-mRNA splicing is how
              the active catalytic site of the spliceosome is formed.  The focus of this
              project is on interactions between two spliceosomal components (Snp1p and
              Prp8p) that may contribute to the formation and activation of the pre-catalytic
              spliceosome.  The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is an ideal organism for these
              studies because genetics and biochemistry can be used in tandem to study
              dynamic and transient interactions.  
An interaction between Snp1p (a protein
              of the U1 snRNP) and Prp8p (a protein of the U5 snRNP), which was discovered in
              the previous grant period, is hypothesized to be important for association of
              the U1 and U5 snRNPs in the spliceosome.  It may help dock the U5 snRNP onto
              the developing spliceosome, and promote rearrangements leading to formation of
              the spliceosome's catalytic site.  One such rearrangement is the 5' splice site
              (SS) switch when the pre-mRNA's 5' SS switches from pairing with U1 snRNA to U6
              snRNA.  Preliminary results suggest that the Prp8/Snp1 interaction is important
              in destabilizing the U1/5'SS duplex as part of this switch.  Mutations or
              inhibitors will be assayed to correlate functional changes with physical
              changes in the association of Prp8p with Snp1p.  To map the region(s) of Prp8p
              required for interaction with Snp1p, a library of random prp8 mutations will be
              screened for those altering the interaction via a novel, high-throughput assay.
               Candidate mutations will be further assessed by a combination of in vivo and
              in vitro assays.
A notable percentage of human genetic diseases including some
              types of retinitis and thalassemias are due to defects in pre-mRNA splicing. 
              Furthermore, alternative splicing contributes to the development and life
              cycles of many organisms as well as to biodiversity.  Thus understanding the
              basic mechanism of splicing will contribute to our understanding of several
              biological systems and, in the long-term, contribute to improving human health.
               The proposed research will also make several contributions to other areas of
              science and society.  The development of a high-throughput assay will be a
              collaborative effort using instrumentation invented at the host institution. 
              Results generated by this assay will be disseminated both by traditional
              scientific publication and by a website specifically designed as a database for
              yeast spliceosomal components and their interactions.  The research will be
              conducted at an EPSCoR and designated minority institution.  Thus it is likely
              that some of the students participating in the proposed research will be from
              minority groups.
