Title       : Comparative Genetic Studies of Limb Development in Bats and Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0220458

Award Number: 0220458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard R. Behringer rrb@notes.mdacc.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas MD Anderson Ctr
	      1515 Holcombe, Box 202
	      Houston, TX  77030    /   -

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0220458
Behringer

The primary goal of this project is to understand the
              genetic differences that underlie morphological variation between mammalian
              species.  Dr. Behringer hypothesizes that many of these genetic differences
              reside in DNA sequences that regulate the transcription of developmental
              control genes.  He has chosen to focus upon the classic developmental biology
              paradigm of vertebrate limb development.  He proposes to make functional
              comparisons between mouse and bat limb morphogenesis because compared to mouse,
              bats have highly modified limbs.  The developmental control gene that he
              proposes to study, Prx1, encodes a paired homeodomain transcription factor that
              is required in mice for limb and craniofacial development.  He has localized a
              discreet <600 bp DNA segment encoding a transcriptional enhancer that directs
              limb expression in a Prx1-specific pattern during mouse development.  He has
              isolated the Prx1 orthologue from bat (Carollia perspicillata) libraries that
              we have generated. He is characterizing the expression pattern of this gene in
              bat embryos by whole-mount and section RNA in situ hybridization.  He has
              identified the putative limb enhancer of the bat Prx1 gene by virtue of its
              conserved DNA sequence and genomic position relative to mouse and human
              orthologues.  He will test the activity of this putative limb enhancer using a
              lacZ reporter assay in transgenic mice.  He will then replace the endogenous
              limb enhancer of the mouse Prx1 gene with the bat Prx1 limb enhancer by gene
              targeting in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells.  Thus, mice will be generated
              where the mouse Prx1 gene is expressed under the control of the bat Prx1 limb
              enhancer.  He will assess the morphological consequences of this regulatory
              element alteration in the limbs.  He proposes that this type of highly focused
              in vivo test will provide important insights into the genetic basis of
              morphological divergence.  In addition, his studies should further our
              understanding of how regulatory diversity can modulate organogenesis.

