Title       : ITR: Research on Recruiting Middle School Minority and Majority Girls into a
               High School IT Magnet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0220130

Award Number: 0220130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Caroline E. Wardle                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lecia J. Barker barkerl@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronda K. Garvin-Doxas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
EIA - 0220130
Barker, Lecia J.
Garvin-Doxas, Ronda K. 
U. Colorado at
              Boulder

Title: ITR: Research on Recruiting Middle School Minority and
              Majority Girls into a High School IT Magnet

The overarching goal of this
              ITR-and ITWF-funded project is to increase the participation of women and
              minorities in the critical professional careers in information technology. 
              Increased participation in information technology (IT) by women and minorities
              will lead to broader perspectives from which IT products and services are
              researched, developed, and supported; increased social equity; and greater size
              and diversity in the IT professional workforce.  Prior research shows that
              middle school is a critical juncture for girls, since it is at middle school
              when girls begin to make choices more heavily influenced by stereotypical
              career choices and other culture-based beliefs than their genuine interests. 
              This project is an extensive, triangulated study examining the recruiting
              messages and methods that persuade middle school girls to enroll in a public
              computer magnet high school.  The magnet offers three information technology
              tracks and recruits from 22 middle schools in a diverse district serving 71,000
              children (55% Hispanic, 21% white, 20% African-American, 3% Asian, 1% Native
              American).   

The project takes a communicative approach to the study of
              recruiting, in which recruiting is considered an act of persuasion.  This
              permits a focus on: the content of messages and how they affect particular
              audiences (and not others) in particular social contexts; the individual
              characteristics of the recruiter; and the interactive processes among the
              recruiter, the recruited, and the social/cultural setting.  Since persuasion is
              a culturally situated accomplishment and therefore will vary by group, data
              will be gathered, analyzed, and reported according to demographic information. 
              The University of Colorado-Boulder's principal campus-wide academic initiative,
              the Alliance for Technology, Learning, and Society (ATLAS), provides much of
              the structure for this project.  ATLAS developed an IT certificate program open
              to all undergraduates (Technology, Arts, and Media certificate) which is
              attracting a surprisingly high percentage of women.  Part of the recruiting
              research enlists the help of these students and the TAM curriculum.  The
              results of the research will be widely disseminated through conference
              presentations, publications, and an information web site with special attention
              to reaching audiences that make policy decisions and can effect real
              change.


