Title       : Phase Behavior and Network Morphologies in ABC Triblock Copolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0220460

Award Number: 0220460
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank S. Bates bates@cems.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Synthetic polymers command one of the largest commercial markets in the chemical
              industry with products ranging from ough trash bags to balloon catheters used
              in delicate angioplaty.  Increasingly, polymeric materials must combine
              multiple functions (e.g., toughness, hardness, solvent resistance,
              permeability, clarity, etc.), while optimizing processing characteristics and
              minimizing cost.  Block copolymers, formed by joining two or more chemically
              distinct macromolecules, provide unparalleled control over nanoscale morphology
              and the prospect for creating advanced materials with competitive properties. 
              Linear two-monomer block copolymers (AB, ABA, ABABA, etc) are well understood
              thermodynamically; four microphase separated states have been established
              within the framework of a universal phase diagram, both theoretically and
              experimentally.  Three-monomer triblocks (ABC, ABCBA, etc.), which offer a much
              richer spectrum of materials design combinations, phase behavior, and
              functionality, are significantly less well understood.  This proposal targets
              several model ABC triblock copolymer systems, strategically selected for
              fundamental phase behavior studies, and for development as ion conducting
              membranes.  Perhaps the greatest limitation in connecting ABC triblock
              copolymer theory and practice is a daunting array of experimental variables.  A
              systematic and precise approach to varying composition and block sequencing
              through model anionic polymerization of styrene (S), isoprene (I), and ethylene
              oxide (O) is identified, thereby enabling an organized evaluation of phase
              behavior based on small-angle X-ray and neutron scattering (SAXS and SANS),
              dynamic mechanical spectroscopy (DMS), transmission electron miscoscopy (TEM),
              and other methods.  ISO and SIO triblock materials will be assessed in the weak
              and strong segregation limits with an emphasis on identifying multicontinuous
              and triply periodic structures in coordination with a leading theoretical
              program.   Synthesis and structural characterization of model polyolefins,
              obtained by anionic polymerization and catalytic hydrogenation, will compliment
              this fundamental thrust while contributing new materials to this most important
              sector of the polymer industry.  Glassy poly(dyclohexylethylene) (C), rubbery
              poly(ethylethylene) (E), and semicrystalline poly(ethylene) (E) will be
              configured into complimentary sequences (CEE E, CE E E, and E ECE) and model
              nanostructures and evaluated for response to shear in the melt state and the
              associated mechanical properties in the solid state.

Membranes present an
              attractive development opportunity for block copolymers.  Selective transport
              characteristics can be combined with robust mechanical properties, chemical
              stability, and superior processability.  Ion conduction membranes are
              identified as particularly attractive with applications as solid-state
              electrolytes and proton conducting fuel cell membranes.  Ion conductivity will
              be determined as a function of morphology using lithium doped ISO and SIO
              triblocks.  Multiply continuous morphologies, such as the gyroid, are
              anticipated to provide facile ion conduction without domain alignment.  New
              triblocks containing acidic moieties (e.g., carboxylic or sulfonic acid) will
              be prepared using anionic or living free-radical polymerization methods,
              augmented by post polymerization functionalization.  Poly(acrylic acid) in
              combination with fluorinated poly(butadiene) and poly(styrene) is an initial
              target compound.  These proton-conducting materials will be characterized by
              SAXS, SANS, DMS, and TEM, thereby establishing the correspondence in phase
              behavior between conventional non-polar block copolymers< and those containing
              ionic substituents 

