Title       : Increasing Access and Diversity in Engineering and Microelectronics Careers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0220875

Award Number: 0220875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2003    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399118             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jim Rett jrett@pcc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Cater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Taylor Hanna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dorina Cornea-Hasegan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland Comm Col
	      12000 SW 49th Avenue
	      Portland, OR  972197132    503/244-6111

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Portland Community College's(PCC), along with its contracting community colleges
              in Tillamook Bay (TBCC) and Columbia Gorge (CGCC,) project is a scholarship
              program called 'Increasing Access and Diversity in Engineering and
              Microelectronics Careers'. This CSEMS project serves students in Electronic
              Engineering Technology, Computer Software Engineering Technology, Civil and
              Mechanical Engineering Technology, and Microelectronics Technology. The
              Increasing Access and Diversity program awards a total of 60 two-year
              scholarships over four years, with each scholarship worth $3,000 per year. The
              scholarships are targeted to students who demonstrate financial need and
              academic promise, with special efforts to recruit and retain students who are
              underrepresented in technology disciplines, including African Americans,
              Hispanics, Native Americans, and women. The Increasing Access and Diversity
              scholarship program places special emphasis on recruiting students who have
              recently finished high school. 

The goal of this program is to increase
              opportunities and access to higher education and employment for
              underrepresented minorities and women in engineering and microelectronics
              technology by providing scholarships that will cover the cost of tuition,
              books, and supplies for full-time students. The objectives that will help the
              program achieve this overall goal are:
1. Increase the number of
              underrepresented minority students in participating departments by 50%.
2.
              Increase the number of female students in the targeted departments by 25%.
3.
              Increase by 20% the number of students in targeted departments who enter PCC,
              TBCC, or CGCC within 12 months of graduating from high school.
4. 80% of CSEM
              scholars will complete the two-year program in which they enroll.
5. 95% of
              graduating CSEMS scholars will be employed or enrolled in a four-year program
              related to their discipline within 12 months of graduation.

To achieve these
              objectives, the Increasing Access and Diversity scholarships are publicized
              through meetings at area high schools, community organizations, and one-stop
              career centers, where eligible people will be encouraged to apply. The
              participating departments are committed to recruiting students directly from
              high school. The scholarships give motivated high school graduates a chance to
              begin their college careers immediately, rather than interrupting their
              education due to lack of funds. Once on campus, CSEM scholars benefit from the
              existing array of support services designed to help students at PCC, TBCC, and
              CGCC achieve academic success. These include student success seminars,
              communication skills workshops, academic advising, internships, job placement
              workshops, and career counseling. Each CSEM scholar benefits from
              CSEMS-specific services and activities, such as monthly workshops and
              troubleshooting sessions, an ongoing relationship with an industry mentor,
              increased access to tutoring, exposure to area universities and high-tech
              firms, and job placement assistance. These activities build
peer and mentoring
              relationships for scholars that enhance retention and degree completion.

