Title       : Development and Testing of a Tandem Integrating Sphere Absorption Meter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0220465

Award Number: 0220465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk A. Fuller fuller@nsstc.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4444,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is motivated by the need for a better method of measuring the
              absorption properties of aerosol particles for solar radiation.  Current
              methods consist of capturing an aerosol sample on filter paper or some other
              material, illuminating it, and measuring the effect of the aerosol film on
              transmission or reflection of the light.  A problem is to distinguish between
              the light that is scattered from the beam and that which is actually absorbed. 
              The problem is approached by using an integrating sphere, a cavity with a
              diffusely reflective inner surface that traps the photons scattered by the
              aerosol film.  A small port in the cavity allows a probe to sample the photon
              density of the trapped light, from which the transmittance and reflectance of
              the aerosol film may be determined.  This project improves upon the concept of
              an integrating cavity by use of a tandem integrating sphere (called TANINS), an
              absorption meter consisting of two integrating spheres, joined at the sample
              port, capable of determining the hemispheric transmittance and reflectance of
              the filter sample with high accuracy and sensitivity.  The instrument
              performance is evaluated by comparison with measurements using a
              well-understood integrating cavity of standard design and by measurements on
              laboratory-generated aerosols with known optical properties.  The measurements
              are then converted to characterize in situ or undisturbed aerosols by
              theoretical modeling to account for the effects of particle clumping and the
              filter substrate.  The work provides fundamental information on aerosol optical
              properties that is needed for atmospheric remote sensing and for evaluating the
              effects of aerosol layers on regional and global climate.
