Title       : Endocrine Regulation of Stomach Organogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0220196

Award Number: 0220196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Specker jspecker@gsosun1.gso.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1155,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The stomach is an important organ, both physiologically and ecologically. From a
              comparative perspective, the structure and function of the stomach are similar
              across vertebrate classes, whereas the timing of its formation in the life
              cycle is variable. Little is known about the endocrine regulation of stomach
              organogenesis. In vertebrates, corticosteroids and thyroid hormones
              significantly regulate development, however their metabolic functions in adults
              are more thoroughly studied. The larger idea here is that these are the
              hormones that connect metabolism and metabolic state with growth and
              development. The proposed project tests the hypothesis that stomach
              organogenesis is regulated by sequential action of cortisol and thyroid
              hormones on cell proliferation and differentiation. The endocrine regulation of
              organogenesis is more easily studied in free-living larval stages than in
              embryonic/fetal stages because of the ease of manipulation of hormone levels.
              The experimental animal used to test this hypothesis is the marine flatfish
              summer flounder (Paralichthys dentatus). In summer flounder, stomach
              organogenesis occurs at the end of the larval phase during metamorphosis.
              Metamorphosing flounder can be staged based on the translocation of the right
              eye to the left side of the head (like the hand on a clock). This permits
              stage-specific experimentation that is difficult or impossible otherwise. In
              the incipient stomach, the developmental progression of proliferation,
              morphogenesis, and cell differentiation is closely associated with sequential
              amplification of corticosteroid and thyroid hormone signalling. These hormones
              act through intracellular receptors that serve as transcription factors. How do
              these hormones coordinate the cellular and intercellular mechanisms of
              organogenesis? The research plan integrates responses at the organismal, organ,
              tissue, and cellular and molecular levels of organization. End-points are
              morphogenesis, morphometrics, cell proliferation and differentiation, hormone
              concentrations, and quantification and localization of the receptors for
              cortisol and thyroid hormones. The broad significance of the award includes the
              research training of early scientists, possible contributions to the
              development of aquaculture of marine fishes, and basic understanding of the
              endocrine regulation of cellular proliferation and differentiation. 
