Title       : The Geochemistry of U, Re, Mo in Margin and Coastal Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0220892

Award Number: 0220892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Simone Metz                             
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337090             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Morford jennifer.morford@fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Francois  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0220892

The accumulation rates of Mo, Re and U in marine
              sediments can be useful proxies for reconstructing past redox conditions. 
              While an increase in accumulation rates of authigenic Mo, Re and U is often a
              clear indication of more reducing conditions in sediments, it is more difficult
              to deduce whether the change is due to a decrease in bottom water oxygen
              content or an increase in organic carbon flux.  Three scientist from Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution plan to develop a means of distinguishing between
              these two potential causes utilizing porewater samples obtained from the
              Washington margin and seasonally from sediments in Buzzards Bay (coastal site).
               The PIs will acquire these samples using benthic flux chambers, centrifugation
              and in-situ polyacrylamide gel probes.  The porewater and solid phase samples
              will be analyzed for U, Re and Mo as well as the necessary supporting
              parameters.  Results from the profiles obtained at Buzzards Bay will serve to
              document the seasonal evolution of porewater concentrations and benthic fluxes
              as a function of bioturbation, bioirrigation and non-steady state O2
              penetration into the sediments.  Samples from the Washington margin region will
              be used to assess the influence of water depth, carbon flux and O2 bottom water
              concentrations on the burial of these redox sensitive metals.  Results from
              this study will be incorporated into a steady-state sediment-pore water model
              to use the derived parameters to obtain realistic solid phase metal profiles. 
              


