Title       : New Directions in Understanding Ethics and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0220748

Award Number: 0220748
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215590             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah G. Johnson dgj7p@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This endeavor examines the implications of recent work in Science and Technology
              Studies (STS) for understanding the connection between ethics and technology.
              It involves integration of insights from two fields of research that have
              significantly evolved in the last two decades: 
Social studies of technology;
              and
Applied and practical ethics related to technology.
STS theories of
              technology provide a rich foundation for understanding the connection between
              ethics and technology insofar as they reveal the intimate connections between
              technology and society, and especially the social shaping of technology. STS
              scholars have rejected the idea that technologies simply appear and then have
              social impacts.  They now favor more complex, co-creation models of technology
              and society.  However, many ethicists continue to use a model of technology
              arriving intact and then having impacts, i.e., threatening particular social
              values or raising ethical issues. When the seamless connection between
              technology and society is better understood, many new and promising directions
              for research on ethics and technology become apparent. 
This project aims to
              develop, articulate, illustrate, and disseminate a theoretical account (or
              accounts) of the connection between ethics and technology, an account that
              incorporates and builds on STS social shaping/co-creation theories. The major
              task of the project will be to draw out the implications of STS theory for
              ethics.  Three directions will serve as starting places for this endeavor. STS
              theory suggests that technology should be understood to be not just material
              objects but material objects together with social institutions, social
              practices, and human relationships. In this view, ethical and value issues may
              be present at any point in the life cycle of a technology, from design, to
              manufacture, to marketing and distribution, to adoption and use. Second, a good
              deal of STS literature addresses the values embodied in the design of material
              objects and this has enormous implications for understanding the possibility of
              moral values being 'in' material objects. Third, understanding the connection
              between ethics and technology opens up the possibility of better understanding
              the role of human agency in technology-mediated activities and consequently the
              accountability of humans for such activities. 
The project is philosophical
              and theoretical in nature, not empirical. While the research to be done will
              draw on empirical studies of technology, the methodology of the project is
              conceptual, thematic, and analytical. The investigator is a philosopher who has
              worked both in STS and in the field of applied/ practical ethics, especially
              ethical issues in computer technology. Two post-doctoral research associates,
              one post-doc with a background in STS and one with a background in ethics are
              involved.  Each will be trained to understand the other field so that both can
              assist in the development of the theoretical account and work on an individual
              project.

