Title       : ITR Collaborative Research: Complexity-Theoretic Applications of Fourier
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0220264

Award Number: 0220264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120454             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander C. Russell acr@cse.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ourier analysis appears in many of the celebrated cornerstones of
theoretical
              computer science. It plays essential roles in expander
graph construction and
              derandomization, complexity lower bounds,
probabilistically checkable proof
              systems, quantum computing, lower
bounds for distributed computation, and
              traditional applications to
computer algebra. The majority of these
              applications involve the
familiar framework of commutative Fourier analysis.
              The proposed
project brings together a multidisciplinary research team to
              apply the
beautiful tools of non-Abelian (that is, noncommutative)
              Fourier
analysis to investigate open questions in two areas where
              non-Abelian
groups have recently become very important: lower bounds for
              parallel
computation and quantum algorithms.  The program also further
              develops
efficient algorithms for the discrete Fourier transform over
              finite
non-Abelian groups.

This project focuses on developing tools for
              separating the complexity
classes ACC^0 and NC^1, in order to demonstrate that
              there are natural
(polynomial-time computable) problems which simply cannot
              be
parallelized in the sense of ACC^0. The project applies a new family
of
              tools for separating such circuit classes, using non-Abelian
Fourier analysis
              to bound their computational power. These tools apply
also to the problem of
              solving equations over finite groups, and the
development of new
              probabilistically checkable proof systems based on
non-Abelian groups.  In
              addition, the project applies non-Abelian
Fourier analysis to develop improved
              lower bounds on the standard
Quantum Fourier Transform approach to Graph
              Isomorphism and study
quantum Monte Carlo algorithms. Finally, the project
              focuses on
adaptations of Bratelli diagrams and quivers to develop classical
              and
quantum algorithms for the non-Abelian Fourier transform itself.

