Title       : A Probabilistic Model for Microstructure Evolution with Application to Smart
               Concrete Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0220327

Award Number: 0220327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katerina D. Papoulia kp58@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mircea D. Grigoriu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The project proposes to formulate methods for representing and analyzing
              random
heterogeneous materials in three directions. First, general
              probabilistic models are developed
for the microstructure of cement based
              composites with carbon fibers. The models
are random fields characterizing the
              geometrical, mechanical, and electrical properties of the
material
              constituents. These cement based composites have an interesting
              microstructure,
and are used in both mechanics and electronics as sensors of
              mechanical properties. Second,
a computational environment is developed for
              calculating the evolution in time of the
properties of microstructures
              subjected to deterministic loads. Finite element procedures
are used to
              calculate changes in, for example, the stress, strain, damage and electric
              fields
in cement based composite specimens generated from their probabilistic
              models. Development
of the finite element code entails advances in numerical
              solver techniques as well as
formulation of new mathematically sound
              traction-displacment relationships to model cohesive
fracture. Third, the
              results of the finite element analyses are used to (i) update
the
              probabilistic models of the material microstructure so they reflect the current
              damage
state and (ii) develop macroscopic damage models for cement based
              composites by using
homogenization procedures.
The evolution of the material
              state is monitored by a mathematical object, referred
to as digital material
              (DM), that defines uniquely the state of the microstructure at any
time during
              loading and can be stored in the computer. The results of the analytical
              and
numerical developments are validated against experimental tests providing
              information of
the properties of the fiber matrix interaction and on the
              dependence of electric conductivity
of macroscopic specimens on their damage
              state.
The main outcome of the project is a novel methodology for predicting
              structural behavior
of composite materials and for designing materials with
              better structural properties
and better capabilities for sensing damage and
              strain. Other outcomes include new finite
element codes, new mathematical
              models, and a strong educational outreach program.
