Title       : ITR: Application Partitioning Without Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0220248

Award Number: 0220248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299634             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioannis Smaragdakis yannis@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1652,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  Application partitioning is the task of breaking up the
    functionality
              of an application into distinct entities that can
    operate independently,
              usually in a distributed setting. As
    networking changes the computing
              landscape, application
    partitioning is becoming an increasingly common
              form of distributed
    programming. This project examines the possibility of
              automating the
    partitioning of a software application. Instead of hand
              re-coding,
    higher-level tools allow the user to express how the
              application is
    to be partitioned. The tools can then rewrite the
              existing
    application code to replace local data exchange (e.g. function
 
                calls, data sharing through pointers) with remote communication
    (e.g.
              remote function calls, remote pointers or mobile objects).
    The tools are
              based on a novel static analysis and translation
    algorithm. The potential
              impact of this work is in significantly
    simplifying distributed program
              construction, a prime
    intellectual and practical challenge of computer
              science.
    Automatic partitioning can revolutionize the way a large class
              of
    distributed programs is developed. Additionally, the proposed
   
              tools have a high educational value: they can be used for
    illustrating
              crucial concepts in both programming languages and
    distributed systems,
              while minimizing distractions due to low-level
    complexity.
