Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Visualizing Mechanistic Controls of North
               American Climate Variability Through Cartographic Animation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0220976

Award Number: 0220976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9445               (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Bartlein bartlein@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1324,1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Extreme climate variations, such as droughts and floods, have broad social and
              economic consequences for agriculture and water resources.  A major challenge
              to climate researchers, however, are to effectively formulate and present
              depictions of climate change.  The objectives of this doctoral dissertation
              research project are to develop a conceptual model of the controls of North
              American climate on multiple spatial and temporal scales and to illustrate this
              model using animated cartographic methods.  Specifically, this project is
              designed to provide a general process-based description of daily and
              month-to-month variations of atmospheric circulation that contribute to surface
              climate anomalies such as drought.  This study will also describe the influence
              that such phenomena like El Nino have on year-to-year variations of North
              American climate.  Data for this project are provided through the National
              Center for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) and the National Center for
              Atmospheric Research (NCAR) 50-year Reanalysis Project.  These data sources,
              which contain meteorological fields, many not directly observable, can be used
              for analyzing the spatial and temporal variability of the climate system.  The
              long-term averages of each variable provide information about the broad-scale
              climate variations through the seasonal cycle.  Composite-anomaly patterns show
              relationships between large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns and surface
              climate responses.  Cartographic animations using these data incorporate time
              progression into analyses of climate variability, thus providing an opportunity
              to visualize the build-up and demise of anomalous events such as droughts and
              floods.

Results from this project will provide a greater understanding of
              the processes involved in climate variability in North America and how those
              processes vary through time and space.  This research will show the surface and
              atmospheric climate processes that control extreme events like drought in the
              modern climate record in order to help understand what has driven past climate
              change.  The project also will provide tools for predicting the impact of
              drought in future climates.  The process-based approach taken in this project
              will contribute to understanding of the mechanisms and feedbacks that cause
              climate variability on multiple spatial scales (e.g., regional to continental)
              and temporal scales (e.g., daily to yearly).  In addition, this research will
              enhance the field of cartography through the application of animations for both
              data exploration and communication of results.  Animations created from this
              research will be made available via the internet to researchers, educators and
              the general public for use as teaching and resource tools.  Such products
              provide a link between research in the lab and learning in the classroom.  In
              K-12 education, for example, teachers will be able to use the web-based
              materials created for this project to help develop their own student-centered
              learning activities.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
              this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
              a strong independent research career.

