Title       : Miniaturized MEMS Based Fiber Optic Distributed Health monitoring System for
               Civil Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0220036

Award Number: 0220036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farhad Ansari fansari@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1639,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI Name and Institution:  Farhad Ansari, University of Illinois at
              Chicago
Proposal Number: 0220036
Proposal Title: Miniaturized MEMS Based
              Fiber Optic Distributed Health monitoring System for Civil Structures 

              
Project Abstract

The primary objective of the proposed research is to
              develop capability for application of large numbers of sensors in a very
              compact and portable manner in civil structures.  This will be accomplished by
              condensing all the hardware components of the sensor system, which includes
              optical interferometer, and microprocessor modules into a single miniaturized
              unit.    The micro fabrication methodologies will be employed for development
              of the Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), which will include wave-guides,
              and micro mechanical optical switches and rotating micro mirrors.    This
              system will drive a series of distributed optical fiber sensors designed for
              sensing of structural perturbations within a large sensing range.  Conversion
              of the bulky system into the miniaturized MEMS device will allow for mass
              production of MEMS-sensor modules for integration within structures as needed. 
              The sensory system will provide monitoring capabilities for excessive strains,
              cracks, delaminations, deflections, uneven load distributions, thermal shocks,
              impact loads, and corrosion. The outcomes of this research will have a
              tremendous impact on safety, maintenance, and efficient operation of the public
              works infrastructure systems that include myriads of facilities such as
              buildings, bridges, dams, tunnels, seaports, highways, pipelines, railroads,
              and power generation stations.  This research will provide new educational
              opportunities for civil engineering students, as they will learn to develop and
              work with modern tools to solve problems of great importance for the nation's
              public works infrastructure. Students involved in this project will benefit
              greatly by exposure to different research areas of engineering, particularly
              sensor technology, MEMS, structural testing, and industrial packaging of micro
              devices.

