Title       : Collaborative Research: Developmental Patterning of the Cephalopod Euprymna
               Scolopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0220414

Award Number: 0220414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35518              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick F. Callaerts callaerts@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1080,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0220414
Callaerts

Drs. de Couet and Callaerts are trying to understand the
              molecular and developmental mechanisms underlying the invention of
              morphological novelty.  Much of the progress in this area of evolutionary
              biology has been derived from comparing the developmental modes and the
              causative genes of model organisms such as Drosophila with those of
              representatives from other phyla.  The identification of genes involved in
              pattern formation and their conserved structure highlight the importance of
              developmental events for the evolution of new form and function, and provides
              new directions for evolutionary biology.  Whilst arthropod and vertebrate
              development have been studied in great detail, the development of Mollusks is
              poorly understood at the molecular and cellular levels.  The phylum Mollusca
              comprises several classes of highly diverse invertebrates without overt
              segmentation and metameric organization. Mollusks are characterized by an
              external shell, a muscular foot and a rasping organ, and are commonly elongated
              along the dorsoventral axis.  Among the Mollusks, the cephalopods have achieved
              the highest morphological and physiological complexity. It is proposed to
              investigate developmental processes and molecular parameters that give rise to
              the adult characteristics of the cephalopod Euprymna scolopes, a small sepiolid
              squid endemic to Hawaiian waters.  Cephalopods are highly specialized Mollusks
              with a complex nervous system and powerful sensory organs. A subset of
              homeobox-containing genes, the Hox-genes, are commonly considered pivotal
              determinants in anteroposterior patterning. The expression patterns of these
              genes have been extensively used as molecular markers for judging evolutionary
              relationships, such as homologies of structures along the anteroposterior axis.
              In preliminary studies they isolated sequences of a family of Hox genes and of
              other homeobox-containing regulatory genes from Euprymna. Extensive
              phylogenetic analyses led to the conclusion that cephalopods have a set of at
              least nine Hox-like genes most closely resembling those isolated from
              polychaetes and ribbonworms. Specifically, this study aims to (1) To establish
              techniques for experimental and molecular-genetic manipulation of Euprymna
              scolopes arm development, and (2) To isolate and characterize Euprymna genes
              homologous to Dll/Dlx, apterous/Lhx2/Lmx1, Tbx genes, BMP2, hh, and Wnt, and to
              initiate the study of their expression patterns. The detailed molecular
              analysis of cephalopod axial patterning genes and their developmental
              expression patterns may hold important cues to explaining the diversification
              of appendage number and appearance. 




