Title       : MII: Frameworks for the Development of Efficient and Scalable Knowledge-based
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0220590

Award Number: 0220590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2011       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1498898            (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger T. Hartley rth@cs.nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Son Tran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hing Leung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Desh Ranjan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Enrico Pontelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-20590
Hartley, Roger T.
Leung, Hing Pontelli, 
Enrico Ranjan, Desh

              Tran, Son
New Mexico State University 

Title: Frameworks for the
              Development of Efficient and Scalable Knowledge-Based Systems
 
This
              proposal, expanding activities geared to attract and retain Native American
              students, aims at developing a solid collaborative research backbone, enhancing
              its educational program, and improving participation of a diverse student
              population in computer-related disciplines. The backbone, enabling a
              cooperative research efforts in the Computer Science Department, fosters
              research and educational collaborations with other departments (specifically
              Biology and Psychology) and with other research institutions. The proposed
              research backbone is articulated in four inter-dependent threads: 

Data
              structures and methodologies for efficient parallel execution of logic and
              constraint programming languages 

Languages and methodologies for the design
              of knowledge based systems 

Application of knowledge-based technology in
              Semantic Web, Universal Accessibility, and Computational Biology 

Automated
              debugging and component-based programming for knowledge-based
              applications
Enhancement of the educational program is expected to lead to
              improved recruitment and retention, increased transition towards graduate
              programs, and a stronger integration between research and education at the
              graduate
 and undergraduate level. These goals will be accomplished through
              the introduction of a pathways system throughout the undergraduate curriculum,
              where different pathways will accommodate the diverse student backgrounds.
              Focusing on an educational model for the training of Native American students
              in Computer Science, the institution expects to improve participation of a
              diverse student population in computer-related disciplines, with particular
              focus on the creation of an educational model for the training of Native
              American students in Computer Science. The proposed infrastructure provides
              research support, in the form of computing equipment (e.g., a 64-processor
              Beowulf platform, HP shared memory platform, robotic equipment) and human
              resources support (for faculty, students, and visiting scientists). The
              educational infrastructure includes the creation of a new computing classroom
              and provides human resources for the development of the new educational
              programs. A research team, consisting of 14 investigators, will benefit from
              this infrastructure by strengthening their interdisciplinary research through
              cross-fertilization of new ideas.


