Title       : US-Bangladesh Cooperative Research: Modeling Motorized and Non-Motorized
               Vehicular Traffic Flow to Estimate Vehicular Emissions and their Impacts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0220558

Award Number: 0220558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarosh Islam Khan skhan@carbon.cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
Program Ref : 5989,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0220558
Khan

Description:
This award is to support a joint research project
              by Dr. Sarosh I. Khan, Department of Civil Engineering, University of Colorado,
              Denver, Colorado; Dr.Jobair Bin Alam, Civil Engineering Department, Bangladesh
              University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh; and Dr. Lars
              Persson, Centre for Health and Population Research (ICDDR,B), Dhaka,
              Bangladesh.  The investigators will develop a traffic flow model to represent
              the interaction between motorized and nonmotorized vehicles.  The model will
              provide microscopic and macroscopic measures of traffic flow, and generate
              emission estimates for transportation networks.  The broader goal of this grant
              is to estimate the impact of traffic flow on pollutant concentrations near
              roadways, and how those pollutants affect the children in Dhaka.  The
              researchers will use an integrated model development approach based on field
              data.  Dr. Khan will develop a traffic interaction model for two-and
              three-wheeled motorized and nonmotorized vehicles that travel in the same
              right-of-way, but which is not lane-based due to significant lateral movement
              primarily by smaller sized vehicles.  The information from the model will then
              be incorporated into a dispersion model to be developed by Dr. Alam to estimate
              air pollutant concentrations.  Dr. Persson and other ICDDR,B epidemiologists
              will examine the impact on children exposed to vehicular
              emmisions.

Scope:
Dhaka, Bangladesh, experiences air pollution that is more
              severe than in many larger cities, and the degraded air quality can have a
              significant negative impact on children.  In part this pollution is caused by
              emissions from the increased number of motorized vehicles on Dhaka's roads. 
              The current models for predicting emission impacts were created for the
              lane-based, homogeneous traffic found in developing countries.  These models
              are much less reliable when used in developing countries, where the vehicles
              are heterogeneous, and driver behavior patterns and traffic regulation and
              enforcement are different.  This research initiates a new partnership with
              international counterparts to develop and test integrated models for a problem
              that plagues several megacities in developing countries.  


