Title       : University of Portland Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarship
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0220850

Award Number: 0220850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240126             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Male male@up.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carmen Schabel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Regina Largent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven R. Vegdahl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Portland
	      5000 N Willamette Blvd
	      Portland, OR  972035743    503/283-7911

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project encourages and assists qualified financially needy students
              majoring in computer science, engineering, and mathematics in the completion
              their degrees. Central to the project is the fostering of socially cohesive
              cohorts of students progressing together through their programs in an
              academically enriched, interdisciplinary, supportive environment. A special
              effort is made to increase the participation and retention of underrepresented
              groups. The project supports an initial group of 10 students, recruited in the
              first year, through four years of study. A second group of 10 students,
              recruited in the second year of funding, are supported for three years of study
              with their final year of study funded by other sources.

An outstanding
              feature of the project is the coupling of this very individualized environment
              typical of a liberal arts college with a high quality School of Engineering.
              Existing university programs are integrated into the project. Activities for
              the CSEMS students include a weekly interdisciplinary seminar and social
              gathering, the opportunity for shared housing, opportunities to work together
              as peer-leaders in courses relevant to their disciplines, shared volunteer
              projects that use their academic expertise, and group interactions with
              professionals in their fields of interest. Students work closely with an
              academic advisor, have the opportunity to work with an industry contact, and
              participate in internships in his or her field of study. 

