Title       : ITR: Unifying Software Frameworks for Distributed Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0220183

Award Number: 0220183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vaidy S. Sunderam sunderam@mathcs.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              An architectural framework for distributed computing is proposed, with a view to
              unifying multiple resource sharing models. Farm computing, private virtual
              machines, computational grids, and peer to peer technologies are examples of
              di.erent paradigms that have evolved to support di.erent application domains.
              However, despite their common underlying theme of sharing resources across
              computer networks, systems implementing these technologies tend to preclude
              interoperability and, in some cases, require substantial middleware to
              orchestrate resource aggregation. This project adopts a provider-centric view
              of resource sharing, emphasizes lightweight software infrastructures that
              maintain minimal state, and facilitates straightforward interfacing to current
              and emerging distributed computing standards. Through a reconfigurable,
              component-based approach, the proposed framework will attempt to provide
              support for multiple distributed computing paradigms in a unified setting.
              

The provider perspective adopted in this project envisions resource owners
              hosting a software backplane onto which owners, clients, or third-party
              resellers may load components or component suites that deliver value added
              services. Complete control over usage, security, and protection of resources is
              retained by the owner. Components may implement primitive functions such as
              message transport or mathematical transforms, or may be aggregated to emulate
              concurrent computing environments, or may ofer portal interfaces to complex
              backend application services. Providers of primitive resources or components
              may publish their availability using either standard mechanisms,
              framework-supplied schemes, or private directories; clients discover, lookup,
              and use these services
subject to usage and security constraints.

In the
              conduct of this project, fundamental issues concerning commonalities and
              dualities in distributed systems, secure resource sharing, and software
              reconfiguration will be explored, and will likely contribute new and useful
              findings to the field. Owing to its strong pragmatic bias, the project is also
              likely to have broad impact by suggesting schemes to realize effective
              distributed computing systems, and by evolving prototype paradigmatic
              software.



