Title       : ITR: Game Theoretic Approaches to the Internet Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0220343

Award Number: 0220343
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390275             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay V. Vazirani vazirani@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Milena Mihail  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The emerging area of algorithmic game theory carries much promise because of new
              game theoretic issues arising from the Internet and because of the opportunity
              of applying recently developed powerful ideas from the yield of approximation
              algorithms to these issues.
BGP is an important network protocol whose
              performance affects many applications, and in
fact is critical to the
              integrity of the network. It is also one of the rare cases for which some
              routing
data is available. We propose to study BGP routing stability from a
              game theoretic perspective.
Our work will span all the way from mathematical
              modeling to a concrete proposal for developing
network performance evaluation
              primitives. Our project is interdisciplinary. Our team, together with our
              collaborators in the networking community, combine excellent complementary
              expertise and has successfully carried out a theory/networking project in the
              past. The impact of this work lies both in developing mathematical techniques
              and opening a new channel in technology transfer. We report several preliminary
              results. We also touch on other computational game theoretic issues such as
              cost sharing and protmaximizing pricing.
