Title       : Millennium Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0220709

Award Number: 0220709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $363000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol M. Poucher pouchecm@alfredstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Hunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce Fuller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Tech Alfred
	      
	      Alfred, NY  148021196    607/871-6111

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The National Science Foundation Scholars' Program is targeting seven academic
              programs. All seven are associate degree programs and two offer baccalaureate
              degrees. Based on a 1998 mission review, the college implemented a process
              calling for a broader, polytechnic baccalaureate mission. This is reflected in
              the expanding number of baccalaureate offerings.

The goals of the NSF
              Scholars Program are to:
1. Enroll academically talent and financially needy
              students in computer and engineering technology degree programs by the end of
              the four-year period.
2. Increase the diversity of students who matriculate
              into the college's computer science, engineering, and engineering technology
              degree programs.
3. Retain 100% of the NSF Scholars through graduation (AAS or
              BS).
4. Evaluate the outcomes of the NSF Scholars Program.
5. Disseminate the
              results of the NSF Scholars Program.

Associated Objectives and Specific
              Activities are designed to achieve these goals. Among these are to: 
(a)
              increase the proportion of students who are African-American and/or Hispanic by
              producing advertising material in English and Spanish, and recruiting in the
              Syracuse, Rochester, and Buffalo city school districts; 
(b) increase the
              proportion of students who are female by highlighting current support for women
              in non-traditional programs at the college, and designing advertising material
              specifically addressing the needs of women; 
(c) increase the number of
              students who are financially needy by targeting the 25 poorest rural school
              districts as identified by the New York State Education Department; and 
(d)
              increase the retention rate of all students enrolled in targeted programs by
              tapping the power of peer support in a variety of ways.

The selection
              process is based on an essay, letters of recommendation, academic performance,
              extra-curricular activities, and financial-eligibility. Evaluation is designed
              to determine whether the quantitative goals of the project are met. The
              outcomes of the NSF Scholars Program are being disseminated in academic,
              student affairs, enrollment management, and financial aid outlets nationally
              and regionally.
