Title       : Graduate/Undergraduate Engineering Initiative for Development and Enhancement
               (GUIDE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0220500

Award Number: 0220500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gretchen L. Hein glhein@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy Monte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Mihelcic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Michigan Technological University's College of Engineering strives to attract
              and retain more students from underrepresented groups, specifically women and
              minorities. This project supports undergraduate students during their first two
              years of college. The goal is for these high-risk students to perform well
              early in their college career with the expectation that their strong
              performance will help them to obtain alternate funding sources (e.g.: co-op and
              internship positions) during the latter two years of study. In addition, the
              project provides graduate scholarships for engineering students who are in
              unfunded programs so that they can cost effectively complete an advanced
              degree. The project builds upon and utilizes pre-existing campus programs,
              campus Learning Centers, and peer tutoring programs. To facilitate
              undergraduate success, students attend and participate in the engineering
              seminar series and the Career Center Workshops associated with this program.
              They regularly meet with their mentor and the program advisor. To retain their
              scholarships, undergraduate students need to show satisfactory progress towards
              their degree, become active in an on-campus professional organization, and work
              toward obtaining a co-op/internship position. The graduate scholars serve as
              academic mentors to the undergraduate scholars and offer insights regarding
              student life and the local community. Two groups of graduate students are
              targeted for the scholarships: Peace Corps International Masters students and
              the Master of Engineering students. (These graduate students are not typically
              eligible for traditional funding sources.) Graduate students in both programs
              are ideally suited to be mentors to undergraduate students: they have received
              a technical undergraduate degree and are interested in working with and
              supporting others. The graduate students receive training in mentoring and
              advising students. All target group engineering graduate and undergraduate
              students entering Michigan Tech are sent information and a scholarship
              application in the spring of each year of the program. Faculty/ staff evaluate
              the applicants based on need and individual merit. Each undergraduate
              scholarship recipient receives $2,500 per year to assist with college expenses.
              Each graduate scholarship recipient receives $3,125 per year to assist with
              college expenses. The graduate students receive funding for one year (the
              amount of time they are on campus for their degree program), while the
              undergraduate students are funded for two years. The interaction of
              undergraduates and graduate students is one of the most important components of
              this program.
