Title       : Ocean Energetics, Tidal Conversion and Baroclinic Instability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0220362

Award Number: 0220362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $659133             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Young wryoung@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ocean energetics, tidal conversion and baroclinic instability
William
              Young
Scripps Institute of Oceanography
The project is directed at
              understanding ocean energetics, mixing, baroclinic instability, tidal
              conversion, and the formation of the thermocline.  The first part of the
              project is understanding the ramifications and extensions of constraints on the
              ocean energetics. Because there are no deep sources of buoyancy in the ocean
              (apart from small geothermal heating), one can show that in a statistically
              steady state there is no exchange between the reservoirs of kinetic and
              potential energy at every depth.  The viscous dissipation of kinetic energy is
              balanced totally by tidal and wind forcing; there is essentially no net
              transformation o f potential into kinetic energy in the ocean.  Theory will be
              developed and directed at analyzing Boussinesq energetics and the balances of
              available and background potential energies in the ocean.  A second goal will
              be use primitive equation simulations and theory to examine the role of
              baroclinic eddies in forming the ocean thermocline.  This will test the
              hypothesis that buoyancy flux associated with breaking internal gravity waves
              is balanced by baroclinic eddies. An extension of the quasi-geostrophic
              approximation, in which the background stratification is self-consistently
              determined, rather than simply prescribed, will also be developed and
              implemented numerically.  The third goal will be an improved calculation of the
              generation of the internal tide by realistically large topography in an ocean
              with strongly variable buoyancy frequency.  A new boundary-integral
              representation of the solution leads to an integral equation that enables
              efficient calculation of the internal gravity waves generated by topography. 
              These goals relate to establishing the critical role of ocean mixing and
              turbulence in determining long-term changes in the Earth's climate via physical
              arguments based on energy balances.


