Title       : ITR: Cross-Layer Optimization For 4G Wireless Networks: Heavy-Tailed Traffic,
               Multiuser Channels, and Pseudocells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0220118

Award Number: 0220118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Upamanyu Madhow madhow@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses some fundamental aspects of the theory and practice of
              wireless networking.  An integrated approach, combiningphysical layer
              innovations with new protocols for medium access control and scheduling, while
              accounting for application requirements and transport protocol dynamics, is
              employed for solving the research problems that are identified.  Two major
              research thrusts are considered.  In the first research thrust, the concept of
              ``pseudocellular'' wireless networks, which combine the best features of
              cellular and ad hoc networks, is considered as a paradigm for plug-and-play
              fourth generation (4G) wireless networks.  Such a flexible architecture is
              clearly critical for quick set-up of wireless networks in emergency situations,
              in which stationary, or perhaps even mobile, base stations are deployed at
              convenient (but not optimized)
sites to serve both slow-moving and fast-moving
              users.  However, it is also a key ingredient of our vision of achieving a
              quantum jump in wireless link speeds, by going beyond the current cellular
              frequency bands of 1-2 GHz to the large bandwidths available in frequency bands
              in the 10s of GHz.  The path loss in such bands is high, forcing the use of a
              dense network of base stations on the one hand, and enabling more aggressive
              frequency reuse on the other.  The focus of the research is to support a mix of
              user mobilities, and a mix of real-time and non real-time applications, over a
              packetized pseudocellular infrastructure.  This setting differs from
              conventional cellular networks, in that the cell sizes are small, and cells may
              have substantial overlap.  It differs from wireless Local Area Networks
              (WLANs), in that it allows for rapidly mobile users despite the small cell
              sizes.  Instead of a conventional hierarchical structure (i.e., large cells for
              fast-moving users, overlaid on small cells for slow-moving users) to deal with
              a range of mobility, a mobile-centric approach, which combines handoffs and
              reservation-based medium access control, is considered to allow for flexible
              deployment. A novel idea to be investigated is the support of priorities on the
              reservation channel, so as to allow, for example, highly mobile users with
              real-time calls in progress to rapidly reserve resources when entering a new
              pseudocell, thus implicitly achieving a handoff. Another important issue is
              transceiver optimization of the reservation channel, which requires solution of
              new problems in multiuser communications.

The second research thrust is
              motivated by the well-known observation that Internet traffic has a
              heavy-tailed distribution, which typically calls for more conservative resource
              provisioning than for traditional Markovian traffic models.  Since
              overprovisioning is unattractive in  resource-constrained wireless environment,
              the approach considered is toemploy a new Quality of Service (QoS) framework
              that allows foraggressive resource utilization, by serving the bulk of
              the
transactions (which are short) rapidly, and penalizing the small fraction
              of long transactions that contribute to the heavy tails. Scheduling disciplines
              that achieve this goal are very different from
popular round robin or fair
              queueing schedulers, and were considered in the queueing theory literature more
              than three decades ago.  The implication of these results for heavy-tailed
              Internet
traffic is explored for the first time (to the best of our knowledge)
              in this project.  The scheduling strategy is extended to a shared wireless
              channel, where fairness is traded off against system
efficiency, with the
              latter dictating that users seeing the best channels are the ones that should
              get link access.  The tradeoff is expected to be biased towards efficiency in
              order to support
heavy-tailed traffic effectively.  The interaction between
              scheduling and the dynamics of TCP connections (TCP is the Internet data
              transport protocol on top of which most transactions run) is explored, keeping
              in mind that a TCP connection that is starved of network resources can get
              locked out of the network due to repeated timeouts and rate cutbacks.  Finally,
              the dependence of scheduling on mobility is explored, with the concept of
              assigning priority to highly mobile
users (who have a smaller chance of
              getting access to the link during their sojourn in a given pseudocell), while
              keeping overall QoS and fairness in mind.  The scheduling methods we develop
              place a high importance on overall system efficiency, and are therefore
              well-suited to flat rate pricing, which is arguably an effective mechanism of
              promoting usage growth in wireless data networks.

