Title       : Information Technology Training and Academic Enhancement Program for Computer
               Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Undergraduate Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0220830

Award Number: 0220830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396604             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sitharama S. Iyengar iyengar@bit.csc.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Connie Stelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Saundra McGuire  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Neubrander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eyassu Woldesenbet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Departments of Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics, in
              collaboration with the Office of Strategic Initiatives and the Center for
              Academic Success at Louisiana State University, is increasing the educational
              and career opportunities for academically talented, financially disadvantaged
              students to reach their fullest potential through a student/faculty partnership
              with a comprehensive monitoring system. 

The goal of this project is to
              recruit financially disadvantaged students, to retain these students, and to
              enhance the educational experience of these students in the technology
              disciplines. Specific objectives are: (1) Recruit qualified students through an
              active K-12 educational outreach program, including math and science fairs,
              competitions, and in-school math and science laboratories, (2) Retain these
              students through the incorporation of student support and mentoring programs,
              (3) Enhance the educational experience of these students through
              workshops/seminars, industrial outreach, and community service opportunities,
              (4) Increase the number of undergraduates, including women and minorities in
              the above-mentioned disciplines, and (5) Promote intercultural participation
              among non-minority and minority students. In addition to the scholarships, the
              project consists of three activities: (1) mandatory computer and information
              technology training (average 2 hrs/wk), (2) mandatory academic enhancement
              activities (average 1 hr/wk), and (3) optional educational and industrial
              outreach programs (up to 3 hrs/wk). CSEMS Scholars receive additional
              information technology training through various workshops and training courses.
              

The Office of Strategic Initiatives and the Center for Academic Success,
              Co-PIs, and several other faculty members provide active mentoring and academic
              assistance for the CSEMS Scholars to maximize their chances for academic
              success. The faculty mentors also assist CSEMS Scholars in pursuing their
              professional careers though continuing graduate studies or job placement in
              industries relevant to their education. There are 29 students per year majoring
              in computer science, engineering, or mathematics disciplines who hold
              scholarships. Scholarships can be renewed up to graduation. CSEMS Scholars form
              a community that interacts regularly with each other, with faculty, and with
              other students on campus. 

