Title       : ITR: Sublinear Algorithms for Massive Data Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0220280

Award Number: 0220280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shanmugavelayut Muthukrishnan muthu@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Piotr Indyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Manipulating large scale data sources leads to question what are efficient
              algorithms. Even linear time algorithms may be much too slow on truly massive
              data. Similarly, even using linear space
to store the data may be unreasonable
              when input data that is generated is far too voluminous. Applications abound
              where these constraints are natural. For example, data stores that archive web
              pages on the Internet, all telephone call records or molecular sequences are
              massive, and even linear time algorithms to process them prove slow. Data
              sources such as network traffic measurements are voluminous and rarely get
              archived; instead, it is desirable to process them as they are generated to
              obtain suitable sublinear space representations. Two approaches to building
              sublinear algorithms are sampling and streaming. In sampling, algorithms
              examine a (small) subset of input and solve problems of interest in sublinear
              time, typically to some provable approximation. While sampling has been studied
              in Probability and Statistics for decades, truly sublinear algorithms for
              sophisticated tasks such as clustering and building fourier representations
              have only recently been obtained. The algorithms should have solid theoretical
              foundations, and should be amenable to analysis using rigorous theoretical
              tools. However, some of the algorithms will be also implemented and subjected
              to experimental evaluation. It is expected that the algorithms developed in the
              context of this project
will have significant practical impact.

