Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematical Scholarships: Transition to
               Meaningful Employment Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0220840

Award Number: 0220840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Key ericskey@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ethan V. Munson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen M. Brucks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Papadopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project supports 33 talented, academically qualified, students with
              financial need, many from traditionally under-represented groups, during their
              beginning, core coursework in the targeted disciplines (Computer Science,
              Engineering, and Mathematics). The program offers scholarships for students and
              provide an extensive set of academic support services and educational
              opportunities, including tutoring and inviting speakers. 

Primary
              Objectives
1. To allow such students who major in Computer Science,
              Engineering, or Mathematics to complete the first half of their undergraduate
              education in four semesters by reducing the need for outside employment during
              the school year.
2. To increase the number of such students who choose to
              attend the university as freshmen.
3. To increase the proportion of such
              students who go on to complete their degrees in a timely fashion.
Methods
1.
              $3000 scholarships annually for two years.
2. Visits to local high schools to
              recruit prospective scholarship recipients.
3. Peer mentoring, faculty
              advising, and extramural speakers.
4. Tutoring and other academic
              services.
Impact
These scholarships benefit students both financially and
              academically. The scholarships are equivalent to about 75% of annual in-state
              tuition at the university. Students on scholarship are able to work at least 12
              fewer hours per week, giving them more time to devote to their studies.
              Students funded by this program are required to earn 58 credit hours, compared
              with the current average of about 48 credit hours. By the end of the
              scholarship period, the successful student is better able to find employment at
              higher wages and to find work that reinforces their recently acquired academic
              skills. The program benefits the university by making it more attractive to the
              pool of talented low income students in the surrounding community. It meshes
              well with the current Pre-College Academy, which attracts about 100 students
              annually for training in the Natural Sciences, by providing funds for these
              students to continue their education at the university. The presence of
              students in this scholarship program enhances the academic climate at the
              university. 

