Title       : ITR: Optimization of Reconfigurable Architectures for Efficient Implementation
               of Particle Filters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0220011

Award Number: 0220011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359806             (Estimated)
Investigator: Petar M. Djuric djuric@ece.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sangjin Hong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0220011
Djuric, Petar
SUNY @ Stony Brook

Optimization of
              Reconfigurable Architectures for Efficient Implementation of 
Particle
              Filters

In recent years particle filters have attracted great attention in
              several research communities. These filters are used in problems where
              time-varying  signals must be processed in real time and the objective is to
              estimate various unknowns of the signals and to detect events described by the
              signals. The standard solutions of such problems in many applications are based
              on the 
Kalman or extended Kalman filters. In situations when the problems are
              highly nonlinear or the noise that distorts the signals is non-Gaussian, the
              Kalman filters provide solutions that may be far from optimal.  
A major
              drawback of the particle filters is that their implementation is 
              computationally very intensive. They are, however, inherently parallelizable,
              and special hardware can be built for their implementation that can meet the
              stringent requirements of real-time processing. In this research,
              
reconfigurable and physically feasible VLSI architectures for particle
              filters are developed. In the development of these architectures, many
              important problems are researched. The most critical of them is the balancing
              of hardware and software, which itself is tightly related to other important
              issues. They include reductions of computational complexities by
              transformations and 
approximations, investigation of the degree of
              parallelism implemented in the filter, investigation of various interconnection
              mechanisms, random communication schemes, hardware optimization, and design of
              low power VLSI processors. This effort also includes building of reconfigurable
              hardware so that it is suitable for different types of particle filters. 


