Title       : Step Ahead: Fontbonne Scholarship Program in Mathematics and Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0220450

Award Number: 0220450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Newton bnewton@fontbonne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn Graves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theresa Jeevanjee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fontbonne
	      6800 Wydown Boulevard
	      St. Louis, MO  631053098    314/889-4510

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY
This scholarship program is designed to provide increased
              financial assistance to qualified students pursuing a baccalaureate program in
              mathematics or computer science in preparation for successful entry into a
              career field or graduate study related to these disciplines. The objectives of
              this scholarship program are: 1) to increase the number of academically
              qualified low income students obtaining undergraduate degrees in mathematics or
              computer science, with special encouragement given to women, under-represented
              minorities and persons with disabilities; 2) to collaborate with the St. Louis
              corporate community in its efforts to attract, retain and develop a qualified
              talent pool of employees; and 3) to increase the number of qualified students
              who enroll and persevere in the mathematics and computer science programs at
              Fontbonne College. A total of ten students will be chosen as scholarship
              recipients. Seven students will be selected as entering freshmen, and will
              continue to receive a scholarship of $3,125 throughout their four-year program
              provided they meet the published academic standards of the department. Three
              transfer students, preferably from the St. Louis Community College system, will
              be selected in year one and three in year three. Each will receive the $3,125
              per year scholarship for the two years they are at Fontbonne College.

A
              Principle Investigator and two Co-PIs will direct the program. A review
              committee composed of the three directors, with appropriate input from the
              Directors of Admission and Financial Aid, will make the final selection of
              participants. Selection will be made based on criteria including U.S.
              citizenship status, financial need, published admission and department
              requirements, evidence of the candidate's ability demonstrated through
              transcripts, a written essay and personal interview, and the expressed desire
              to pursue a career or graduate study in an area related to mathematics or
              computer science. All students will agree to complete a baccalaureate degree as
              full-time students during the two or four year duration of the program.

The
              CSEMS scholars will have access to all student support services available as
              needed through the Kinkel Center for Academic Resources, the Office of
              Multicultural Affairs and the Career and Counseling Center. In addition to
              their academic program, scholarship recipients will participate in department
              sponsored programs designed to optimize their chances for successful program
              completion and entry into the career of their choice. The PI and Co-PIs will
              serve as academic advisers to the scholars, closely monitoring each scholar's
              progress. They will participate in the career center's four year Professional
              Development Certificate Program for entering freshmen; the two-year Career
              Advancement Program will be recommended for the transfer scholars. Five
              graduates from the department will serve as mentors for these scholars
              throughout their academic program. A one hour supplemental instruction/problem
              solving
session will be scheduled weekly during each semester. Scholars will
              also have the option for Co-op which will be coordinated through the Director
              of Cooperative Education and internship placement coordinated through the
              academic department. All scholars will present a poster session on their
              research prior to graduation in addition to the regular presentation of their
              portfolio which is required of all graduates from the department.

