Title       : Longhorn Scholars in Computer Sciences, Engineering and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0220811

Award Number: 0220811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Laude dalaude@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alvin H. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lucia Gilbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J Strother Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Texas at Austin is partnering with the Hispanic Scholarship
              Fund Institute to produce outstanding undergraduates for service and research
              in the public sector as part of a unique academic experience for computer
              science, mathematics and engineering majors. A total of 32 four-year
              scholarships are being awarded to talented students who are entering the
              University as Longhorn Scholars with an interest in technology fields. The
              highly successful Longhorn Scholars Program, now in its third year of
              operation, identifies financially needy students who graduate in the top 10% of
              their class from 70 historically underrepresented high schools in the State of
              Texas. The Colleges of Engineering and Natural Sciences participates by
              providing a rigorous curriculum and associated degrees in the targeted areas.
              Recognizing the substantial population of minority students graduating from
              these high schools, the Hispanic Scholarship Foundation has offered to assist
              in devising a collection of retention strategies including mentoring programs
              and placement opportunities in public sector research laboratories, research
              internships and cooperatives. Despite its large size, the University of Texas
              is committed to a personalized academic experience for its students. In
              particular, Longhorn Scholars are evaluated to identify career interests as
              well as academic strengths and weaknesses. This information is used to
              determine the appropriate academic track for each student. Depending on major
              and background, students become part of either the Equal Opportunity in
              Engineering Program (EOE), the Partnership for Excellence in the Natural
              Sciences program (PENS) or the Emerging Scholars Program (ESP) that serves both
              Colleges. Each of these programs provides an intricate support structure that
              includes strong faculty participation, personalized academic advising and
              mentoring and an intensive math and science curriculum. The Hispanic
              Scholarship Fund Institute is augmenting these existing services with external
              mentoring programs as well as seminars and field experiences to introduce
              students to the function and significance of the public sector in technology
              advancement. By their junior and senior years, students will be poised to begin
              capstone experiences through academic research, internships and co-ops. It is
              expected that many will participate in the public sector opportunities made
              available as a part of this initiative. The CSEMS scholarships and the support
              programs surrounding them contribute directly to the primary mission of The
              University of Texas at Austin to effectively serve all populations of the State
              of Texas in producing outstanding graduates. The ability to bring together such
              a wide array of collaborators speaks to the importance of this mission in
              producing a new generation of leaders in technology fields.
