Title       : Reaching Out to Academically-Talented, Financially-Disadvantaged Students for
               Careers in Engineering and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0220761

Award Number: 0220761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hasan Sevim sevim@engr.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rolando Bravo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew G. Earnest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen A. Pericak-Spector  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides scholarship support for academically talented and
              economically disadvantaged students seeking to earn undergraduate degrees in
              Engineering or Mathematics at Southern Illinois University Carbondale. The
              primary goal of this project is to improve the recruitment and retention of
              these students, thereby increasing both the number and quality of students in
              these disciplines who are well prepared to enter the high-technology workforce.
              The program provides scholarship support to seventy-two students during the
              crucial first two years of their university training. By the end of this
              period, the students have achieved a sound foundation in the fundamentals of
              science and mathematics on which to build their specialized training in their
              chosen disciplines during the final two years of their university training.
              Following the period of scholarship support, the students in the program are
              provided with the opportunity to participate in: 1) a cooperative educational
              experience or an internship designed to prepare them for the transition into
              their professional careers, 2) a departmental research project as an
              undergraduate researcher, or 3) the College of Engineering supplemental
              instruction program as a mentor or the Department of Mathematics tutoring
              program as a tutor. These experiences help develop a sense of responsibility
              and instill leadership skills in these students as well as provide them with
              financial support to partially offset their school expenses. To complement the
              job offerings, an industrial scholarship coalition provides additional
              financial support to the students during their junior and senior years.
              

There are two target groups of students being recruited for this program:
              1) economically disadvantaged high school students from the southern Illinois
              region, which constitutes the northernmost part of the Delta Regional Authority
              of 236 counties and parishes in the eight-state Mississippi delta region, and
              2) African-American and Hispanic-American high school students from Illinois,
              mainly from urban centers such as Chicago and East St. Louis. There is a
              special emphasis on attracting female students from these groups. Recruitment
              and support activities for the scholarship recipients is being carried out
              within the context of established mechanisms that exist in the College of
              Engineering and the Department of Mathematics and builds upon established
              collaborations between all of the involved departments. 

