Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a0220820

Award Number: 0220820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross P. Abraham Ross_Abraham@sdstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ali Salehnia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Reid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Maras  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To assist with the recruitment and retention of promising students in the
              Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics (CSEM) fields and to help improve
              the quality of their education, this project supports a scholarship program for
              students in the CSEM fields. The goal of the SDSU CSEMS project is to increase
              the number of students pursuing and successfully completing degrees in the CSEM
              fields, with special consideration given to women and minority students
              underrepresented in these areas.

To accomplish this goal, the Management
              Team has established the following objectives:
1. Advertise the CSEM
              scholarship opportunity and recruit 30 students in the CSEM fields who have
              demonstrated academic merit and financial need;
2. Promote high quality and
              sustained faculty-student relationships between the scholarship recipients and
              their faculty mentors and monitor student progress;
3. Increase the students'
              awareness of the academic support, career planning, and educational enhancement
              opportunities available to them and encourage them to utilize these resources
              and opportunities;
4. Increase the students' awareness of and interaction with
              the high technology industry and higher education.

To achieve these goals
              the CSEMS scholars each have extensive contact with faculty mentors who guide
              their proteges through the college experience. Under the direction of their
              mentors, scholars attend a variety of Educational Enhancement Activities
              designed to provide a mixture of practical knowledge, academic discourse,
              appreciation of the university, and global and community awareness. Each CSEM
              scholar also has contact with a member of the business and industrial community
              in order to gain insight into different degree-related careers that will be
              available to them. The SDSU CSEMS project has the potential to increase not
              only the number of financially needy and underrepresented students, but also
              the overall number of students majoring and graduating in high-demand
              technology-based fields. 


