Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program (CSEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0220655

Award Number: 0220655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack N. Donato jdonato@sunyjefferson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Genny Pond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Penrose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oliver Youst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Dittrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jefferson Cmty Col
	      1220 Coffeen Street
	      Watertown, NY  13601    315/786-2200

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is creating a comprehensive scholars program for students whose
              goals are to pursue degrees and careers in high technology fields. The program
              provides $3,000 scholarships annually to 30 students who have academic ability
              and documented financial need, and who enroll full-time in our computer
              science, engineering, network technology or computer information systems (CSEM)
              associate degree programs. The program particularly targets women and first
              generation college students.

Two activities in particular contribute to the
              overall success of the scholarship recipients, as well as other students
              enrolled in these high technology curricula. The activities are:
(a) intensive
              instructional support for historically difficult classes. A supplemental
              instruction program assists students in the targeted curricula who are enrolled
              in classes that have high attrition rates. Each of the five courses identified
              as historically difficult is a requirement for at least one of the CSEMS degree
              programs.
(b) creation of a community of scholars to engage students receiving
              the CSEMS scholarships, faculty, alumni, local high school faculty, and local
              industry representatives in developing relationships and fostering an
              environment that supports and inspires students to achieve. 

The project
              builds on existing relationships between high school faculty and guidance
              counselors to recruit and enroll academically gifted students. Student
              development events include annual scholars' reception, open house and a high
              technologies career forum. Opportunities for student enrichment activities,
              including internships with local industry, faculty mentoring, and field trips
              are being developed.

The goals of the program are to increase the number of
              :
(1) educated workers prepared for placement in the high technology careers,
              especially in the region.
(2) students recruited, enrolled, retained,
              graduated and transferring in the CSEMS disciplines.
(3) underrepresented
              populations (women and first generation college students) enrolled and
              graduated in CSEMS majors.
(4) quality of support services and educational
              opportunities available to students enrolled in the targeted
              curricula.

These goals are being assessed and evaluated by measuring annual
              rates of retention, graduation and transfer; subsequent success of transfer
              students at baccalaureate institutions; and employer satisfaction with our
              graduates.
