Title       : Functional Roles for Tetrahymena RAD51 During Conjugation and the Cell Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0220085

Award Number: 0220085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Romero romero@lenti.med.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The regulation of genome dynamics has been evolutionarily conserved.  A key
              factor involved in maintaining the genome's integrity is the ubiquitous DNA
              strand transfer protein Rad51p.  Despite a full decade of research on RAD51
              from model systems ranging from yeast to mammals, it is still unclear how
              Rad51p mediates its effects.  This project focuses on RAD51 from the ciliated
              protozoan Tetrahymena thermophila.  Due to Tetrahymena's unique cell biology
              and nuclear organization, genetic manipulations can showcase the separable
              functions of Rad51p, including roles unwitnessed in other model organisms.  
              Ciliates possess an unusual genome organization that effectively divides the
              somatic and germ-line genetic functions between two distinct nuclei.  The
              micronucleus (MIC) is the germline nucleus, dividing mitotically during
              vegetative growth, and transcriptionally silent.  The macronucleus (MAC) is the
              somatic nucleus, dividing amitotically, and transcriptionally active.  The MICs
              of a conjugating pair undergo a series of meiotic and mitotic divisions,
              followed by an exchange of haploid nuclei, which fuse to produce a zygotic
              nucleus.  Late in conjugation the parental MACs are destroyed, and new MACs
              develop in a programmed manner from copies of the zygotic MIC.  Tetrahymena
              RAD51 expression varies under a number of different environmental conditions
              and developmental stages.  Constitutively high Rad51p expression during
              vegetative growth decouples MAC division from the cell cycle, leading to a high
              percentage of amacronucleate progeny.   This project has two goals.  First, a
              cDNA expression library will be screened for Tetrahymena gene products that
              suppress the severe amacronucleate phenotype exhibited by strains that
              constitutively express Rad51p.  This experimental approach will help identify
              factors that directly and/or indirectly interact with Rad51p during
              macronuclear division.  Second, randomly mutagenized Rad51p will be
              constitutively expressed in an effort to identify missense mutations that
              alleviate the amacronucleate phenotype in transformants.   

This project,
              taking advantage of genetic manipulations possible only within the Tetrahymena
              experimental system, should extend our understanding of Rad51p structure and
              function and thus will contribute to the analysis of this highly important
              protein in other eukaryotic model systems.  Both undergraduate and graduate
              students will help carry out this research.

