Title       : An Interdigitated PVDF Guided Wave Transducer for Large Array Condition
               Monitoring of Steel Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0220027

Award Number: 0220027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209745             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming-Liang Wang mlwang@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Lloyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              To place the problem of condition monitoring in structures into an overall
              perspective and  to highlight the growing need for guided wave condition
              monitoring strategies, it is important to note that the past decade of
              theoretical and applied experience in structural health monitoring has yielded
              two overarching conclusions.  First, from a theoretical perspective, it has
              become accepted that transducer design must focus on distributed, localized
              measurements at critical members and attachment points.  This is because of the
              low sensitivity of global measurements, such as mode shapes and natural
              frequencies, to degradation of any kind. Secondly, extensive experience from
              applied research and demonstration projects has indicated that a successful
              transducer must incorporate all following requirements: low unit cost, easy
              installation and wide applicability; high sensitivity and high S/N ratios; low
              power consumption; capability for wireless operation or remote interrogation;
              and long-term durability

Transducers for condition monitoring of structures
              based on guided wave interrogation principles, such as Rayleigh-Lamb wave
              transducers, address in principle both sets of concerns. However, transducers
              based on conventional piezoceramics do not meet all the necessary requirements.
              To address this need, it is proposed to develop an interdigitated Rayleigh-Lamb
              wave transducer based on polyvinyldine fluoride (PVDF) piezoelectric polymer
              films.  The successful demonstration of such a transducer will combine the
              attractive approaches of ultrasonic guided wave testing and the highly evolved
              capabilities of interdigitated electrodes (IDEs) developed for RF SAW devices
              or high field, high force pizeoceramic actuators, with the highly desirable
              properties of PVDF films for structural monitoring. This will significantly
              enlarge the choice of piezoelectric materials available for maintaining the
              performance of the nation's infrastructure components.

