Title       : Development & Application of Molecular Diagnostics for Fe & P Limitation of
               Trichodesmium Nitrogen Fixation & Productivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0220945

Award Number: 0220945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398129             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Webb ewebb@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Moffett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sonya T. Dyhrman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Waterbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,9117,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Photosynthetic fixation of CO2 in the oceans accounts for approximately half of
              total primary production.  A significant component of this primary production
              is due to the growth of oceanic cyanobacteria, such as the diazotroph
              Trichodesmium.  For example, in the tropical and subtropical North Atlantic,
              Trichodesmium  spp. are thought  to be  the most significant primary producers.
               Additionally, in this region Trichodesmium introduces the largest fraction of
              new nitrogen to the euphotic zone (~30mg N/m2/day), a value that exceeds the
              estimated flux of nitrate across the thermocline.  Although there are many
              biogeochemical factors that may impact Trichodesmium productivity and N2
              fixation (e.g. nutrients, light, temperature), recent studies have emphasized
              the critical importance of P and Fe bioavailability.  To increase our
              understanding of how the bioavailability of these elements may constrain
              primary production and N2 fixation, these PIs developed specific molecular
              diagnostics for Fe and P limitation in Trichodesmium.  The PIs have determined
              that axenic cultures of P-stressed Trichodesmium colonies induce the enzyme
              PhoA and Fe-stressed colonies express the protein  IdiA.  The PIs have also
              demonstrated that they can detect PhoA activity and IdiA  expression in field
              populations. In this project, laboratory studies will be used to determine how
              these diagnostics correlate with decreases in both Trichodesmium productivity
              and N2 fixation.  This work will result in the development and application of
              two well-tested molecular diagnostics for determining if P, Fe, or both, limit
              Trichodesmium C and N2 fixation. The assay for species-specific PhoA activity,
              called Enzyme Labeled Fluorescence, utilizes commercially available reagents,
              and as with IdiA heterologously-expressed in Escherichia  coli, the PIs will
              provide the IdiA protein or antiserum to others.  The impact of this research
              will be tools that can be used by investigators to quickly and easily identify
              P and Fe limitation in Trichodesmium species from any environment.  
