Title       : NSF/CONACyT: Integrated Air Modeling Approach to PM Source Apportionment at the
               USA/Mexico Border
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0220079

Award Number: 0220079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101069             (Estimated)
Investigator: JoAnn S. Lighty jlighty@coe.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hendrik L. Meuzelaar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0220079  Lighty  The University of Utah (UofU) and the Instituto Tecnologico y
              de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey (ITESM) are involved in a collaborative air
              quality modeling study of ambient particulate matter (PM) in selected areas of
              the Lower Rio Grande Valley (LRGV) section of the USA/Mexico border.  Special
              attention is being given to the peculiar evening episodes with very high PM
              levels observed near several large border cities and reported to be associated
              with increased mortality risk in at least one region.
The partners have
              recently participated in a comprehensive PM characterization and source
              attribution study of the Paso del Norte airshed and propose to use a novel,
              integrated approach to PM source apportionment by cross-validating the results
              of PM Receptor Modeling (using factor analysis of receptor and source
              characterization data to estimate major source contributions) with PM Source
              Modeling results (using area emission estimates and geography- plus
              meteorology-based dispersion models to predict evening PM concentrations at
              specific receptor sites).  Successful integration of both methods should permit
              some degree of interpolation between the limited sampling locations and time
              points afforded by Receptor Modeling alone while enabling calibration of Source
              Modeling predictions.  Other potential benefits include improved PM exposure
              risk assessment opportunities for various population groups and more detailed
              evaluation of the widely reported statistical association between 24-hr PM
              averages and urban mortality plus morbidity.  Most of the PM receptor
              characterization and modeling tasks will be carried out by the Uof U team
              whereas primary responsibility for the source measurement and modeling tasks
              will be undertaken by the ITESM team. Integration of measurement, data fusion,
              evaluation, and interpretation tasks will require a highly coordinated effort
              by both teams, an International Collaboration being supported by the
              NSF-CONACyT Collaborative Research Opportunities Program.

