Title       : Creating Access and Opportunity for Engineering and Technology Students in
               Southeastern Massachusetts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a0220721

Award Number: 0220721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Majkut jmajkut@bristol.mass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony M. Ucci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bristol Community College
	      777 Elsbree Street
	      Fall River, MA  027207307    617/678-2811

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is strengthening the completion and graduation rate of students who
              are non-traditional majors in engineering and technology. Students are being
              selected on academic merit and financial need criteria. The purpose of the
              program is to close the financial assistance gap, increase time on task, and
              support graduation for the associate degree for selected scholars within two
              years.

A broadly representative Scholarship Committee is being formed;
              composed of faculty, administrative staff including the Director of Financial
              Aid, and industrial partners. Applications require a personal statement of
              educational and career goals and at least one letter of recommendation. This
              program aims to sustain award recipients to completion by providing intensive
              supportive services including small classes and a learning community approach,
              goal-based developmental advising, a college success seminar, a new student
              orientation, and internships. Other support services include tutoring and
              writing centers. The scholarship program enables the college to provide
              supplementary support for tutoring and monthly scholar seminars.

Industrial
              partners provide mentoring and cooperative education opportunities. The
              Department of Engineering and Engineering Technology offers an associate degree
              in both career and transfer programs and is currently implementing an NSF
              Advanced Technological Education project, which establishes a new automated
              manufacturing curriculum and laboratory (also referred to as
              computer-integrated manufacturing or CIM program). This program is recruiting
              and enrolling two cohorts of non-traditional students for engineering and
              technology. Program scholars in this project are being drawn from this ATE
              project as well as from other engineering programs at the college.
