Title       : Collaborative Proposal: Kuroshio Extension System Study {KESS}
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  2002   
File        : a0220161

Award Number: 0220161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2116287            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nelson G. Hogg nhogg@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven R. Jayne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0220161 Hogg

The overall goal of the Kuroshio Extension System Study (KESS)
              is to identify and quantify the dynamic and thermodynamic processes governing
              the variability of and the interaction between the Kuroshio Extension and the
              recirculation gyre. Investigators from three US institutions will deploy a
              state-of-the-art array consisting of moored-profiler and current-meter moorings
              and inverted echo sounders equipped with near-bottom pressure and current
              sensors. Profiling floats will monitor the temperature and salinity structure
              in the recirculation gyre south of the Kuroshio Extension. The KESS array is
              designed to use these tools synergistically to observe the Kuroshio Extension
              in a more complete way than any one of them could do alone. In particular, the
              Inverted Echo Sounders will map features of the jet as they evolve and, in
              combination with the Moored Profilers, will quantify the cross-frontal fluxes,
              while the profiling floats will monitor the upper ocean structure around the
              Kuroshio Extension and its recirculation gyres. KESS will use these combined
              observations to identify and quantify the dynamic and thermodynamic processes
              governing the variability of, and the interaction between, the Kuroshio
              Extension and the recirculation gyre. The proposed approach makes extensive use
              of satellite data (surface temperature and sea-surface height). The
              investigators will also collaborate closely with Japanese scientists studying
              the overall Kuroshio system. The measurements from the KESS array will guide
              future planning for a long term observational program as part of CLIVAR.

