Title       : Tufts-CSEMS Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0220651

Award Number: 0220651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane L. Souvaine dls@cs.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Caroline Cao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie Baise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Misha Kilmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Soha Hassoun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of Tuft's CSEMS program is to improve the recruitment, retention,
              and graduation of students with demonstrated financial need, especially women,
              and underrepresented minorities, who pursue studies in computer science,
              engineering, and mathematics. Two-year scholarships are going to be awarded
              each year to a cohort of entering freshmen and community college transfers to
              Tufts. The program is going to support 28 students per year over a four-year
              period. Four scholarships are going to be allocated to students who transfer
              from community colleges.

The program also aims to relieve students of the
              necessity to work, so that they have more time to concentrate on their academic
              program. Yet, as important as this additional study time is, experience
              indicates that students with demonstrated financial need confront several other
              obstacles to succeeding at college as well. They are, for example, less likely
              to have parents who graduated from a four-year college, and are, therefore,
              less familiar with many of the expectations, and protocols of an academic
              environment. The absence of role models, such as older siblings or friends, who
              have experienced academic success, also denies to them opportunities to map out
              the expectations they will confront in college. Together with the substantial
              demands that the regimens of computer science, engineering, and mathematics
              make on them, these students can become discouraged, and eventually seek out
              other fields, or leave school entirely.

Through early intervention, the
              CSEMS Scholars program at Tufts expects to provide participants with an
              integrated set of support services that is going to both monitor their progress
              and address problems, both academic and non-academic, as they occur. By doing
              so, students are going to be afforded the maximum opportunity to succeed
              academically. The program offers them close contact with a specially designated
              CSEMS faculty advisor, peer mentoring, graduate student mentors, accelerated
              access to academic and other university support services, and a series of
              seminars that brings together faculty, graduate students, and support staff to
              form an integrative experience for CSEMS Scholars across the two years they are
              in the program.

