Title       : DBE Synthesis Supplement: Deep Circulation in the Tropical and Subtropical South
               Atlantic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0220407

Award Number: 0220407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Speer kevin.speer@ocean.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andreas Thurnherr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1326,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0220407 Speer

In the course of the Deep Basin Experiment under the World
              Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) a new hydrographic and tracer climatology
              of the tropical and subtropical South Atlantic was constructed and a
              re-analysis of hydrographic sections was carried out. The meridional density
              gradients observed in hydrographic sections west of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge (in
              the Brazil Basin) indicate a strikingly regular pattern of persistent zonal
              flows coherent over large spatial scales, consistent with the isopycnal
              distributions of several tracers in the new climatology. This pattern of
              alternating zonal flows is also apparent in the output from a state-of-the-art
              numerical model. While the observations (as well as the model) indicate that
              the notion of a mean deep circulation is sensible they also show that it is not
              possible to determine the time-averaged geostrophic flows from synoptic
              observations by simply determining a reference velocity (barotropic
              adjustment). The difference between the synoptic and the time-averaged
              geostrophic zonal velocity fields in the Brazil Basin is baroclinic and varies
              both in time and space. The excellent agreement between the hydrographically
              observed and the numerical zonal flows in the South Atlantic suggests that it
              possible to use the numerical results to separate the observations into
              long-term mean and low-frequency time-varying components. The current analysis
              will be extended and applied it to a larger region of the South Atlantic with
              the overriding goal to quantitatively describe the deep circulation in the
              tropical and subtropical South Atlantic during the WOCE period. The first step
              will consist of analyzing the spatio-temporal structure of the time-varying
              model flow to guide the separation of the time-varying from the mean
              geostrophic flows determined from the hydrographic sections. The fact that the
              model appears to simulate the mean zonal flows in the Brazil Basin
              realistically does not imply that the time-varying flows are as well
              represented, of course. While it is not possible to directly estimate the
              time-varying flow component from available hydrographic sections analysis of
              individual profiles as well as differences between two hydrographic sections
              will allow the PI's to compare important aspects of the time-variable flow
              field, such as spatial scales and baroclinic structure to the model output.
              Furthermore, the results of a recent analysis of the time-varying flows derived
              from ?oat data (Hogg et al. , 2002) will be used for comparison. In addition to
              revealing new aspects of the deep circulation (with implications for climate,
              tracer dispersal, biogeography, etc.), the results of the proposed project will
              significantly improve the analysis of synoptic hydrographic sections with
              important implications for inverse models and, therefore, for determining the
              mean circulation from the WOCE data sets. Direct comparison of numerical-model
              output and oceanic data is an intrinsic part of the proposed project and will
              reveal strengths and, more importantly, weaknesses of current numerical models.
              These insights will be useful for improving the models.

