Title       : Inkjet-printed inductively-coupled power harvesting circuits on plastic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0220931

Award Number: 0220931
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivek Subramanian viveks@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There has been intensive research focused on the development of an electronic
              replacement for the ubiquitous UPC barcode. To replace consumer barcodes,
              ultra-low cost will be paramount. Organic-based circuits may enable this due to
              their low fabrication cost. In this work, the investigators will develop the
              technologies necessary for RFID barcode replacement systems, and will use these
              to demonstrate a major subcomponent of any REID system - the power harvesting
              subcircuit.

Power for barcodes will be supplied by inductive coupling since
              battery integration is not feasible. To achieve the cost points required for
              UPC replacement, it is necessary to integrate this and other REID circuitry on
              existing packaging with little or no perturbation of the packaging process.
              Specifically, the elimination of the need for lithography, plasma etching, and
              vacuum evaporation is critical to ensuring adequately low cost.

The
              investigators will use nanocrystal-based and organic-based materials and
              processes that they have developed to demonstrate high quality active (diodes
              and transistors) and passive (inductors, wires, and capacitors) components, and
              will assemble these to fabricate the first functional power-harvesting
              sub-circuit on plastic. The entire process will be performed at low cost using
              a custom inkjet printer, eliminating all lithographic and vacuum-based process
              steps.

High-Q Spiral inductors will be fabricated using a novel
              low-temperature gold nanocrystal inkjetting technology that has been developed
              by the investigators. Parallel plate capacitors will be formed using
              nanocrystal electrodes and inkjetted polymer dielectrics. Schottky diodes will
              be developed using inkjetted gold and silver nanocrystals as the rectifying and
              ohmic contacts and inkjetted organic semiconductors as the active layer.
              Transistors will be fabricated by inkjet processing using an existing
              polythiophene-based process. Finally, the various components will be integrated
              to form a power-harvesting circuit.

An undergraduate and a graduate student
              will be involved in this work. In particular, the mentoring of the
              undergraduate student will be emphasized through a series of tutorials and
              review programs. The results of this proposal will also be used in a
              University-sponsored highschool outreach program. This will increase the level
              of interest in science and engineering among local high-school students

