Title       : Controlled Crystallization in Novel Block Copolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0220236

Award Number: 0220236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Register register@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award will investigate the ability of block copolymers to direct polymer
              crystallization.  Diblock and triblock copolymers with defect-free
              crystallizable blocks will test the prediction of an equilibrium degree of
              chain folding in crystalline-amorphous block copolymers, which contrasts
              sharply with the kinetically-induced chain folding typically exhibited by
              homopolymers.  Control of crystallite thickness through crystalline and
              amorphous block lengths or the addition of a nonvolatile diluent will yield
              materials with narrow and tunable melting ranges.  Diluted triblocks having
              crystallizable endblocks will represent a new type of thermoplastic elastomer
              gel with low modulus and good dimensional stability-desirable candidates for
              large-deformation actuators.  In the second aspect of this work, novel block
              copolymers synthesized by combining ring-opening metathesis and anionic
              polymerizations will address the long-standing issue of cocrystallization
              between linear and short-branched polyethylenes.  These polymers will contain
              blocks of linear polyethylene, PE, and poly(ethylene-co-butene), PEB, separated
              by an amorphous block of variable length.  When this "linker" run is short, the
              polymers are essentially PE-PEB diblocks, which are expected to show an
              interesting crystal heterogeneity.  When the linker run is of medium length
              (long enough to microphase-separate from the other blocks), then the PE and PEB
              blocks are tethered to amorphous domains, favoring PE/PEB cocrystallization. 
              Finally, when the linker run is the majority component, the mixed PE + PEB
              chains will be segregated within discrete microdomains, where they will
              crystallize only at deep undercoolings and with extensive cocrystallization. 
              This provides a route to the preparation of PE/PEB cocrystals for systematic
              examination of their structure and properties.  

Crystallization of polymers
              has a profound impact on their properties, and underpins many of their
              applications.  At size scales ranging from nanometers to microns, a typical
              polymer's crystalline structure depends strongly upon details of method used to
              crystallize it.  In this work, we propose to robustly control the
              crystallization process, and hence the structure, through molecular features
              built into the polymers-the so-called "block architecture"-during synthesis. 
              The proposed work will provide an integrated research and educational
              experience for two graduate students and approximately six undergraduates, who
              will be able to disseminate results from their work both internally and
              externally.  The PI and the graduate students will continue their active work
              in support of K-6 science education in Mercer County, both through the
              development of new educational materials and through teacher training.

