Title       : WORKSHOP: Model-Data Integration and Network Design for Biogeochemical Research:
               An NCAR-CSU Summer School
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0220877

Award Number: 0220877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy Hibbard kathyh@eos.sr.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Schimel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Britton Stephens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1389,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Global biogeochemical research must increasingly address the
              problems of "detection" or quantification of changing fluxes to the atmosphere,
              and "attribution" or explanation of those fluxes in terms of specific
              mechanisms. Today, neither our measurement nor analysis capabilities are
              sufficient to meet the twin challenges of biogeochemical detection and
              attribution with sufficient accuracy and resolution. We propose a summer school
              to advance both analysis techniques (inverse and assimilation modeling) and
              observing system design. The Summer School will involves lectures from a broad
              and distinguished group of scientists on the biogeochemical cycles, current and
              planned measurement capability, process and data analytical modeling, and new
              approaches in applied math. It will have as its centerpiece a hands-on
              simulation exercise. Estimates of global terrestrial and oceanic fluxes will be
              produced from existing data and models, combined to produce flux fields with
              reasonable time-space variability. They will be distributed in a global
              simulated atmosphere using an atmospheric transport model, run at the maximum
              achievable resolution to produce a 4-D data set of concentrations. The
              participants will form competing teams to reconstruct surface fluxes. Each team
              will choose a measurement strategy and obtain data corresponding to that
              strategy by querying a referee. Each measurement will have a price and each
              team will have an identical budget in dollars to fund its observing program.
              Each team will have access to the same models. An adjoint carbon model is being
              developed at NCAR using the NASA DAO model in assimilation mode. The model will
              be available for the participants to use in network design, and to demonstrate
              concepts and application of data assimilation in biogeochemistry. The teams may
              choose any strategy they wish to estimate the real fluxes. The conclusions from
              the workshop will be summarized in a report and a series of articles on 1)
              design of the exercise and implications for observing system design, 2) a
              review of data assimilation approaches for biogeochemical cycle research, 3)
              possibilities for use of the simulation exercise in education. In the year
              following the workshop, we will make the psuedodata bases and analysis tools
              available and improve them to better meet the research needs of the
              biogeochemical research community.

