Title       : Workshop: Support for Hosting 5th CIRP International Workshop on Modeling of
               Machining Operations, May 20-21, 2002 at Purdue University(West Lafayettee,
               IN).
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0220924

Award Number: 0220924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ibrahim S. Jawahir jawahir@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides partial financial support for the 5th CIRP International
              Workshop on Modeling of Machining Operations to be held at Purdue University
              (West Lafayette, IN) on May 20-21, 2002. The objective of the proposed workshop
              is to review the current state of the art and to promote modeling research
              aligned with industry needs. The workshop program covers three major areas:
              materials, processes, and performance.  It is planned to have paper sessions,
              three breakout discussion sessions and a final analysis/discussion session. 
              The goal of the workshop is to identify existing and future research
              capabilities for modeling of machining operations. The NSF grant will be used
              for participation by young researchers/faculty and graduate students and for
              producing a bound volume of workshop proceedings.

The workshop participants
              will benefit from the paper sessions, focused breakout discussion sessions, and
              the final discussion.  The industry viewpoint in all planned sessions will
              provide stimulus for initiating, broadening or redirecting current academic
              research.  The workshop will provide deeper insights into contemporary research
              issues providing an opportunity for the exchange of research ideas leading to
              cooperative research.  The analysis of the breakout session findings will set
              the direction for future research. A bound volume of the workshop proceedings
              containing presented papers from the workshop will be produced.  Also,
              discussion summaries will be made available to all participants.   The academic
              researchers will have an opportunity to bring the new knowledge into the
              classroom for teaching, labwork, and for dissemination through seminars,
              projects, etc.  It is also planned to develop a website containing the
              proceedings of the workshop including a summary of the final discussion and
              conclusions.  The list of participants (with their contact information) will
              also be included to facilitate networking and for the dissemination of new
              knowledge. 

