Title       : Marine Synechococcus Ecotypes: Seasonal and Spatial Distributions of
               Physiological and Genetic Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0220826

Award Number: 0220826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabrielle Rocap rocap@ocean.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,9117,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore the genetic and physiological diversity of the marine
              cyanobacteria  Synechococcus, which are major contributors to primary
              production in the world's oligotrophic oceans.   In addition to its role in the
              oligotrophic oceans, Synechococcus can also be found in mesotrophic and
              eutrophic waters.  This is in sharp contrast to the members of the closely
              related genus Prochlorococcus that are restricted to the subtropical open
              oceans.  At present it is not clear if the increased range of Synechococcus
              reflects a broader physiological tolerance by all the strains of this genus, or
              the existence of ecotypes that are specifically adapted to higher nutrient and
              colder temperature conditions.  These alternate scenarios have very different
              implications in terms of how the Synechococcus community may respond to changes
              in environmental conditions such as global climate change or eutrophication of
              coastal waters.  

In this project, this question is being addressed two
              ways, by characterizing the physiology of multiple genotypes of Synechococcus,
              and by determining the seasonal abundances of these genotypes in water samples
              from around the globe.  It has been established that marine Synechococcus
              consists of a number (seven or more) of genetically distinct lineages.  Three
              of these lineages are specifically associated with a characteristic physiology
              (motility, chromatic adaptation and lack of phycourobilin), and a fourth
              consists of a single strain which is incapable of utilizing nitrate as a
              nitrogen source.  However, the physiologies associated with the other three
              genotypes have not yet been determined.  To begin to understand physiological
              responses of all of the genotypes of Synechococcus to factors that are likely
              to influence their growth and distributions, in this project, several
              representative strains of each genetic clade are being grown in a range of
              light levels, temperatures and nitrogen sources.  

Several lines of evidence
              suggest that additional genetic lineages exist in nature but have not yet been
              cultivated.  To explore this further, the genetic diversity in open ocean
              Synechococcus populations in the Atlantic and Pacific and coastal populations
              in Puget Sound, Washington are being examined by terminal Restriction Fragment
              Length Polymorphism and sequencing analyses of the 16S-23S ribosomal RNA
              internal transcribed spacer (ITS).  Using these sequences and those already
              determined from Synechococcus isolates, primers will be designed that are
              specific for each of the genetic clades.  These primers will be used in
              real-time quantitative PCR in a set of monthly samples from the same three
              environments to quantify the abundance of each genetic type over two annual
              cycles.  

This project will directly involve a graduate student and one or
              more undergraduate students.   Establishing a research program in Puget Sound
              is providing opportunities for additional undergraduate involvement through the
              UW School of Oceanography senior field course.  In addition, data on
              Synechococcus distributions and dynamics in Puget Sound will be shared with the
              Washington State Department of Ecology and incorporated into a Puget Sound food
              web model.  Ultimately, examining the global distribution and population
              dynamics of Synechococcus in conjunction with experiments measuring the growth
              of each genotype under a suite of physical conditions will provide insights
              into the relative importance of ecotypic differentiation and physiological
              plasticity in determining these distributions.     

