Title       : A computer science and mathematics scholarship program in predominantly minority
               and female program.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2002    
File        : a0220762

Award Number: 0220762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Connie X. Yu cyu@njcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carmen Panlilio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Jersey City University
	      2039 Kennedy Boulevard
	      Jersey City, NJ  073051527    201/547-6000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project is designed to encourage low-income, academically talented
              students to
major in computer science and mathematics and to assist them in
              being successful in the
completion of their academic program. Through
              innovative community building
activities, the scholarship program is having a
              significant impact on the entire cohort of
students enrolled in Computer
              Science and Mathematics programs at NJCU. This cohort of 
students are
              predominately female and disadvantaged minorities. New Jersey City 
University
              is designated as a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) and a Minority
              Institution, 
with a Hispanic enrollment of 30% and a total minority
              enrollment of 62%. The Program 
consists of four components: (1)recruitment of
              talented, low-income students into 
Computer Science, Pre-Engineering and
              Mathematics majors; (2) targeted academic 
support initiatives, in addition to
              existing student support services; (3) structured 
scholarship community
              activities; and, (4) internships and cooperative education work 
experiences.
              The overall goals of the Project are the increase in enrollment, retention and
              
graduation rates of high-ability, low-income students in Computer Science,
              
Pre-Engineering and Mathematics baccalaureate degree programs. These goals
              and 
objectives are being accomplished through existing programs, services and
              resources, 
as well as through the addition of new academic support
              initiatives, and scholarship 
community activities. This initiative represents
              a congruence between NJCU's mission 
and the goals and purposes of the
              National Science Foundation's Computer Science, 
Engineering and Mathematics
              Scholarship Program. The Project enables the creation 
of a sustainable system
              for academics, student services and career planning supports 
for our diverse
              student population, thereby increasing the technological capacity of our
              
nation's youth, and strengtheing and diversifying of our nation's workforce.
