Title       : Collaborative Research: Impact of Snow Photochemistry on Atmospheric Radical
               Concentrations at Summit, Greenland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2002 
File        : a0220763

Award Number: 0220763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206547             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry L. Lefer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Shetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lefer
0220763


In the past few years there has been an explosion of
              scientific interest in the chemical processing occurring in sunlit snow. Rather
              than simply acting as a passive sink for the products of tropospheric
              reactions, the snowpack has been shown to be one of the most photochemically
              active, and strongly oxidizing, regions of the entire troposphere. The group of
              investigators assembled for this proposal has played a central role in this
              revolution in our thinking about the role of the snowpack in atmospheric
              chemistry. One key finding has been that photolysis of snow chromophores
              initiates the release of a number of important trace gases. Initial modeling
              suggests that photolysis of a number of these gases (HCHO, HOOH, CH3CHO and
              HONO) results in an enormous production of HOx  (i.e., OH and HO2), which in
              turn causes a large enhancement of these radicals in the snowpack and in the
              air just above the snow. Because oxidation by OH is the main sink for many
              tropospheric gases, including some of those important for climate change and
              stratospheric O3 depletion, this enhancement in HOx might significantly perturb
              tropospheric chemistry. Snowpack chemistry likely also modifies the chemical
              records of atmospheric composition ultimately preserved in glacial ice. While
              recent work has shown that photochemical and physical processes in the snowpack
              can impact the chemistry and composition of both the atmosphere and snowpack,
              these processes are, in general, poorly understood. This is especially true for
              the processes that produce and consume OH and HO2. The research will elucidate
              the processes that produce and consume OH and HO2  radicals within and above
              sunlit snow over a wide range of environmental conditions, thereby improving
              our understanding of fast photochemistry within this unique environment.
