Title       : ITR: An Interactive Visual Anomaly Detection System for Faults and Intrusions on
               Network Protocols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0220147

Award Number: 0220147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400171             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shyhtsun F. Wu wu@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kwan-Liu Ma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With the growing use of the Internet technology, unintentional faults and
              intentional intrusions directly on network protocols, such as routing protocols
              (e.g., BGP, OSPF), have become a serious threat to our Internet-connected
              society. Over the past few years, the researchers  have seen
many fault or
              security related instances happening to our Internet and, because of these
              problems, significant losses occurred one way or the other. In the research
              communities, such as fault tolerant
networking, network security, and
              intrusion detection, many new ideas have been explored to enhance the existing
              network protocols or, more drastically, to propose a completely new Internet
              architecture. Some vulnerabilities have been reduced or removed, but yet the
              researchers expect many more new vulnerabilities and problems to be
              discovered.

The researchers  believe that, to effectively monitor and
              control a large system, they need not only a well-designed and implemented
              system but also, equally important, a good human interface to know the system
              after it is deployed and operated. The researchers  also believe that, in the
              foreseeable
future, human intelligence will play a critical role in managing
              and maintaining large distributed systems such as the Internet. But,
              surprisingly few research efforts are currently toward this direction.

The 
              main contribution in this project is a human-interactive approach to handle
              faults and security attacks on the Internet routing protocols such as BGP
              (Border Gateway Protocol) and OSPF (Open
Shortest Path First). We will
              investigate several critical but very difficult (difficult in the sense if we
              would rely completely on machine intelligence) issues and offer solutions based
              on an interactive visual-based analysis process. For example, anomaly detection
              systems for unknown/novel attacks are hard to build due to the consideration of
              effectiveness, coverage, and false positive. Also, network event correlation is
              very difficult because this task normally involves very complicated potential
              relations among various events on the Internet and the amount of resources to
              complete the task is prohibitively expensive.

This research addresses two
              very fundamental problems. One is the formulation of typical visual-based
              anomaly detection processes. The other is the mapping of not only the protocol
              data but also the analysis process to appropriate visualization representations
              and associated operations. The resulting visual-based process would allow a
              human network operator quickly navigate to the right level of details to
              discover critical facts about the Internet. For the network
routing protocol
              management, we study the "optimal" boundary between the machine intelligence
              and the human intelligence on detecting and tracking anomaly that was
              previously impossible to understand.

