Title       : Community College Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0220755

Award Number: 0220755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395148             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rey Rivera   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest Lara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria Reyes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan K. Tippett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Maricopa County CC Distric
	      2411 W 14th St
	      Tempe, AZ  852816941    480/731-8031

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is serving students in the western portion of Phoenix and Maricopa
              County, Arizona. The Project seeks to recruit academically talented yet
              financially needy students interested in the fields of computer science,
              computer technology, engineering, engineering technology, and mathematics
              (CSEMS), especially those from underrepresented groups in these disciplines.
              The Project's goals are to support CSEMS recipients in their academic
              endeavors, promote student success through the completion of an associate's
              degree and/or the transfer to a four-year institution, and expose participants
              to the various professional avenues that the CSEMS disciplines offer. The
              project utilizes existing structures at the college with a proven success
              record in promoting diversity and academic quality in the fields of science,
              technology, engineering, and mathematics. Through the college's Achievement in
              Mathematics and Science (AMAS) Program, Achievement in Mathematics,
              Engineering, and Science (AIMES) Programs, and Summer Bridge Program,
              strategies have been developed to recruit capable students, especially
              underrepresented groups, into the these disciplines and ensure their success in
              academic programs. 

The project aims to achieve the following
              objectives:
(1) 90% of CSEMS scholarship recipients make satisfactory progress
              (GPA of 2.5 or better) in a targeted program of study leading to an associate's
              degree as full-time students during semesters for which they receive
              scholarship support.
(2) 100% of CSEMS scholarship recipients participate in
              at least 90% of CSEMS special events and activities during semesters for which
              they receive scholarship support.
(3) 85% of CSEMS scholarship recipients make
              satisfactory progress towards their educational goals (i.e. be enrolled as
              full-time students at a community college in the following semester, transfer
              to a university, or have met the requirements for/been awarded an AAS or AS
              degree in the targeted programs.)
(4) 50% of CSEMS recipients are from groups
              that are traditionally underrepresented in the CSEMS disciplines (women,
              persons with disabilities, Hispanics, African-Americans, and/or Native
              Americans).

The Project is establishing support structures that are
              exclusive to CSEMS recipients. These include mentoring from Faculty
              Coordinators, Individual Education Plans, tutoring services and study groups,
              supplemental instruction, special events and activities, career counseling, and
              university transfer options. The Team is monitoring the progress of the
              students and conducting both formative and summative evaluations of project
              processes and outcomes.  
