Title       : University Mathematics Engineering and Computer Science Scholarships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0220796

Award Number: 0220796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316352             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Pickett mpickett@eng.utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ege Egemen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Helen C. Cooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dagmar Morales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William N. Thomas Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the University Mathematics, Engineering and Computer Science
              Scholarships (UMECSS) program is to increase the number of low-income, and
              underrepresented students able to enroll in, successfully matriculate, and
              graduate from the University of Toledo in the fields of Engineering and
              Mathematics. This is accomplished by utilizing numerous individuals and
              organizations from various departments at the University that have an interest
              and proven history in preparing students from these groups for success in
              college and beyond. Furthermore, the UMECSS project builds on numerous
              already-established programs, many of which have successfully collaborated on
              similar projects in the past. After identifying and selecting students with an
              interest and potential for success in Engineering and Mathematics fields of
              study, services help these students to complete their degree programs and
              secure professional positions. These services include a "bridging" program to
              assist recipients with the transition from high school to college, tutoring,
              mentoring, and establishing cohort groups that utilize Supplemental Instructors
              to assist students (by sitting in on classes, helping with note taking, and
              providing Supplemental Instruction). This comprehensive set of support
              services, which is designed to augment their course work and help them adjust
              to the University setting, improve recipients' chances of successfully
              completing their degree programs and securing professional positions. The
              primary components of UMECSS focus on creating small learning communities,
              which enable students to form closer relationships with each other and
              University faculty and staff. Clustering or grouping students in core Math and
              Science classes with the same instructor in the same courses also allows for
              closer relationships, and allows for students to review the materials more
              effectively. Field trips and job shadowing activities with industry and faculty
              mentors help students begin to the make the transition from an academic setting
              to that of the workplace, and they familiarize students with a professional
              environment. Co-op assignments with industry and business partners, job fairs,
              help with resume preparation, interview skills, and professional etiquette are
              gradually incorporated as the students progress in their degree programs.
