Title       : PAthways to Careers in MAthematics and Computer Science (PACMACS) Bridge Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a0220499

Award Number: 0220499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine A. Terry terry@sju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Agnes M. Rash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Lurie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Babak Forouraghi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Joseph's University
	      5600 City Avenue
	      Philadelphia, PA  191311308    215/879-7300

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of the PAthways to Careers in MAthematics and Computer
              Science (PACMACS) Bridge program at Saint Joseph's University (SJU) is to train
              and educate academically talented but financially disadvantaged minority
              students for careers in mathematics and computer science by providing them with
              an excellent, comprehensive, undergraduate education. 

SJU presently runs
              PACMACS, an innovative outreach program, for bright minority high school
              students from Philadelphia public and charter high schools. High school seniors
              (and exceptional juniors) in PACMACS attend up to 4 college classes at SJU (in
              mathematics and computer science), and receive college and career
              guidance.

The PACMACS Bridge program is designed to help those students make
              the transition to full-time college once they are enrolled at SJU after
              graduating from high school. The PACMACS Bridge program is a comprehensive
              package of financial, academic and social support offer to undergraduates in
              the mathematics and computer science department at SJU. Students obtain
              financial support through the University Financial Aid Office and NSF CSEMS
              funding. Six to 10 eligible students will be identified and awarded CSEMS
              scholarships.

Academic support programs include faculty mentors, upper level
              undergraduate student mentors, supervised study sessions, tutoring services and
              individualized attention in the small classes available at SJU. Social support
              programs include seminars on college life, peer support groups and panel
              discussions on cultural diversity to assist the students in the cultural
              adjustment to an urban, predominantly Caucasian Catholic University.
