Title       : Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarships Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0220818

Award Number: 0220818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Bowers bowers@wc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sue Casey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Billy Giles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary K. Landers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Weatherford Col of Parker
	      308 East Park
	      Weatherford, TX  760865618    /   -

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to increase the numbers and percentages of area high
              school graduates that enroll as full-time students in pursuit of associate
              degrees with majors in Computer Science, Engineering Technology, and
              Mathematics (CSEM). The project seeks to (1) address the need for greater
              access and retention of students in the college's technical programs, (2)
              attract more women into the non-traditional computer science and engineering
              technology fields, and (3) provide opportunities for a rich pool of
              academically talented students who lack financial resources to complete their
              studies on a full-time basis, thereby speeding student progress in completing
              an associate degree or in transferring to a four-year institution. Priority is
              given to eligible first-generation and low-income students.

An environment
              is being created that encourages academic and personal growth for CSEM Scholar.
              In addition to financial support, the program includes an array of intensive
              student support and career services, including comprehensive assessment of
              academic deficiencies; individual and computerized tutoring; study skills and
              standardized test preparation workshops; academic, personal, and career
              advising; and faculty, student, and industry mentors. A major component is the
              active recruitment of high school students enrolled in computer science and
              engineering related courses in the 42 school districts participating in the
              Weatherford College Tech Prep Consortium, with a special focus on recruiting
              female students. The project strengthens the transfer bridge between the
              college and the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) and increases the
              incentives for students to pursue higher education through the newly
              implemented Texas TWO-STEP (Technology Workforce Opportunities through Seamless
              Transitions and Educational Partnerships) Project. 

Over time, the combined
              efforts of these students provided can make a large impact on communities in
              high-poverty areas like those in the Weatherford College service area. This
              program increases the number for women choosing high-demand career fields. As
              graduates, they are role models to underrepresented students and women as they
              join national and international firms across the nation.
