Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0220859

Award Number: 0220859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Keith Oddson jko@engr.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Vahid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Matsumoto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is establishing a CSEMS Scholars Program for academically talented,
              low-income undergraduate students in the fields of computer science,
              engineering, and mathematics. The intent is to encourage such students to
              enroll in these disciplines, and then to provide them with a comprehensive plan
              of scholarship, academic, and professional support throughout their
              undergraduate years, to improve their retention and graduation rates. 

In
              engineering at UC Riverside, much of the attrition occurs in the first two
              years. Family financial pressure and the subsequent need for students to work
              part-time are seen as primary contributing factors in this attrition. Thus, the
              core of the UCR CSEMS program is scholarship assistance to the targeted student
              cohorts. Twenty $2,500 freshman scholarships and twenty $2,500
              sophomore/transfer student scholarships are awarded annually for each of four
              years, to academically talented but economically disadvantaged undergraduates
              majoring in the named fields. The primary goal of the program is to demonstrate
              that reduction of financial concern on the part of the students can result in a
              significant improvement in their retention statistics, and thereby their
              graduation rates. Only the freshman, sophomore, and transfer students who have
              been selected as CSEMS Scholars receive scholarships. However, the project
              intends to continue financial support to these students through junior/senior
              year summer internships at companies, or undergraduate research positions with
              faculty members. 

In addition to the financial component, this program is
              accompanied by an extensive support infrastructure of academic assistance and
              advising, career placement services, and faculty and professional mentoring
              throughout the students' academic years. During the annual recruitment
              activities of the College, the College of Engineering distributes brochures and
              provides other information that explains the CSEMS Scholars Program to
              potential UCR applicants. Selection of program participants is made by an
              Oversight Committee that includes faculty members as well as staff members from
              the campus Financial Aid Office and the offices of other support services. The
              Oversight Committee is responsible for general supervision of the program.
              Day-to-day operations, however, including student tracking and data analysis,
              is administered by the College Office of Special Programs with the active
              collaboration of the College Office of Student Affairs. Students receiving the
              NSF scholarship support are designated as UCR-COE/NSF Scholars. As they
              continue into the later phases of the program, they are designated as UCR-
              COE/Advanced Scholars. Together, the group is referred to as the UCR-COE
              Scholars.

