Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: When Technology Spillovers are Localized:
               Importance of Technological and Regional Attributes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0220971

Award Number: 0220971
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey A. Goldstein hgold@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Research and development activities, innovations, subsequent technological
              changes, and spillovers are important factors that influence economic
              development.  New growth theory emphasizes the role of technology spillovers
              and subsequent scale effects, which lead to increasing returns to scale and
              long-term growth.  Research and development may not be a sufficient condition
              for regional growth, however.  Although research and development has been
              considered the most important factor contributing to technological progress and
              hence productivity increase through spillover effects, when it comes to
              regional economies, research and development itself does not automatically
              guarantee technology spillovers within regions, which would eventually drive
              regional economic growth.  For example, a new innovation introduced in
              California can be picked up and implemented in North Carolina, and vice versa. 
              What may be more important to regional economies is the degree to which
              externalities created by innovative activities are localized within
              geographical boundaries.  Strong evidence has been presented in the scholarly
              literature that research and development activities and consequent new
              innovations are the source of productivity growth.  Evidence also has mounted
              that technology spillovers, which lie at the center of this mechanism, often
              are localized.  This doctoral dissertation research project will examine
              technological and regional attributes that influence the geographic
              localization of technology spillovers.  The study mainly focuses on what kinds
              of technological and regional attributes affect the degree to which technology
              spillovers are localized and how much.  The study will use U.S. Patent and
              Trademark Office patent citation data and county business pattern data and will
              apply simultaneous equation modeling techniques to explain the relative
              importance of technological and regional attributes to the localization of
              technology spillovers.

This project will help fill gaps in the literature on
              spillovers and regional economic development.  So far, a major interest of many
              researchers has been to show that technological innovations often spill over
              space and that such localized technology spillovers affect the productivity
              level in a region.  Relatively few considerations have been given to the
              influence of technological and regional attributes on geographical technology
              spillover patterns.  The project also will provide guidance for future science
              and technology policy development.  State and local governments can design
              policy instruments that specifically aim to promote important regional
              attributes influencing geographical technology spillover patterns.  More
              efficient allocation of resources may result if it is known how technological
              attributes influence the localization of spillovers.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.


