Title       : Dynamic Models for Electrodynamic Suspended Magnetic Levitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0220386

Award Number: 0220386
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249729             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brad E. Paden paden@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI: Brad E. Paden	
Institution: Univ California-Santa Barbara
Proposal Number:
              0220386
Proposal Title: "Dynamic Models for Electrodynamic Suspended Magnetic
              Levitation" 
Abstract: 
The novelty in this project is the application of
              mathematical analysis to investigate the dynamic properties of electrodynamic
              suspension (EDS) magnetic levitation (maglev). Objective of the research are
              to: a) develop, validate and analyze dynamical models for EDS on a perforated
              track, b) investigate fundamental limitations of the proposed technology with
              respect to design parameters and levitation control strategies, and c) guide
              the further technological development of maglev, and d) facilitate cost
              effective engineering designs.  The intellectual merit lies in the application
              of tools from functional analysis and dynamical systems to forward the
              development of maglev technology, and to introduce these tools to the maglev
              research community. The program thereby advances knowledge in maglev, and
              across the fields of system theory, dynamical systems and functional analysis
              and magnetic levitation.  By investigating the fundamental limitations of
              perforated track EDS maglev with respect to design parameters and levitation
              control strategies, we guide the technological development of and advance
              discovery of new maglev technology and facilitate engineering design.
              Understanding physical limitation will advance knowledge of maglev in a
              fundamental way, and we aim to define new research directions within maglev
              technology. 

The suggested research is well-organized through a cohesive
              plan of dynamical modeling, mathematical analysis, experimental validation and
              dissemination of results in engineering and mathematics communities.  Our
              available resources is primarily through interactions with researchers within
              the field of maglev, dynamical systems and control theory, mathematics, and
              industry. Our ongoing interaction with Dr. Richard Post at LLNL, the inventor
              and patent holder of the Inductrack levitation concept, ensures support on the
              modeling of maglev. The strong position of the Center for Control Engineering
              and computation at the University of California at Santa Barbara (UCSB) gives
              valuable support in infinite dimensional dynamical systems and control theory
              through its affiliated members from multiple departments among Mechanical and
              Electrical engineering and Mathematics. MagTube, a newly started venture
              capital funded company located adjacent to our campus, provides know-how on
              important engineering issues in maglev design, and ensures relations with
              industry.  Maglev technology has potential for significant impact on society at
              large by promoting efficient high speed transportation without direct
              combustion of fossil fuels, and with substantially higher energy efficiency
              than existing means of ground, air and sea transportation. The research will
              also contribute to MagTube.s innovative transportations concept (which has
              received $2 million in venture capital after a critically  reviewed financial
              analysis) of a high speed transportation network based on magnetically
              levitated capsules moving in evacuated tubes in an automated network system
              resembling packet switched networks in communication technology.

This
              research will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups through
              support of the PI as he works with the LEGO-Robotics, which involves secondary
              school teachers and students from Latino communities. The experimental
              apparatus will enhance the infrastructure for research at UCSB by establishing
              instrumentation and data acquisition capabilities. The equipment will also
              contribute to the education facilities used in the PI's graduate dynamics and
              control lab course taught in collaboration with the Electrical and Computer
              Engineering Department at UC Santa Barbara. 
Research dissemination will be
              performed to fora on maglev, dynamical systems and control research, through
              conference attendance and journal publication. Our experimental results, data
              and simulation models will be made available through the internet for effective
              data sharing. Lastly, we have already significant interaction with MagTube and
              General Atomic who aims to commercialize the inductrack technology.

