Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gentrification and the Displacement of Work and
               Home
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0220486

Award Number: 0220486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10053              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Hanson SHANSON@CLARKU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Gentrification is a process experienced by cities around the world.  It
              exemplifies the shift from an industrial  economy to a service economy.  Yet,
              the fact that manufacturing is still an important part of urban economies
              should not be ignored.  Manufacturing is being threatened by the process of
              gentrification. The loss of manufacturing affects the employment and housing
              opportunities of inner city residents.  The debate around gentrification has
              concentrated on its causes, while its effects on the existing communities has
              been largely unexplored.  What work has been done has largely concentrated on
              the effects of gentrification on housing.  The effect on work and the linkages
              between home and work for working class residents has gone unexplored.  This
              doctoral dissertation research project explores the effect of gentrification on
              small manufacturers and blue collar-workers in the Williamsburg neighborhood of
              Brooklyn.  The project asks the following questions:  1) To what extent has
              gentrification caused manufacturing displacement?  2) How has the job market
              changed as a result of gentrification? and 3) How has gentrification affected
              the residential and employment opportunities of working-class people in
              Williamsburg?  In-depth interviews with key informants, business owners and 
              workers will provide data on the changing structure of opportunity for
              working-class residents and the changing geography of their work, home, and
              social networks.  The findings will demonstrate where manufacturing jobs move
              within the metropolitan region and explore the ability of working-class
              residents to maintain their socioeconomic levels in an area undergoing
              industrial displacement.  It is expected that the study will demonstrate that
              manufacturers are being displaced because of gentrification and that those who
              lose these jobs are unlikely to find jobs at equal skill and pay levels.

The
              proposed research looks at how a global process like gentrification affects a
              local neighborhood and the population that lives there.  It analyzes the nature
              of urban change, the directions in which that change may lead, and the
              implication of this change not only for local neighborhoods, but for cities in
              general.  In the process of gentrification, de-industrialization may be
              encouraged, so much so that the city loses its productive base.  There may be a
              greater homogeneity not only of the economic base, but of the populations
              within urban neighborhoods as well, jeopardizing the economically and
              culturally diverse populations that are such a vital element to central cities.
              This research opens up the field of gentrification to examine the links between
              home and work in gentrifying areas and to analyze the effects of gentrification
              on labor and labor markets.  This research has potential implications for urban
              policies on zoning, industrial retention, job creation, and affordable housing.
               It may also impact the literature of spatial mismatch and skills mismatch and
              the racialized and gendered patterns of work and residence.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

