Title       : SBIR Phase II: Hypertension Treatment Responder Prediction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0220661

Award Number: 0220661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert K. Man aman@burnham.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Predict
	      4540 Georgia St.
	      San Diego, CA  921162636    619/255-8730

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a
              clinical predictive algorithm for hypertension medication response based upon
              patient genetic and medical information. The development of effective treatment
              for hypertension is critical to controlling costs of this disease which has the
              largest negative impact on the U.S. economy in loss of productive years.
              Anti-hypertensive drugs have a large window of therapeutic options, including
              significant variation in dosages, medications, and combinations of therapies
              used. 
     The objective of the Phase II project is to continue development
              of the software platform, GeneRx, which incorporates pharmacogenetics and
              nonlinear adaptive algorithms toward optimizing anti-hypertension therapy on a
              patient specific basis. Genetic data for each patient will be acquired by
              genotyping DNA from the blood samples, and scored as single nucleotide
              polymorphisms (SNPs) present or absent in key hypertension-related genes.
              GeneRx will take a patient's individual genetic, demographic, and environmental
              variables and predict lickely efficacy of a hypertension medication. In Phase
              I, the basic feasibility of a predictive algorithm for predicting patient
              response for the ACE inhibitor class of hypertension drugs was established. The
              Phase II project will use patient information and blood samples from both
              archival and ongoing hypertension studies to predict the effectiveness of other
              classes of hypertension medications, including calcium channel blockers,
              dieuretics, and beta blockers.  The commercial application of this project is
              in the area of hypertension therapy.
