Title       : ITR: Accurate and Robust Operations on Curved Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0220047

Award Number: 0220047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497705             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Keyser keyser@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Curved geometry plays an important role in many applications, including
              manufacturing, robotics, and graphics. In many cases, highly accurate and
              robust operations and representations are desired, but the perceived
              implementation difficulties and inefficiencies (e.g. from exact computation)
              prevent application. Compared to the linear and combinatorial problems
              traditionally associated with computational geometry, problems involving curved
              solids are far more complicated. In practical terms, problems with accuracy,
              efficiency, and robustness are all significantly worse when dealing with curved
              geometry, and significant work remains in addressing these three areas. With
              further development, efficient implementations, and demonstrated applications,
              however, accurate and robust operations will find greater acceptance, giving a
              potential benefit to several application areas. This proposal outlines a plan
              of research that addresses accuracy, efficiency, and robustness of operations
              on curved geometry. Overall, it is a topic that is both challenging and
              promising in terms of potential impact and future research opportunities.
              

The proposed research addresses fundamental areas needed for further
              development of precise operations with curved solids. Theoretical issues are
              addressed, but a primary focus of the proposed research is on implementation.
              Most of the areas of proposed research are geared toward finding highly
              accurate or exact implementations that still achieve reasonable efficiency.
              Software will be released to support dissemination of the results. Specific
              areas of research include:

-  Filtered Sequences of Computations
-
              Incorporating Root-Finding into Expression Trees
- Filtered Geometric
              Representations
- Resultant Computations
- Evaluating Combinations of
              Efficiency Improvements
- Handling Degeneracies
- Computing with
              Transcendental Functions
- Exact Geometric Representations

Application will
              be a major goal for all of the research areas. Application will serve both to
              drive new research ideas, and to allow testing and evaluation of research
              results. The primary application that will be used is solid modeling, from a
              traditional CAD perspective. The need for accurate and efficient
              representations in solid modeling is well recognized, making this research
              particularly relevant. In addition, solid modeling applications present a wide
              range of problems of varying complexity that allow thorough evaluation of the
              new methods. Besides solid modeling, we will also investigate application to
              geometric modeling of other objects, such as neurons, plants, and other
              naturally occurring objects. Application to neuron modeling will be in
              conjunction with an ongoing project on mapping brain microstructure, an
              exciting new interdisciplinary problem area with enormous potential that Texas
              A&M is in a unique position to address.

The proposed research will be
              integrated into educational activities. A new course in practical computer
              algebra will be developed that supports the research areas. Undergraduate
              student research will be encouraged through direct involvement in projects,
              coursework, and interaction through service activities.
