Title       : The Chicago Math Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0220669

Award Number: 0220669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144375             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Rutschman D-Rutschman@neiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern Illinois Univ
	      5500 N Saint Louis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606254625    773/442-4670

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this program is to increase the number of economically
              disadvantaged
students entering the technological workforce through the
              achievement of two specific
objectives:
1) increase the number of
              economically disadvantaged students graduating with
mathematics degrees from
              Northeastern Illinois University (NEIU) and
2) increase the number of
              Northeastern Illinois University mathematics graduates
going on to Ph.D.
              programs in mathematics.

These objectives will be accomplished by creating a
              program at NEIU that
supports, motivates and monitors student progress through
              their undergraduate or masters
degree and by providing a bridge program to the
              doctoral degree in mathematics at the
University of Illinois at
              Chicago.

Twelve students, ten undergraduate and two graduate students, have
              been selected as
Chicago Math Scholars. Undergraduate scholars were recruited
              from undergraduate
mathematics majors, from promising incoming high school
              students and from targeted
community college transfer students. Scholars had
              GPA of 3.0 and were
economically disadvantaged as determined by their
              eligibility for Pell grant awards.
Graduate Chicago Math Scholars were
              selected from among those students admitted to
the masters degree programs in
              mathematics at NEIU. Students were economically
disadvantaged by virtue of
              their eligibility for Graduate Assistance in Areas of National
Need (GANN) and
              express an interest in pursuing a Ph.D. degree in mathematics.
Key strategies
              for achieving the program objectives include: the provision of
tuition waivers
              and monetary stipends; mentoring of students by both undergraduate
              and
graduate faculty; academic and personal support; career guidance and
              enrichment;
technology training; professional development through activities
              such as membership in
professional associations and conference attendance; job
              placement assistance;
interaction with Ph.D. program faculty and students; GRE
              preparation courses; graduate
seminars and orientation programs; and research
              participation.

Northeastern Illinois University is an urban, comprehensive
              university, serving
the northwest side of metropolitan Chicago. Seventy nine
              percent of its enrollment is
comprised of first generation college students.
              Sixty four percent are female, 75.6%
work full or part-time, and 60% receive
              some form of financial aid. NEIU is the only
four year, federally designated,
              Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) in the Midwest. By
virtue of its
              demographics, the students most likely to benefit from this program
              are
under-represented minorities.
The National Science Foundation's report
              "Science and Engineering Indicators
2000l" notes that only 2.2% of all
              graduate students in mathematics and computer science
are Hispanic. In 1997,
              only 34 Ph.D. degrees were awarded to Hispanics in math or
computer science.
              By facilitating student retention, graduation and transfer to Ph.D.
programs
              in mathematics, this program has the potential to significantly impact
              the
number of under-represented minorities attaining advanced degrees in
              mathematics and
who are prepared to enter the U. S. technological workforce at
              the highest levels.
