Title       : Rewarding Achievement in Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0220665

Award Number: 0220665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385586             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvern K. Taylor taylorme@ridgewater.mnscu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Oswood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Field  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ridgewater College
	      2101 15th Avenue NW
	      Willmar, MN  56201    320/231-2900

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program provides scholarships to talented, low-income students majoring in
              computer science, computer technology, engineering, engineering technology and
              mathematics. Special consideration for scholarships is given to the recruitment
              and retention of women and minorities in these fields. Students are retained in
              the program through strategies to enhance learning experiences, by
              participation in cohort group learning and support, and with academic tutoring
              and faculty advising. Information about the scholarship program is broadly
              disseminated in order to encourage other low-income students to aspire to and
              prepare for college careers in these fields. The program builds on
              relationships with industry to assist in recruitment, retention and in
              providing employment opportunities. The college also continues to foster
              relationships with 4-year colleges for both AS and AAS transfer students.
              Ridgewater College Foundation, the financial aid office, and the counseling
              office, ensure timely and careful selection of scholarship winners and
              processing of student information. Scholarship recipients are identified as
              winners on campus and in the community and are encouraged to participate in
              cohort groups of 15 members on each of two campuses. An advocacy team made up
              of faculty, counselors, industry representatives and high school staff meet
              twice yearly to review progress in achieving program goals and to make
              recommendations for improvements.
