Title       : MII: Infrastructure for Research and Training in Database Management for
               Web-based Geospatial Data Visualization with Applications to Aviation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2002   
File        : a0220562

Award Number: 0220562
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2011        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Naphtali Rishe rishen@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ben Wongsaroj  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-20562
Rishe, Naphtali
Wongsaroj, Ben
Florida International University
              (FIU) and Florida Memorial College (FMC) 

Title: MII Consortium:
              Infrastructure for Research and Training in Database Management for Web-based
              Geospatial Data Visualization with Applications to Aviation 


This
              proposal, facilitating research on high-performance database management and
              Internet dissemination of geospatial data, aims at attracting, recruiting, and
              retaining minority students while engaging these in research. The project
              enables the creation of a consortium between Florida International University
              (FIU) and Florida Memorial College (FMC). A pipeline of students from FMC, a
              four year HBCU, to FIU, a Carnegie-I HSI will be formed, encouraging FMC's
              students and others to enter FIU's masters or doctoral program in computer
              science. The consortium will focus on research necessary to enhance TerraFly, a
              web-based geospatial data viewer stemming from research performed at FIU's High
              Performance Database Research Center (HPDRC) under grants from NSF and other
              agencies. Researchers will work in Affinity Groups that consist of
              undergraduate and graduate students, post-docs, and faculty members. These
              groups provide the framework that enables deepening knowledge of a field by
              procuring a physical setting in a cooperative research-engaging environment.
              The project enhances TerraFly's underlying data storage mechanism,
              client-server interaction, user interface, its ability to overlay additional
              information layers, and its ergonomics of use and maintenance. The following
              specific research issues are addressed.
Efficient and ergonomic dissemination
              of imagery with spatio-temporal data overlays, 

Data storage and querying
              methods for spatio-temporal data, 
Integration of heterogeneous data sources
              including relational and semantic databases and web 
sources with the spatial
              data, 
Testbed applications using geospatial data dissemination for aviation
              needs.
Thus, the requested infrastructure will be used to perform this
              research, as well as the training of students at both institutions. Showing
              TerraFly's potential applications, FMC's knowledge of the aviation industry
              will be leveraged as the test beds are developed and tailored. The deployment
              of infrastructure at FMC will enable FIU's distributed database research to be
              incorporated into TerraFly research, as FMC students gain valuable hands-on
              experience with the requested infrastructure on a daily basis.


