Title       : ITR: MAC Protocols Specific for Sensor Networks (MACSS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0220026

Award Number: 0220026
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Heidemann johnh@isi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Wireless sensor networking is an emerging technology that has a wide range of
              potential applications including environment monitoring, smart spaces, medical
              systems and robotic exploration. While the technology is very promising, it
              raises serious challenges in network
and system design.  Sensor networks
              differ in many ways from than the traditional IP or voice networks, and have
              their unique features and requirements.  Although MAC protocols such as 802.11
              and TDMA are ideal for wireless IP or voice, no MAC protocol today meets the
              needs
of sensor networks.

This project will execute a systems-driven
              research program to address these problems through the development of
              sensor-network specific MAC protocols.  Specifically, we are
              investigating:

ADAPTIVITY AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY:  Sensor network MACs must
              be adaptive in several dimensions, including energy consumption, traffic loads,
              and deployment density.  Energy is *the key limitation* for battery-powered
              sensor nodes.  The researchers are investigating and will provide designs for
              ENERGY CONSERVATION approaches that modify node duty cycle
to conserve energy
              while considering user varying application traffic requirements.  One approach
              to energy conservation is to trigger primary node radios with a paging channel,
              but this requires a second radio (with corresponding cost, space, and money
              requirements). Sensor nodes already must operate sensors full time, so the
              researchers are evaluating the use of sensors (acoustic, seismic, etc.) as a
              PHYSICAL SENSOR PAGING CHANNEL.

MAC INTERACTION WITH THE PHYSICAL LAYER: 
              With low-power, relatively unsophisticated radios, sensor networks applications
              and MAC protocols are very close to physical layer effects of radio
              propagation.  A serious problem with current sensor applications is dealing
              with link
error conditions such as packet loss and asymmetric communication.
              Energy-conserving MAC layers already keep track of neighbors, so the
              researchers will provide a BLACKLISTING SERVICE that allows the MAC to identify
              and exclude unusable links.  The researchers also will study and report on
              radio POWER CONTROL AND APPLICATION INTERACTIONS to understand how MACs can
              control neighborhood size.

UNIQUE APPLICATION NEEDS OF SENSOR NETWORKS: 
              Sensor networks are fundamentally different from Internet-style networks of
              peer nodes in several different ways.  A first differences is that sensor
              networks are primarily quiescent, but they occasionally become very active
              when
something is sensed.  The researchers  will develop a MAC PROTOCOL WITH
              MULTIPLE
OPERATING MODES to allow the MACs to adjust to this ``feast or
              famine'' traffic load.  In addition, energy conservation introduces a
              *directional bias* in node communication; sleep/wake-up schedules can either
              add latency to all directions equally, or can allow rapid communication in one
              direction and slower communication in the other. The researchers will evaluate
              how controllable MAC-LEVEL DIRECTIONAL BIAS INTERACTS WITH APPLICATION,
              exploiting it where possible.

Finally, the research community has a
              compelling need for a publicly available, freely modifiable Sensor-MAC protocol
              for experimentation and simulation.  Evaluation of our ideas requires
              implementation and evolution of a MAC protocol.  We will provide this
              implementation to other researchers for use over existing sensor network radios
              (with a reference implementation on the UC Berkeley Mote hardware) and in
              simulation (with a reference implementation in the ns-2 simulator).
Thus, in
              addition to opening up sensor-network-specific MAC protocols as a new subfield
              of research, this work will serve as a catalyst for wider sensor network
              research that is sorely in need of an appropriate and modifiable MAC.

