Title       : Dissertation Research: Science and Popular Culture in Traditional China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0220947

Award Number: 0220947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan Sivin nsivin@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The plurality of science in China is a large unexplored topic in the world
              history of science. Rather than a single narrative of traditional science, the
              issue calls for a new framework that acknowledges that many modes for
              understanding nature coexisted in pre-modern China. Most of these survived
              modernization and nation-building in the early twentieth century. This
              dissertation research project will examine the plurality of science in China,
              analyzing the relationship between science and popular culture from the
              seventeenth through the early twentieth centuries. The approach of this
              doctoral dissertation subordinates the investigation of elite intellectual
              traditions that has so far dominated the historiography of Chinese science.
              Historians such as Margaret Jacob and Larry Stewart have examined the
              transformation of European culture through the popularization of science in the
              eighteenth century; it is time to study Chinese counterparts. This study will
              add new perspectives to themes familiar to historians of western science such
              as the professionalization of scientists and the relationship between science
              and the nation-state, avoiding the one-dimensional approach. The relationship
              between science and popular culture offers a key framework not only for
              understanding the plurality of science in traditional China, but for showing in
              what ways its evolution differed from that of the European technical
              enterprise. That will make it possible to avoid conventionally exaggerating the
              very limited impact of small groups of reformist scientists and traditional
              doctors on Chinese culture. Popular understandings of nature, intermixed with
              elite intellectual traditions, pervaded every aspect of Chinese society from
              the imperial court to the peasant village. Despite the great diversity of
              customs and language within China, everyone shared an understanding of gods,
              ghosts, and spirits as intermediaries between man and the cosmos. The spiritual
              world affected the practice of science and medicine and, through state
              sacrifices and local rituals, organized craft production. The natural world
              served as a stage for social interactions that created and applied modes for
              rational understanding. This study will examine the diversity and flexibility
              of these human relations, and their underlying conceptions of the natural
              world, in the areas of craft production and healing. Studies so far indicate
              that attention to scholarly discourse, local and supra-local community
              relations, and state appropriation or suppression of popular religious
              practices will cast light on science, technology, and medicine as Chinese
              actually practiced them. This proposal requests $12,000 to be used over twelve
              months for travel to the archives in China and Taiwan.

