Title       : ITR:Secure Electronic Transactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0220286

Award Number: 0220286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $416258             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adriana B. Compagnoni acompagn@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elsa Gunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arnold B. Urken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,1686,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns authentication, audit trails, and privacy in secure
              electronic transactions, with the intended scope encompassing a wide array of
              daily activities such as banking, on-line shopping, elections, and surveys.
              Some of these activities are already be based in part on electronic
              transactions today, but would benefit from better mechanisms for security.
              Other activities have the potential to be performed electronically given
              greater confidence in the security infrastructure surrounding electronic
              transactions.

This project develops the design of a concurrent
              domain-specific language for distributed electronic transactions that will
              provide more security guarantees and automation of checks than has been
              previously done in such languages. It proposes an alternative to security based
              on software packages with dynamic checks, by a type-theory based approach where
              security guarantees are verified automatically and statically via typechecking,
              factoring out checks that other approaches perform dynamically for every
              execution, and performing them only once at compile time.

Efforts in these
              directions are potentially rich in social and economic benefits. Research on
              secure electronic transactions will directly reduce the incidence of electronic
              fraud, theft, and forgery, improving the quality and extending the scope of the
              software available to the general public.

