Title       : CSEMS: Scholarships in Computer, Engineering and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0220876

Award Number: 0220876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343748             (Estimated)
Investigator: David McAvity mcavityd@evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith B. Cushing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Niki Amarantides  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides up to four years of scholarship support to 25 talented,
              low-income undergraduates pursuing bachelor degrees in mathematics or computer
              science along with a carefully crafted program of enriched student support
              activities. Special consideration is given to recruiting women, ethnic and
              racial minorities, and persons with disabilities.

The project also includes
              a strong collaboration with South Puget Sound Community College (SPSCC), a
              neighboring two-year institution from which many of our students
              transfer.
Collaborative elements include integrated recruitment activities,
              cross-institution advising and student support services, and transfer
              agreements. Integrated into this project is the scholarship award process,
              which ensures that successful students at SPSCC are given priority for CSEMS
              scholarships at Evergreen. 

The project has a clear and effective management
              plan and collaboration with an existing Evergreen student services program,
              Keep Enhancing Yourself (KEY), which has proven highly effective in retaining
              and graduating low-income students. An Individual Action Plan has been
              developed with each student and monitored regularly. Additional student support
              activities include faculty advising, career planning support, internships and
              work study opportunities on and off campus, and workshops on various subjects
              known to be relevant to student success. A required biweekly Computer Science,
              Engineering, and Mathematics seminar is the vehicle for structuring many of
              these activities. 

A unique feature of the project is a three-day summer
              institute for CSEMS students, relevant faculty and staff, and industry
              partners. Partnerships with industry and state, federal government agencies and
              MESA (Math, Engineering and Science Achievement) Program, are also part of the
              project through advisory board participation, involvement in the seminar and
              summer institute, in some cases, internships and field placements.

