Title       : ITR: Algorithmic Problems in Population-Scale Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0220154

Award Number: 0220154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Gusfield gusfield@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Langley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1655,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0220154
Gusfield, Daniel
University of California-Davis

ITR:
              Algorithmic Problems in Population-Scale Genomics

Now that genomic level
              technologies are widely available (for sequencing, resequencing, 
micro-array
              screening of sequences etc.), the dream of comparing sequence variations at the
              population level is starting to become a reality. These comparisons will be
              used to help to identify the genetic basis of disease susceptibility, and  will
              have additional uses.  This shift to opulation-scale genomics introduces a new
              set of computational problems, and provides a huge opportunity for high-impact 
              algorithm development and research.

This project focuses on novel, critical
              computational problems 
that arise in population-scale genomic data
              acquisition and  analysis.   The  specific computational problems to be
              addressed arise out of on-going population-scale investigations into
              
population-level genomic variability.  It will focus on novel computational
              problems that have not been previously formulated and addressed, and problems
              
where additional formulations are needed to better capture the 
relevant
              biology.  Although the algorithmic techniques will be grounded in theoretical
              computer science and discrete mathematics (and the results will be of interest
              in those fields), the standards for success will be the ultimate applicability
              of the results in genomics.  The research will be conducted at several levels:
              modeling and defining important problems;  finding and developing efficient
              algorithms; implementing and distributing software for the most important
              results; and applying the software on population-scale genomic data. Our first
              focus is on problems related to computationally extracting haplotype
              information from genotype information, and the construction and use of
              haplotype maps.  The larger significance of the project will be the
              
development of powerful computational tools for use by geneticists and gene
              mappers, which will help to more effectively identify the genetic bases for
              disease susceptibility and other important genetic traits.
