Title       : Recruit, Retain, and Support Two-Year College Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0220832

Award Number: 0220832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300705             (Estimated)
Investigator: Modene Murphy murphy@sfcc.cc.mo.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : State Fair Community Col
	      3201 West 16th Street
	      Sedalia, MO  653012199    816/826-7100

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              State Fair Community College has been serving the residents of central Missouri
              for 34
years. In their 14-county service area, only 11% of the residents have
              baccalaureate degrees and 80% of the students at SFCC are low-income. To meet
              the cost of attending college, over 90% of SFCC's students must work while
              attending school. Thus, high-maintenance degree programs such as Computer
              Science, Engineering and Mathematics are difficult for students and result in
              low-retention rates in these programs. With special emphasis on
              underserved-populations, the goal of this project is to recruit, retain, and
              graduate or transfer each year 12-13 academically talented but financially
              needy students in the fields of Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
              thus increasing the numbers of well-educated and skilled employees in technical
              areas of national need. 

The project targets individuals from
              under-represented groups such as women, African-Americans, Hispanics and
              persons with disabilities, focusing on recruiting and retention activities. A
              recent report in
the American Association of Community Colleges' College Times
              indicates that the number of minority students attending college must be
              increased if a severe shortage of skilled workers in the future is to be
              prevented. For example, the rapid growth in the Hispanic population is not
              being reflected in college enrollment. Recruiting activities includes visits to
              high schools by faculty, a Career Fair, and training of high school counselors
              to promote careers in Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics. Retention
              activities include new student orientation, mentoring, supplemental
              instruction, tutoring, the 'buddy system', business/industry tours,
              internships/partnerships, tracking student success, cultural opportunities, and
              financial aid counseling.

The objectives of the project are as follows:
1.
              Each year recruit 12 to 13 academically talented students who are disadvantaged
              and under
represented, into the fields of Computer Science, Engineering, and
              Mathematics.
2. Improve educational opportunities for these students and
              others enrolled in Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Programs.
3.
              Establish support systems that maximize the students' ability to achieve and
              maintain a 2.5 GPA.
4. Increase the number of students completing degrees
              and/or transferring to four-year colleges and universities.
5. Implement,
              improve, and/or utilize student support programs for these students.
6.
              Strengthen and utilize, for the benefit of students, partnerships between
              institutions of higher education and high technology industry.

The
              foundations for success at SFCC include articulation agreements with the
              University of Missouri and Central Missouri State University. SFCC also is a
              recipient of an Implementation Site Seed Grant for the adaptation and
              implementation of curriculum for an Associate Degree in Networking. In
              addition, SFCC received a federally funded TRIO Student Support Services
              project in the fall of 2001. As a result of this program, supplemental
              instruction was established on campus. The outcome of this project results in
              students successfully completing a two-year degree program and either
              transferring to a four-year program or being immediately placed in employment
              directly related to Computer Science, Engineering or Mathematics. Additionally,
              a strong foundation is formed on which to perpetuate the process of attracting
              and retaining talented students.

