Title       : US-Pakistan Workshop: High Salinity Plants, Karachi, Pakistan, November 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0220495

Award Number: 0220495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell J. Weber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1305,5943,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0220495
Weber

Description:  This project supports a U.S.-Pakistan Workshop
              on High Salinity Plants to be held in Karachi, Pakistan in November 2002.  The
              organizers are Dr. Darrell Weber, Department of Biology and Range Science,
              Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah and Dr. M. Ajmal Khan, Department of
              Biology, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan. 
The workshop theme is
              "High salt tolerant plant ecosystems and their use in restoration of highly
              saline soils" and the focus will be on the restoration of highly saline soils. 
              The subjects include: collection and characterization of halophytes for use in
              restoration of highly saline soils, molecular biology of halophytes and
              identification of their salt tolerant genes, critical factors involved in the
              establishment of halophytes on highly saline soils, mechanisms of salt
              tolerance for halophytes, factors involved in maintaining natural halophyte
              populations, factors involved in maintaining restored halophyte populations,
              and development of cash crop halophytes.  The subjects covered focus on the
              restoration of highly saline soils, the mechanism of salt tolerance would have
              value in determining what type of plant is selected for restoration.  The
              workshop is designed to involve a presentation by a U.S. or Pakistan scientist
              on each specific research area. Information on how to prepare a joint proposal
              will be presented.  The proceedings will have information on restoration of
              highly saline soils, selected areas of high priority research, as well as a
              literature guide for the cooperative research. 

Scope: 
The workshop is
              being held in conjunction with the 8th national meeting of the Pakistan
              Botanical Society.  The workshop objectives are consistent with the interests
              and priorities of the Pakistan Government.  It will include U.S. scientists who
              are active in the field of plant physiology and ecological studies.  The U.S.
              participants include four junior scientists.  The results of the workshop will
              include identifying joint research that would benefit the United States,
              Pakistan and other countries that have high salinity, especially those that
              have intensive irrigation systems.

