Title       : ITR: Computational Theory and Tools for Reduced-Order Modeling of Very Large
               Dynamical Systems and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0220104

Award Number: 0220104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhaojun Bai bai@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Laub  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The continual and compelling need for accurately and efficiently simulating
              dynamical behavior of physical systems arising from a wide variety of
              applications has led to increasingly large and complex models. Reduced-order
              modeling (ROM), also called model reduction, techniques play an indispensable
              role in providing efficient computational prototyping tools to replace such
              large-scale models by approximate smaller models. Such reduced-order models
              must be capable of capturing critical dynamical behavior and faithfully
              preserving essential properties of the larger models they approximate. An
              accurate and effiective reduced-order model can be applied for steady-state
              analysis, transient analysis, or sensitivity analysis of large-scale models and
              the physical systems they emulate. Consequently, scientists and engineers can
              significantly reduce design time and pursue more aggressive design strategies.
              Designers can try ``what-if" experiments in hours instead of days.

In this
              proposal, we propose a broad range of synergistic research activities on ROM
              relating to three interlinking strands: computational theory, reliable
              algorithms, and high-performance software tools. We will also be actively
              involved with promoting applications of ROM techniques and testing our methods
              through existing and new collaborations with researchers in circuit simulation,
              structural dynamics, control systems, and microelectromechanical systems
              (MEMS). Specifically, our proposed research activities on computational theory
              and algorithms include:

	Accuracy estimation in both time and frequency
              domains.

	Sensitivity analysis of linear systems using the techniques of ROM
              and statistical condition estimation.

	Development of ROM techniques that
              directly exploit so-called second-order model structures and generate a
              reduced-order model in second-order form.

	Exploration of a framework of ROM
              techniques for certain types of large-scale nonlinear systems of technological
              importance.



