Title       : Engineering Technology Scholarships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0220654

Award Number: 0220654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Turbeville   (Principal Investigator current)
              Arnulfo Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas St Tec Inst Harlinge
	      P.O.Box 2628
	      Harlingen, TX  785512628    512/425-4922

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The college is a public, Hispanic-serving, two-year associate degree granting
              college charged with advancing the state's economic development by educating a
              skilled workforce. The vast majority of the residents in the College's service
              area are of Hispanic origin, reflecting the College's 87% Hispanic student
              population. Students receive an associate of applied science degree in one of
              four areas: Biomedical Engineering Technology, Electro Mechanical Engineering
              Technology, Electronic Engineering Technology, and Telecommunications
              Technology.

Award recipients are being selected on the basis of a submitted
              application, interviews, a written statement on choosing an engineering related
              field, and assessment of career goals. A campus National Science Foundation
              (NSF) Scholarship Committee selects qualified students for awards. Awarded
              students maintain a 3.0 GPA and if they continue in an engineering-related
              field until graduation, they remain eligible for the scholarship award.

The
              scholarship awards are being integrated into the overall recruitment and
              retention efforts of the college. As a result of additional funding, specific
              initiatives for outreach and recruitment to Hispanic families, Texas Workforce
              Commission, and parental involvement centers are ready to be implemented.
              Intensive retention strategies such as assessment methods using the Noel-Levitz
              Retention Management System, intrusive academic advising, a structured first
              year student success course, supplemental instruction, tutoring and mentoring,
              and the establishment of learning assistance centers provide awarded students
              with a strong retention infrastructure for student success as measured by
              persistence until graduation.

