Title       : Collaborative Research: Mixing and Circulation in a Buoyant Coastal Plume
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0220446

Award Number: 0220446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800476             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Garvine rgarvine@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Tilburg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0220446 Garvine

Mixing and circulation in the Delaware Coastal Current (DCC),
              a buoyant coastal jet, will be studied using a combination of numerical
              modeling and field work (moorings, rapid surveys, and purposeful dye releases)
              followed by analysis and interpretation of results from the two approaches. 
              Working hypotheses are that mixing between the coastal buoyant discharge and
              ambient shelf waters is larger during upwelling than downwelling events, that
              this mixing during upwelling is primarily concentrated at the offshore plume
              boundary, and that the conservation of buoyancy is principally a balance
              between horizontal advection and vertical diffusion.  Moorings will include
              standard current meters and bottom-mounted acoustic Doppler current profilers
              (ADCPs).  There will be 5 moorings, three parallel to the DCC and three
              perpendicular.  Multiple conductivity-temperature-depth recorders (CTDs) and
              temperature sensors will also be deployed on both taut and slack moorings.  At
              the northernmost mooring, two ADCPs will allow estimation of the Reynolds
              stresses using Stacey's method.  ADCP bin spacing will be 0.5 m allowing
              resolution of 1m eddies.  Forty-five kilograms of Rhodamine dye will be
              released during each upwelling or downwelling event selected for study.  This
              dye will be traced for 4-5 days.  There will be two cruises and mooring
              deployments.  One upwelling dye study will occur during year 1 and one
              upwelling and one downwelling experiment during year two.  A previously
              utilized version of ECOM3d, configured for the DCC, will be used to analyze the
              dye study results.  Significant effort will be devoted to comparing different
              turbulent closure schemes.  After the model is calibrated, it may be used for
              sensitivity studies.  Careful comparison and interpretation of field and model
              results will conclude the study.


