Title       : A Symposium on Structural and Earthquake Engineering: Fundamental and Emerging
               Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0220143

Award Number: 0220143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Armen Der Kiureghian adk@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The University of California at Berkeley together with CUREE (the Consortium of
              Universities for Research in Earthquake Engineering) have planned a symposium
              in honor of Emeritus Professors Ray Clough and Joseph Penzien to be held on the
              Berkeley campus on May 9-11, 2002. The event recognizes the notable
              contributions made by two of the most influential researchers and educators in
              structural and earthquake engineering.  The wide-ranging careers of Professors
              Ray Clough and Joseph Penzien at UC Berkeley included teaching, research and
              consulting on topics such as the finite element method; shake table testing;
              seismic analysis and design of dams, bridges, water tanks, offshore structures,
              power plants, and buildings; analysis of strong ground motion records; and
              development of seismic design criteria.

The Symposium features a technical
              program having broad appeal for practicing engineers, researchers, teachers and
              students. The program combines historical perspectives of structural and
              earthquake engineering with state-of-the-art discussions on topics represented
              by the seminal works of the honorees. Attention is given to emerging
              technologies, including those related to the Network for Earthquake Engineering
              Simulation (NEES) and to protective devices and sensors.

The program is
              particularly valuable to junior faculty starting careers in structural and
              earthquake engineering, as it provides them an opportunity to have a
              four-decade perspective of the field as well as an appreciation of the
              contributions of the two noted pioneers. They also have an opportunity to hear
              about emerging technologies and the future directions in the fields of
              structural and earthquake engineering. The opportunity to mingle with the
              giants of the field in an inviting technical environment is one that will make
              a lasting impression on the junior faculty in particular.


