Title       : Revision of the Greenland Ice Sheet Program 2 (GISP2) Depth-Age Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0220949

Award Number: 0220949
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45258              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra A. Meese dmeese@crrel.usace.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Meese
0220949

This proposal is being jointly funded by the Arctic Natural
              Sciences Program, Antarctic Glaciology Program, and the Paleoclimate Program in
              the Division of Atmospheric Sciences. The Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP2)
              depth-age scale is accurate within one per cent on an annual basis through the
              Holocene and into the Wisconsin and therefore has been of great interest to the
              paleoclimate community. Researchers have used, and want continue to use our
              most valuable paleoclimate archives, the GISP2 and the Greenland Ice Core
              Project (GRIP) ice cores, to calibrate chronologies from other materials.
              Because the GRIP core was drilled simultaneously and in close proximity (30 km)
              to the GISP2 core, comparison between the two cores was expected to be similar.
               However, there are segments of the cores where there is sufficient variability
              and the chronologies have been questioned. This has caused confusion within the
              ice coring and the paleoclimate communities. An example of these errors can be
              seen in the Antarctic Siple Dome core. Like the GISP2 chronology, the Siple
              Dome chronology is based on annual layer counts, but the gas age chronology
              deeper in the core is based on correlations with the GISP2 record perpetuating
              the errors that exist in the GISP2 chronology. It is critical that the GISP2
              chronology be reexamined and any discrepancies be resolved, if possible. The
              Principal Investigator will: 1) use new volcanic records obtained since the
              completion of the original GISP2 depth-age as additional tie points for greater
              calibration; 2) revise the Holocene portion of the GISP2 depth-age scale based
              on the new Berylium-10 and Carbon-14 results; and 3) revisit areas of the
              depth-age scale where discrepancies exist between the GISP2 and GRIP ice cores
              based on a recent publication. Revision of the GISP2 depth-age scale will be
              accomplished by reexamining areas of the core that have been identified to be
              in error by new data that have come available since the completion of the
              original GISP2 chronology. Additionally, areas of the core where the GISP2 and
              GRIP chronologies vary will be reexamined. The goal in the cases where
              discrepancies exist with the GRIP record is not to adjust the GISP2 chronology,
              but to identify any errors that are now evident due to new data and make
              adjustments as necessary to obtain the best possible GISP2 chronology.




