Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0220726

Award Number: 0220726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Libby Holt lholt@fccj.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evan Kuharich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fl Cmty Col Jacksonville
	      501 West State Street
	      Jacksonville, FL  322024030    904/632-3000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is establishing a new scholarship for Computer Science,
              Engineering, and Mathematics Scholars. Recipients are being chosen from
              candidates majoring or planning to major in Computer Science, Engineering
              Technology, or Mathematics (CSEM). Scholarships are available to students in
              both Associate of Science and Associate of Arts programs. 

The objectives of
              the program are to:
1. Annually provide scholarships to 30 academically
              talented, financially disadvantaged CSEM students, including those from
              underrepresented groups.
2. Provide support to CSEM scholars, enabling a
              minimum of 70% of the recipients to maintain or exceed a 2.5 grade point
              average and persist until associate degree achievement.
3. Provide job
              placement assistance to 100% of the project participants who complete
              requirements and desire employment in CSEM disciplines.
4. Provide transfer
              assistance to 100% of students who complete program requirements and desire to
              enroll in a four-year institution.

The program build upons existing
              recruitment, support and career placement activities at the college and
              integrates new programs to provide a complete infrastructure. Candidates are
              being recruited through existing college recruitment efforts as well as the
              College Board Tutoring Partnership, a program providing college readiness
              tutors to local high schools, and the Jacksonville Urban Systemic Initiative.
              In addition to existing student support programs present on the four campuses
              and three centers of the College, each scholar is paired with a faculty mentor
              to assist the scholar and provide guidance. The College also has a CSEM
              counselor who is responsible for coordinating all support services college-wide
              for the scholarship recipients. The counselor works closely with the mentors
              and assures all support services are fully accessed by the scholars. In the
              area of career services, the scholars have access to all existing career
              services. Industry partners provide internship activities and mentoring to
              students wishing to seek employment upon graduation with an A.S. degree. An
              innovative support structure is being established built upon existing programs
              and partnerships improving the success of students in these demanding
              disciplines.
