Title       : Dissertation Research: Knowledge and Ethics in the Debate Over Inuit Suicide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0220814

Award Number: 0220814
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anna M. Kerttula                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Cohen cohen@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret (Lisa) E. Stevenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5221      ARCTIC SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


This is a dissertation improvement grant for a modest $12,000 to cover
              transportation, video supplies for a Youth Video Documentary sub-project,
              informant honoraria, and a part-time research assistant. Knowledge and Ethics
              in the Debate Over Inuit Suicide (Knowledge and Ethics) is a long-term (12
              month), multi-sited (Iqaluit, Pangnirtung, Toronto) ethnographic research
              project that seeks to understand how knowledge about suicide is produced in a
              multi-cultural and post-colonial milieu. Through semi-structured interviews,
              conversation, archival research, and a youth video project, Knowledge and
              Ethics proposes to study the social and political implications of western
              medical, scientific and journalistic knowledge on the subject of Inuit
              suicide.

In addition, Knowledge and Ethics identifies and analyzes the
              dialog between Inuit ways of knowing and western biomedical knowledge.  The
              divergent responses of psychiatrists, family members and suicidal individuals
              to research questions concerning human life, the preservation of life (ethics),
              and the self should provide data about different conceptions of reality and how
              meaning is created. Through careful discourse analysis the investigators hope
              to identify new ways of conceptualizing human life that are emerging in the
              Canadian arctic.  Through such analyses, this research proposes to enhance and
              challenge theoretical discussions on the cultural construction of knowledge,
              indigenous identity, and the meanings of suicide, as well as, contribute to the
              ongoing debate about the creation of knowledge amidst upheaval and cultural
              confrontation. 

