Title       : ACE'M Scholarships for Engineering Technology Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0220657

Award Number: 0220657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Wandschneider rwandschneid@madison.tec.wi.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald W. Mahun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald D. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard V. Xavier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terry P. O'Laughlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Madison Area Tech College
	      211 N Carroll Street
	      Madison, WI  537032285    608/266-5050

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program provides scholarships to low-income, academically talented students
              in architectural technology, civil engineering technology and electronics and
              mechanical design technology programs. Our efforts are expanded to recruit
              individuals from groups underrepresented in CSEM fields, including women,
              ethnic/linguistic and racially underrepresented groups and students with
              disabilities. Strong and varied student supports are in place to retain
              scholarship recipients through services such as academic support, counseling
              and mentoring activities. The College has successfully administered similar
              scholarships and fellowships and this scholarship program compliments existing
              resources. MATC and the MATC Foundation are providing additional funds and
              services to enhance the program. Our main objectives of the ACE'M program are
              to increase enrollment of underrepresented students, including women,
              minorities and persons with disabilities in CSEM programs at MATC, monitor
              their progress to promote and assure timely completion of their programs,
              increase overall graduation rates and achieve either full employment for CSEM
              graduates related to their program or continuing on to a four-year college
              within six months of graduation.
