Title       : Collaborative Research: Pathways to Closing the Gaps in North Texas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a0220854

Award Number: 0220854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon L. Hawkins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dallas County CC Sys Off
	      701 Elm Street
	      Dallas, TX  752023201    214/746-2125

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this collaborative proposal is to increase the number of high
              achieving, but financially challenged, students graduating with a four-year
              degree in computer science, engineering, or mathematics. The approach is to
              create a formal link between the University of Texas at Arlington and two local
              community colleges (Tarrant County College-Southeast Campus and Mountain View
              College) to tap a rich pool of academically talented students who lack the
              financial resources to complete their studies on a full-time basis. First
              generation students, in particular, tend to fall into this category, and they
              often lack the visibility or knowledge to seek needed resources and career
              guidance effectively. Many of these students begin their higher education at
              community colleges, while working full- or part-time. Lack of funds negatively
              affects the retention rate of this group, thus shortchanging the technical
              workforce of much-needed potential talent.

Therefore, UTA and its CC
              partners formed a CSEMS collaborative partnership that could have a tremendous
              impact on the Dallas/Fort Worth (DFW) technical workforce. Eighty-nine
              scholarships are awarded annually with priority given to eligible first
              generation students.

The objectives to support the goal include establishing
              a structured pipeline from the CCs to
UTA; developing retention strategies and
              adapting existing academic support resources
to target this pool of students
              in CSEM disciplines; formalizing an optional research component or industry
              internship experience to the Scholars' degree plan; and developing CSEM
              specific programs to prepare the students for professional experiences beyond
              graduation. Faculty and industry mentors are available, and a Peer Bridge Group
              of CC alumni, who are now attending UTA, assist CC students through the
              transfer process.

A formal CSEM Articulation Agreement was developed to
              create seamless curricula and concurrent enrollment opportunities in these
              fields by which to transition CC students to UTA. This collaborative
              encompasses a significant portion of North Texas, and it builds capacity and
              critical mass for the technical workforce in this leading high tech region.

