Title       : Do Anoxygenic Aerobic Photoheterotrophs Contribute to the Ecology of the Open
               Ocean?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0220955

Award Number: 0220955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $531696             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zbigniew S. Kolber   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Falkowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Aerobic anoxygenic photoheterotrophs (AAPs), and their characteristic pigment,
              bacteriochloropyll a (BChla), were recently discovered throughout the surface
              waters of the open ocean (Kolber, 2000; Kolber, 2001).  AAPs comprise upwards
              of about 11 % of the total microbial community, they are globally distributed
              in the euphotic zone, and display high levels of photosynthetic activity.  More
              than twenty isolates have been obtained from different ocean basins. These
              organisms are facultative photoheterotrophs, and represent a potentially
              significant, but hitherto unrecognized component of the marine microbial
              community. Their potential role in the ecology of the upper ocean is determined
              by their contribution to the energy and carbon fluxes, and by their
              interactions with other components of marine ecosystems.  

To elucidate this
              role, this project is investigating mechanisms of photosynthesis, carbon
              fixation, and respiration in AAPs, to identify factors controlling expression
              of phototrophy vs. heterotrophy, and to estimate the extent of AAP-specific
              energy, carbon, and redox under varying environmental conditions.  AAPs are
              readily cultivated on organic-poor media.  The investigators  are establishing
              a library of the open ocean isolates, and characterizing the phylogenetic
              relationship between AAPs from different geographical regions.  AAPs use
              photosynthesis to produce ATP and to fix CO2.  The investigators  are
              characterizing the photosynthetic properties of AAPs, evaluating the effect of
              light on their carbon metabolism, and investigating the effect of
              photosynthesis on the incorporation of dissolved organic material (DOM).  Where
              DOM is abundant, AAPs perform mostly heterotrophic metabolism, respiring the
              available organic carbon. When DOM is limited, AAPs synthesize photosynthetic
              pigments and reaction centers, shifting their metabolism toward phototrophy. 
              The investigators are assessing the extent and the factors controlling these
              transitions.  Unable to oxidize water, AAPs rely on other substrates to serve
              as electron donor(s).  Although most of the photosynthetic electron transport
              in AAPs is cyclic, external electron donors are necessary to replenish the
              electrons lost to photosynthetic carbon fixation, or to external electron
              acceptors. The researchers are investigating which of the organic/inorganic
              reductants present in the upper ocean serve as potential electron donors to
              AAPs, and explore the AAP-mediated redox reactions, with particular emphasis on
              oxidation of the reduced sulfur species, and reduction of iron and nitrogen
              species.  

Phototrophy alleviates AAPs' dependence on the organic carbon,
              reducing the rates of carbon remineralization in the upper ocean, thus
              affecting the extent of new production.  If effective in reducing iron and
              nitrogen species, AAPs will also affect the physiology of oxygenic phototrophs.
              By addressing these questions, this project is providing the most basic
              knowledge regarding the potential role of AAPs in the upper ocean ecology.
