Title       : The Garden in the Machine: The Adaptation of Canine Biotechnology and Human
               Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0220764

Award Number: 0220764
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund P. Russell russell@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 0220764
The Garden in the Machine: The Adaptation of Canine Biotechnology
              and
Human Society
Edmund Russell, University of Virginia

We have long
              thought about the relationship between technology and nature as "the machine in
              the garden," which focuses our attention on ways that technology intrudes into
              nature. This project reverses our framework by focusing on the garden in the
              machine (more accurately, the organism in the artifact), or ways that
              technology emerges from nature. Organisms shaped to serve human ends, such as
              domesticates, became one form of biotechnology. Analyzing the workings of this
              process can help us understand the past, present, and future of
              biotechnology.

This project uses the history of dogs in the 19th and 20th
              centuries in the United States and United Kingdom as a case study. Dogs were
              the first domesticated species, make the impact of breeding easily visible,
              have done a wide variety of jobs (with companionship becoming an ever more
              important source of employment), and are important to many people  -- a fact
              that increases interest in the products of this research.  This study analyzes
              several factors important in shaping canine biotechnology: economics, class,
              gender, institutions, culture, gambling, breeding, and national differences. We
              like to think that we have been in control of dog evolution, but dogs have also
              shaped us. To understand the coevolution of humans and dogs, this project
              introduces a new field to history called evolutionary history. This field pairs
              strengths of history of technology, environmental history, history of science,
              and evolutionary biology to gain a fuller  understanding of the coevolution of
              humans and other species than we could obtain from one  field alone. One of
              evolutionary history's strengths is focusing on cultural as well as genetic
              evolution. 

This project relies on standard historical methods, including
              research in libraries, archives, and museums.  It will produce conference
              papers, articles, and a book.

