Title       : Scholarships for Information Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0220770

Award Number: 0220770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Nettles enettles@valencia.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              JoeLynn Look  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale A. Husbands  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nasser Hedayat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Colin C. Archibald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Valencia Community Coll
	      P O BOX 3028
	      Orlando, FL  328023028    305/299-5000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Despite recent economic downturns, the demand for skilled information technology
              (IT) professionals in the United States and in Central Florida remains
              significant. Community colleges play significant roles in the success of
              students (especially underrepresented populations) who pursue high skill, high
              wage technical degrees and careers such as those in IT-related areas. Valencia
              CC's project provides educational opportunities to low-income, academically
              talented students through scholarships and support services that promote
              full-time enrollment and degree achievement in six Associate in Science degree
              programs related to computer technology and engineering technology: Computer
              Engineering Technology (CET), Computer Information Technology (CIT), Computer
              Programming and Analysis (CP&A), Database Technology (DBT), E-Business
              Technology (EBT), and Electronics Engineering Technology (EET). Project
              objectives include increasing the number of full-time students, establishing
              higher retention rates, and establishing higher placement rates. Valencia CC
              awards 30 scholarships each year to full-time students pursuing the targeted
              degree programs, for a total of 120 scholarships over the four-year grant
              period. Student must meet all CSEMS eligibility requirements and are recruited
              through extensive existing recruitment strategies. Valencia's IT and EET
              programs are nationally recognized for being well defined, current, and
              rigorous in content, with curriculum that is relevant and responsive to the
              needs of the business community. High academic performance is encouraged
              through supplemental advisement services. A small portion of the project funds
              are allocated to management costs and support programs and services designed to
              enhance
student learning, confidence, performance, retention, and placement.
              The student support services strategies include student advisement and
              mentoring by faculty and industry representatives, recruitment and retention
              activities, and the availability of industry-based internships for scholarship
              recipients.
Internships not only supplement classroom-based learning
              experiences; they provide students with networking opportunities critical to
              finding eventual employment after graduation. 

Marketing to students is
              targeted at: (1) current Valencia students in the targeted programs who have at
              least 25 percent of their coursework remaining; (2) high school seniors and
              recent high school graduates who are or were enrolled in dual enrollment
              programs related to the targeted programs; (3) high school seniors and recent
              high school graduates who are or were enrolled in schools with high minority
              student populations; (4) female high school seniors and recent high school
              graduates who have or had an interest in IT or EET programs. The likelihood of
              success in achieving the objectives of this project are increased by the fact
              that Valencia will be able to implement the project rapidly by building upon
              existing academic and support services.

