Title       : Japan-JSPS Fellowship: Milankovitch and Climate Change in the Cretaceous and
               Paleogene Period
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0220936

Award Number: 0220936
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin S. Cramer benjamin@dges.tohoku.ac.jp  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : B, Cramer
	      Geological Sciences
	      Piscataway, NJ  088548066    732/445-0688

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0510101   Climate Models                          
Program Ref : 1304,5921,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              INT-0220936
Cramer

This award supports a twenty-four month Japan Society for
              the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Benjamin Cramer. 
              He will be collaborating with Professor Kunio Kaiho at Tohoku University in
              Japan.  They will be undertaking research on Milankovitch and climate change in
              the Cretaceous and Paleogene period.  This topic is a major focus of current
              research in paleoceanography.  Most characterizations of long-term climate
              change in this time period rely on low-resolution records that are most likely
              compromised by aliasing of the underlying orbital cyclicity.  In addition,
              high-resolution studies of climatic and biotic perturbations lack a context for
              evaluating how the climate response to insolation forcing may have changed
              during different events or how insolation forcing may have affected the
              structure of these events.  The major objectives of the research are  1) to
              produce a Milankovitch stratigraphy for the Cenomanian-Turonian,
              Cretaceous-Tertiary, and Paleocene-Eocene transitions and  2) using this
              stratigraphy as a guide, to investigate climate changes on Milankovitch
              timescales in discreet intervals during these transitions.   

The
              researchers hope to produce a reliable Milankovitch-based stratigraphy that
              will greatly enhance studies of all three boundaries.  Understanding the
              relationship between climate proxy records and orbital forcing is a crucial
              step in understanding Cretaceous and Paleogene greenhouse climates and will be
              useful in understanding isolated perturbations that affected those climates.  
              This project will offer a good opportunity to join efforts between the two
              countries.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of the research on the
              web and report on the findings at scientific meetings.


