Title       : Electromagnetic Modeling of Cylindrical Waveguide-Based Deielctric Resonator
               Amplifier Arrays for Spatial Power Combiners
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0220218

Award Number: 0220218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed A. Kishk ahmed@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander B. Yakovlev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal addresses two areas of critical emerging technology in the
              microwave and millimeter wave regions.  The first area is the fundamental
              characteristics of dielectric resonator antennas and finite antenna arrays
              operating in a cylindrical waveguide environment.  The study and analysis of
              single dielectric resonator antenna element show the advantages of this new
              antenna type at millimeter wave frequencies in comparison with traditionally
              used microstrip and patch printed antennas.  This new radiator is expected to
              be an excellent element in antenna arrays used in many critical applications. 
              This part of the project focuses on the development of new analytical and
              numerical tools for full-wave analysis of antenna radiation characteristics and
              on the investigation of performance of dielectric radiators as elements in
              waveguide-based antenna arrays.  Based on the understanding of dielectric
              resonator antenna performance in cylindrical waveguides, the second part of the
              project addresses the issue of modeling a fully integrated cylindrical
              waveguide-based spatial power combining amplifier array.  A cylindrical spatial
              power combining architecture, which utilizes an array of dielectric resonators,
              is proposed.  In this system, dielectric resonator antennas play a critical
              role, which is justified by their radiation characteristics and high power
              handling capabilities.  Our goal here is to develop an integrated modeling
              scheme for the full-wave analysis of a complete waveguide-based spatial power
              combining system, including the interaction of passive (dielectric resonator
              and hard-horn antennas) elements and active (amplifier) circuits.  The newly
              proposed system will allow to operate in dual and circular polarization
              regimes.
       
 A high level educational component is considered here by
              training two graduate students during the course of this project that merge the
              basic research with high level practical applications.  In order to broaden the
              scope of benefits, a new course will be developed to involve and expose more
              graduate students to this area.  The course will be developed based on the
              study of dielectric resonator antennas in an array environment and the use of
              hard surfaces as an artificial magnetic surface.

