Title       : Operation of the Magnetometer Array on the Greenland Ice Cap (MAGIC) and
               Interhemispheric Investigations of Multi-Scale Current Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0220735

Award Number: 0220735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $524910             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Robert Clauer rclauer@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0220735
Clauer

This research is directed toward the continuation of the
              operation of the Magnetometer Array on the Greenland Ice Cap (MAGIC) and the
              continued analysis of the data from these stations together with data from
              other ground based and satellite instruments. The overarching objective is to
              explore a new approach to investigate the multi-scale solar wind -
              magnetosphere - ionosphere electrodynamic system through high temporal and
              spatial resolution, magnetically conjugate arrays of digital magnetometers
              deployed in Greenland and Eastern Antarctica. Major new elements of the
              proposed investigation include: (1) the upgrade of existing Greenland
              magnetometers to 1-second samples, (2) simultaneous visualization of
              interhemispheric ground geomagnetic field variations with the goal to
              investigate multi-scale magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling, and (3) the detailed
              study of the transition in magnetospheric electrodynamic morphology from weakly
              southward IMF to weakly northward IMF conditions and vice versa. This project
              is a cooperative effort between the University of Michigan and the Danish
              Meteorological Institute. The project is a continuation of a collaboration that
              began with the installation of the original magnetometer stations on the
              Greenland ice cap in 1991. The autonomous magnetometer systems in central
              Greenland provided valuable intermediate variometer measurements of magnetic
              perturbations between the Greenland west and east coast stations. One station
              is located at the central Greenland summit site to provide continuity between
              the west and east coast stations, and one station was placed at the Air
              National Guard LC130 Raven skiway to provide a dense two-dimensional array for
              detailed current calculations. The MAGIC data in combination with data from the
              Greenland coastal stations and Sondrestrom incoherent scatter radar have been
              crucial in resolving the spatial and evolutionary characteristics of various
              dynamic ionospheric current systems, including traveling convection vortices,
              poleward propagating DPY currents, and the transition of large scale convection
              systems from one state to another. Using data from the Greenland stations in
              combination with Canadian, Scandinavian, and Antarctic magnetic data, and
              coordinated with other ancillary ground based and satellite data, this effort
              will investigate high latitude magnetic pulsations and interhemispheric auroral
              oval and polar cap relationships. The focus is on understanding the various
              electrodynamic current systems that couple energy and momentum from the solar
              wind to the magnetosphere and ionosphere.


