Title       : The Mathematics, Computer Science and Engineering (MACSER) Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0220647

Award Number: 0220647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellena Reda reda@sunydutchess.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evelyn Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Cavalieri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dutchess Cmty College
	      53 Pendell Road
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12601    845/431-8000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is establishing the Mathematics, Computer Science and Engineering
              (MACSER) Scholars program. The scholarships provide financial support to
              full-time students who have demonstrated need and are enrolled in or plan to
              enroll in our mathematics, computer science, engineering science and
              engineering technology programs. Both part-time and non-traditional students
              are being encouraged to apply for MACSER scholarships. Offering financial
              support to those students whose current economic situation prevents them from
              attending college on a full-time basis provides a mechanism that enables the
              student to shorten the amount of time required to complete his or her
              respective program. It also leads to an increase in the number of full time
              students enrolled in the mathematics, computer science, engineering science and
              engineering technology programs.  By providing scholarship opportunities, the
              project is relieving some of the burden full-time employment places on them,
              and helping to ensure academic success. Extra efforts are being spent on
              increasing the number of women and underrepresented minorities in the targeted
              majors as well.

The program provides a support network for scholarship
              recipients, which builds community and is the cornerstone and strength of the
              MACSER Scholars program. This network includes personal advising, academic
              support, mentoring, peer tutoring, a virtual community, and MACSER workshops.
              These serve to increase the academic success of students enrolled in the MACSER
              Scholars majors. 
