Title       : ITR: Software-Hardware-Technology Co-Optimization for Ultra Low Power
               Architectures Via Delay Considerations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0220259

Award Number: 0220259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264915             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abhijit Chatterjee chat@eecom.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1652,1686,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recently there has been considerable interest in the design of
              power/energy-aware electronics seeking to reduce the power consumption of
              military and consumer applications by over two orders of magnitude. This
              interest is driven by the power demands of today's high-speed, high-density,
              (portable) integrated electronics. Unless new power-efficient design methods
              are developed, there will be stringent limitations on the levels of electronics
              integration possible in the future as well as limitations on the speeds at
              which hardware can operate. Hardware portability will also be affected by
              battery size and weight. Simple calculations reveal that future microprocessors
              will dissipate several hundred watts of power unless drastic power reduction
              features are implemented. High power consumption and the associated high
              temperatures can also lead to reliability problems leading to early failure. If
              the trends in reduction of feature sizes and the increase in the levels of
              integration in silicon are to continue well into the future, the power
              consumption problem must be handled effectively and solved urgently.

This
              research involves the study of hardware-software co-optimization methods to
              achieve ultra low power/energy consumption over a range of applications. Such
              co-optimization has been difficult in the past due to the complexity of the
              optimization problem and the fact that the optimization parameters stretch
              across software, hardware and technology parameters. While factors of energy
              savings up to 5X are possible using software, hardware and technology
              optimization individually, much larger savings are possible if a vertically
              integrated power optimization approach across software, hardware and technology
              boundaries is undertaken. To handle the complexity problem of such a vertically
              integrated power/energy minimization approach, a very simple optimization
              metric is proposed. This metric seeks to allocate delay to software and
              hardware modules in such a way that the delay of the module is proportional to
              the energy consumed by the module. Using such a metric, the problem of
              technology optimization (Vdd, Vt, device sizing) can be decoupled from that of
              system-level optimization without compromising the quality of the solution
              obtained. As long as the above metric is satisfied, software/hardware and
              technology optimizations can be done independently with high confidence that
              the resulting solution will be close to the optimum. Note that the proposed
              metric relies on the knowledge of the energy consumption of each module
              relative to other modules than on the absolute values of energy consumption of
              each module. The energy consumed by a hardware or software module relative to
              that of other modules is computed easily using simulation. It is conjectured
              that the use of the proposed power metric will simplify the complexity of the
              optimization problem to a degree that will allow much bigger, vertical
              optimizations to be performed across the software, hardware and technology
              boundaries. 


