Title       : Supporting Students for Success in Math and Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0220612

Award Number: 0220612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $394996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Chase jchase@radford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Corwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Radford University
	      Radford Univ Post Office
	      Radford, VA  24142    703/731-5000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of this Radford University project is to produce more highly
              skilled graduates in Computer Science and Mathematics. The project's approach
              is one of aggressive tracking and continuous financial, academic, and social
              support throughout the crucial freshman and sophomore years. At least 30
              scholarships are awarded to freshmen and sophomores in each of the four years
              of the project. 
 
Program objectives are (1) to recruit and select students,
              especially nontraditional students, to pursue careers in CSEM fields; (2) to
              support participants with intensive academic advising and with social
              activities; and (3) to obtain internships and other experiential learning
              positions for all participants. Recruitment of academically strong students,
              especially women and minority students is in cooperation with the university's
              Admissions Office and through the Office of Multicultural Services.
              

Students are supported by individual attention from project staff as well
              as a well-developed institutional support system. This includes constant
              monitoring; frequent, individualized advising; academic support (through
              tutoring and other services); social support (through clubs and social events
              related to CSEM disciplines); internships; and career counseling (in individual
              sessions with the university's Career Services Center). Participants meet
              monthly with project staff, and are required to seek tutoring or other help as
              appropriate. Project staff meets regularly to discuss participants' progress
              and needs. 
 
Project evaluation is based on student progress, and on student
              opinion as revealed in annual structured interviews. Evaluations are used to
              modify the project to provide the best possible support for students. 
 

