Title       : Microcontroller Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1991  
File        : a9050405

Award Number: 9050405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15890              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Kent Stiffler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1365      PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Microprocessors in mechanical engineering education are ready to               
              move beyond personal computer based control and data acquisition               
              to mechatronics:  a blend of mechanical design and electronics                 
              which stresses breadboard design of microprocessors and support                
              chips.  The logical niche for mechanical engineers is the                      
              microcontroller or microcomputer-on-a-chip.  These chips are the               
              basis for modular control in product design:  automobiles,                     
              appliances, cameras, etc.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this project is to establish a microcontroller                  
              laboratory concurrent with a required course on microprocessors.               
              The present laboratory uses microprocessor board designs which                 
              concentrate on bus oriented wiring.  Microcontrollers have memory              
              and I/O onboard.  Wiring problems are reduced to peripherals.                  
              This allows the additional time to teach computer assembly of                  
              microcontroller programs, to strengthen the peripheral designs                 
              but with microcontrollers, and to place more course emphasis on                
              interfacing stepper and DC motors.                                             
                                                                                             
              The laboratory equipment would consist of twelve work stations.                
              Each student would have a microcontroller development board to                 
              interface a personal computer for program assembly, software                   
              simulation, and program downloading to the microcontroller.  Six               
              oscilloscopes and three logic analyzers would provide for                      
              hardware and software debugging.
