Title       : Undergraduate Laboratory for Control Systems Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1991      
File        : a9050866

Award Number: 9050866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25717              (Estimated)
Investigator: Garng M. Huang   (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Fleming  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammed Dahleh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1365      PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Undergraduate students studying control theory have difficulty                 
              connecting the abstract and fundamental notions presented in the               
              classroom with the practical reality of what processor system                  
              their design is to control.  Although students gain facility in                
              mathematical analysis, they lack the physical intuition on how to              
              pose a control problem, how to model the system, how to determine              
              which types of measurements are necessary and available.  An                   
              undergraduate control systems laboratory consisting of six                     
              experimental stations will address this deficiency.  Each station              
              will include a microcomputer with analog interface boards for                  
              data acquisition and for implementation of control.  The computer              
              will be used first in the identification of a suitable model for               
              the system, then as a design, simulation and display device using              
              the Matlab CAD package and finally as the actual implementation                
              of the control law when interfaced with the physical system.                   
              Experiments include DC motor control, coupled tanks, and the                   
              inherently unstable system of balancing a ball on a tiltable                   
              beam.  The lab will be used in two senior level courses and by                 
              students who wish to work on control systems for their senior                  
              design projects.  The wide range of physical phenomena afforded                
              by the experiments will give students experience in handling                   
              different types of problems, from a point that precedes the                    
              typical textbook setting, through the actual implementation and                
              performance.  By requiring the student to model and control a                  
              physical system, students should gain a better understanding of                
              the underlying theory; through there use of the CAD tools, they                
              should be able to design better control systems, and be better                 
              prepared to face the demands of new technologies.
