Title       : "Science is an Activity": A New Approach to Exhibits in Science Museums
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9050232

Award Number: 9050232
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert L. Russell                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1100690            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Bell lbell@mos.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence J. Ralph  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Museum of Science
	      
	      Boston, MA  02114    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The Museum of Science is initiating a unique approach to                  
              its permanent exhibits which concentrates on the process of                    
              learning science rather than on the facts to be learned.  The                  
              first stage, development of "Seeing the Unseen", one of six                    
              activity centers, is the focus of this proposal.  Guided by the                
              American Association for the Advancement of Science's call for                 
              reforms in science teaching and by recent research on learning                 
              styles, the Museum will organize its exhibits around six                       
              "activity centers".  Each center introduces a basic skill, such                
              as observation or experimentation, and prompts a visitor to use                
              the new method in special surrounding exhibits.  The project is                
              a breakthrough approach to science learning in the museum                      
              setting because it encourages visitors to discover for                         
              themselves characteristic scientific activities and habits of                  
              analysis.  Although the Museum will use many current exhibits                  
              in the layout of the new plan, many others will be created                     
              which engage visitors interactively in learning science.  The                  
              total cost of the project is estimated to be $18 million.
