Title       : Chemistry for Elementary Teachers (Providing Discoveries in Chemistry for
               Elementary School Children)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1993       
File        : a9050273

Award Number: 9050273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $748922             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Emory Howell j.e.howell@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lillie V. Tucker-Akin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The University of Southern Mississippi has designed a project                  
              in which teams of three primary grade (K-3) and three                          
              intermediate grade (4-6) elementary teachers from each of                      
              twelve Mississippi public school districts will be selected                    
              to participate in two successive three-week summer workshops                   
              over the next two years. These workshops are designed to                       
              prepare 216 teachers in the use hands-on science activities                    
              in their classrooms.  The project has a two-fold purpose, (1)                  
              to enable the teachers to use these activities in their                        
              classroom in order to stimulate the interest of children in                    
              learning science and (2a) to equip the teacher with the                        
              necessary content knowledge base to teach science.  Although                   
              chemistry will be used as the science content theme, the                       
              concepts, ideas and activities developed in these workshops                    
              are applicable to all science teaching at the elementary grade                 
              level.  It is assumed that participants will not have a                        
              background in chemistry.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The project faculty will model an approach in which concrete                   
              manipulation of objects is the mechanism for obtaining data                    
              for mental processing into abstract statements of patterns and                 
              relationships.  The participants will actually work through                    
              each of the many activities, which have chosen for their                       
              usefulness in the classroom, their low cost, their use of                      
              readily available materials, and their safety.  Each                           
              participant will gin experience with these activities by                       
              teaching in a special summer class for grade school children.                  
              In addition to receiving three hours of graduate credit, each                  
              participant must share what they have learned by participating                 
              and conducting hands-on in-service workshops with the support                  
              of the project staff.  A high school chemistry teachers and                    
              an administrator from each school district will be a member                    
              of the team during the entire project including the follow-                    
              up and evaluation phase.                                                       
                                                                                             
              In the course of this project and its immediate predecessor,                   
              thirty-six school districts in Mississippi will be impacted                    
              directly, affecting one-fourth of all the districts in the                     
              state.  An amount equivalent to 25% of the NSF request is                      
              being cost-shared by USM and the twelve school districts.
