Title       : Incorporating Thermal Analysis and Polymeric Principles into the Undergraduate
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1990       
File        : a9050652

Award Number: 9050652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27337              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip L. Kumler kumler@fredonia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Bowser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice C. Neveu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Fredonia
	      Central Avenue
	      Fredonia, NY  14063    716/673-3111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Through this project, the institution acquired thermal analysis                
              equipment including a differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)                  
              module, a thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) module, a module                    
              controller which operates either device, a mechanical cooling                  
              accessory to allow programmed cooling, and various accessories.                
                                                                                             
              The acquisition greatly strengthened the undergraduate research                
              component of the chemistry curriculum by providing the means for               
              three faculty, with demonstrated interest and skill in thermal                 
              analysis, to involve students in such research projects.  As part              
              of the development plan, students were allowed to participate in               
              undergraduate research as early as the summer of their first                   
              year.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              DSC and TGA experiments utilizing polymeric materials have been                
              incorporated into both analytical and physical laboratories.                   
              This allows training in both thermal analysis and polymeric                    
              principles in the curriculum.  A thermal analysis experiment                   
              based on food, beverage, or pharmaceutical products is included                
              in an analytical laboratory for health science majors, thus                    
              exposing this group to widely used thermal analytical methods.                 
                                                                                             
              Longer term goals of the project include potential offering of a               
              polymer chemistry laboratory to augment the existing lecture                   
              course in polymers and heightened awareness/interest in polymer                
              science from the rest of the departmental faculty.                             
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to this project in an amount equal to              
              the NSF funds.
