Title       : An Integrated Science Sequence for Elementary Education Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1990      
File        : a9050024

Award Number: 9050024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $529836             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra H. Harpole sharpole@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon E. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this project is to radically modify the                         
              introductory science courses offered at Mississippi State                      
              University to non-technical students.  A three semester                        
              sequence of courses to include content in biology, astronomy,                  
              physics, chemistry, and geology will be offered.  The major                    
              objective of the proposal is to provide preservice teachers                    
              with solid content in the disciplines while preparing them to                  
              teach science in the elementary school with an emphasis on                     
              the teaching of hands-on science.  Special laboratory                          
              sections will be developed for the preservice teachers which                   
              focus on application of content, use of guided-discovery                       
              methods, and the development of process skills.                                
                                                                                             
              Prior to teaching of the revised courses, Arts and Sciences                    
              faculty will attend seminars focusing on current science                       
              education research, methods of teaching by discovery, and                      
              newly developed curriculum materials for the elementary and                    
              middle school student.                                                         
                                                                                             
              The preservice teachers, upon completion of the three-term                     
              sequence, will apply content knowledge and laboratory skills                   
              to the elementary education science methods course by                          
              planning lessons with increased science content and will                       
              translate laboratory activities into activities that are                       
              appropriate and meaningful to children.  During their student                  
              teaching experience. students will be placed with teachers                     
              who have been educated in a three weeks summer workshop to                     
              serve as mentors to insure that students are in classrooms                     
              where good science is being taught.  These mentors will be                     
              able to provide the encouragement and support that the                         
              perservice teachers need to teach science as they have been                    
              taught.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The project evaluation will include following the students                     
              through student teaching and the first year of full time                       
              teaching.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              In the latter years of the project, there will be workshops                    
              and conferences to reach out to the other teacher education                    
              institutions in the state of Mississippi to share the course                   
              development and evaluation on a state wide basis.  Of                          
              Particular interest is the inclusion of the community                          
              colleges in the target for outreach.                                           
                                                                                             
              The cost sharing by Mississippi State is 58% of the amount                     
              requested from NSF.
