Title       : Laser Theory, Spectroscopy, and Kinetics Equipment for Undergraduate Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1990     
File        : a9050487

Award Number: 9050487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44037              (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Polik polik@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/392-5111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Laser applications impact virtually every branch of science.  In               
              chemistry, the laser has revolutionized the fields of high                     
              resolution spectroscopy and molecular reaction dynamics.                       
              However, relatively few institutions offer laboratory instruction              
              using lasers at the undergraduate level.  A sequence of laser                  
              experiments is being taught in the Physical Chemistry curriculum               
              for chemistry majors at this institution.  The experimental                    
              sequence has been carefully devised to teach students the                      
              underlying principles of laser operation and to introduce them to              
              useful and exciting applications of lasers in chemistry.  In one               
              experiment, students develop a basic understanding of the                      
              essential components in a laser by "building" a helium-neon laser              
              and characterizing the emitted laser beam.  In a subsequent                    
              experiment, students obtain a laser induced fluorescence (LIF)                 
              spectrum of iodine with a pulsed dye laser.  This experiment                   
              introduces students to a tunable laser and demonstrates the                    
              advantage of frequency resolution when using a laser for                       
              spectroscopy.  In another experiment, students use the same                    
              pulsed dye laser system to measure electronic energy transfer                  
              rates from pyrimidine to various buffer gases.  This experiment                
              vividly demonstrates the temporal resolution afforded by laser                 
              measurement of dynamic processes.  The results of this project                 
              are being communicated to the general scientific educational                   
              community through presentations at professional meetings, and in               
              teaching journal articles.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to this project in an amount equal to              
              the NSF funds.
