Title       : Undergraduate Lasers, Fiber Optics, and Photonics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1990     
File        : a9050499

Award Number: 9050499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47451              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Wanser kwanser@fullerton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton
	      800 N State College Blvd, MH-112
	      Fullerton, CA  928346850    714/773-3921

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Physics Department is developing a new undergraduate instructional         
              laboratory Lasers, Fiber Optics and Photonics Laboratory.  This                
              laboratory is giving the student a practical working knowledge of state        
              of the art devices, methods, and techniques used in these new and              
              emerging technologies.  This laboratory course complements two lecture         
              courses that have recently been added to the curriculum, Fiber Optics          
              and Photonics, and Laser Physics and Optoelectronic Devices.  These            
              fields are central to the development of several optical technologies          
              and instrumentation techniques of the future, and there is a shortage          
              of trained scientists and engineers in these rapidly developing                
              disciplines.  Fiber optic sensors and communication/data links,                
              magneto-optic storage media, semiconductor optoelectronics, optics and         
              electronics on the same chip (integrated), and optical computing will          
              have major impacts on the future economy and science and technology            
              base of the U.S.  The equipment, in conjunction with equipment already         
              on hand, allows a broad variety of student experiments to be                   
              performed.  Novel features of the laboratory include work with several         
              types of photonic equipment, experiments with gas and semiconductor            
              laser, beam, spectral, modal, coherence, and noise properties, high            
              speed fiber optical data communication techniques, acousto-optic beam          
              deflection and frequency shifting, experiments in fiber optic                  
              interferometric and distributed sensors, measurements of magneto-optic         
              and polarization properties of optical fibers and other media,                 
              experiments with integrated optic phase modulators and electric field          
              sensors, and computer interfacing and control of laboratory                    
              instrumentation and equipment.  Major equipment items purchased include        
              an optical spectrometer, Fabry Perot interferometer, RF spectrum               
              analyzer, high speed pulse generator, stepper motor controlled                 
              precision translation and rotation stages, an optical vibration                
              isolation table, an integrated optic Mach Zehnder modulator, and               
              laboratory computer with data acquisition hardware and software.               
                                                                                             
              The university is matching the award with an equal amount of funds.
