Title       : Integrating Pedagogy and Content in Pre-Service Mathematics Teacher Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1993  
File        : a9050016

Award Number: 9050016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $585551             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Cooney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The project's focus is the development and evaluation of five                  
              units that integrate mathematical content and pedagogical                      
              strategies in mathematics.  The units are designed to                          
              illustrate topics in mathematics (distributivity, functions,                   
              Pythagorean theorem, basic combinatorics, and applications of                  
              modeling) that are central to the current secondary school                     
              mathematics curriculum, while offering excellent vehicles for                  
              illustrating new thrusts outlined by NCTM Standards.  These                    
              units will provide preservice teachers with opportunities to                   
              see connections between a variety of mathematical topics and                   
              their applications; to experience the learning of mathematics                  
              with an eye toward structuring that mathematics for teaching;                  
              and to construct a vision of mathematics as a human activity                   
              built from reflection, activity, and modification of                           
              perceptions.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The activities of the project will involve developing the                      
              units taking into consideration significant content at the                     
              secondary school level and elements of problem posing,                         
              problem solving, various mathematical representations and                      
              pedagogical approaches, and available technology where                         
              appropriate.  The units will be field tested at three                          
              American universities and will be reviewed by outstanding                      
              teachers, teacher educators, and mathematicians. Reports will                  
              be written on the impact of the units on the preservice                        
              teachers' conceptions of mathematics and the teaching of                       
              mathematics as they engage the units.                                          
                                                                                             
              The units will be developed by an international team of                        
              mathematics educators and mathematicians, all experienced in                   
              writing materials for perservice teachers.                                     
                                                                                             
              The cost sharing has been negotiated to the level of 26.7% of                  
              the funds requested from NSF.
