Title       : An Electricity Curriculum Based on Capacitor-Controlled Transient Lamp Lighting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9050189

Award Number: 9050189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397670             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin S. Steinberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              I propose to convene 12 teachers from 9 states to produce a high school        
              electricity curriculum that engages students in hands-on experimentation       
              to counteract misconceptions.  Our strategy employs transient lamp             
              lighting controlled by high-tech capacitors to reveal the physics of           
              current propulsion.  This stimulates students invent all required              
              circuit concepts in highly intuitive form, including a pressure-like           
              version of electric potential.                                                 
                                                                                             
              We plan to write and evaluate the effectiveness of three instructional         
              aids:                                                                          
                                                                                             
              INTRODUCTORY WORKSHOP GUIDE -- to acquaint teachers with new                   
              instructional opportunities made possible by capacitor-controlled lamp         
              lighting experiments.                                                          
              CLASSROOM RESOURCES BOOK -- to provide teachers with many useful               
              experiments, duplicatable materials and teaching strategies in easily          
              accessible format.                                                             
              BACKGROUND INFORMATION FILE -- to provide professional depth in areas of       
              apparatus characteristics, misconceptions research and history of              
              concepts.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              These materials will enhance the teacher's own understanding of electric       
              circuits and make study of electricity enjoyable for students.  They           
              will help students construct visualizable models and learn to reason           
              effectively with electric potential.  We anticipate a salutary effect on       
              students' preparedness for university courses in science and                   
              engineering, and on comprehension of electricity concepts by those who         
              enter the work force directly from school.
