Title       : Optical Instrumentation Upgrade and Purchase of a Laser Laboratory for Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9050610

Award Number: 9050610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42905              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry P. Jasinski jjasinski@keene.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald G. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keene State College
	      229 Main
	      Keene, NH  034350001    603/352-1909

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The institution modernized two major instruments in the areas of               
              absorption and luminescence spectroscopy and created a central                 
              multi-functional laser laboratory for use in upper division                    
              teaching and student research.  Both instruments and the output                
              from two laser light sources will be interfaced to the same central            
              microcomputer.  Capabilities in each of these spectroscopic                    
              techniques have been expanded to allow for computerized data                   
              acquisition and analysis for use in laboratory courses in physical             
              chemistry, instrumental analysis, polymers, special topics and                 
              independent/directed study as well as in departmental undergraduate            
              research projects.  The laser laboratory allows students to realize            
              and work with the unique capabilities of laser light sources.                  
              These include a He-Ne laser, a He-Cd laser and a nitrogen-pumped               
              dye laser in addition to associated optics, a monochrometer, a                 
              detection system and a microcomputer for experiment control and                
              data analysis.  In the teaching labs novel absorption and                      
              luminescence measurements are made from continuous broad band                  
              sources and monochromated laser sources.  These are focused on                 
              physical and chemical properties in ways which more clearly                    
              elucidate optical effects in materials as well as illustrate the               
              power of modern optical techniques.  Independent study and research            
              projects involve experiment dealing with the spectroscopic                     
              illumination of laser dye materials in the solid state, as                     
              spectroscopic probes in surfactant and micelle based systems, and              
              in the pH dependent polymeric behavior of bioorganic ligand bonded             
              to lanthanides in association with EDTA.  The institution                      
              contributed to this project in an amount equal to the NSF funds.
