Title       : Jasper Series: A Generative Approach to Improving Mathematical Thinking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1991 
File        : a9050191

Award Number: 9050191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret B. Cozzens                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $805680             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Bransford john.bransford@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Our objective is to develop, evaluate, and disseminate a                  
              video-based problem solving series that generates excitement                   
              about mathematics and science among middle school students                     
              (grades 5,6,7) and that helps them develop powerful skills of                  
              mathematical problem formulation and problem solving.  The                     
              series will consist of (1) six problem solving videos that                     
              cover the key mathematical concepts and activities recommended                 
              for middle school mathematics in the NCTM curriculum standards                 
              (1989); (2) ancillary materials in the form of print,                          
              Hypermedia and computer tools that help students carry their                   
              mathematical thinking to other parts of the curriculum such as                 
              science and social studies; (3) teaching videos plus text                      
              materials for teachers.                                                        
                                                                                             
                   The series will be based on a theoretically and                           
              empirically motivated set of design principles that help                       
              teachers engage in the types of classroom activities that are                  
              recommended in the NCTM curriculum standards.  Several of these                
              design principles are unique to our proposed series and appear                 
              to be extremely important for enhancing motivation among                       
              students and developing powerful skills of complex problem                     
              formulation and problem solving.                                               
                                                                                             
                   We have already produced two problem solving videos that                  
              serve as pilots for the series (one is included with this                      
              application) and are currently producing a teaching video plus                 
              ancillary materials to accompany the pilots.  We are asking the                
              NSF for help in producing the four additional problem solving                  
              videos (plus ancillary materials) plus the two additional                      
              teaching videos.  We discuss the anticipated impact of our                     
              series, our previous track record and our plans for quality                    
              control, cost-sharing and dissemination.
