Title       : A Master's in Chemistry Program for Out-of-Field Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1996   
File        : a9050296

Award Number: 9050296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $664354             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn A. Crosby gac@wsunix.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is a comprehensive inservice program involving                    
              Washington State University, the State Office of Public                        
              Instruction, private foundations, government and private                       
              industrial laboratories and local schhool districts.  The program              
              is targeted at out-of-field teachers of high school chemistry and              
              culminates in a Master of Arts Degree in Chemistry.  Thirty                    
              teachers from the Northwest states of Washington, Oregon, Idaho                
              and Montana will be selected each year to participate in a three-              
              year program which will include two one-month periods of                       
              instruction on the University Campus, four semesters of                        
              instruction during the academic years via satellite and a                      
              capstone six-week assignment in an industrial laboratory coupled               
              with on-site instruction. Ninety teachers of high school                       
              chemistry will participate in this program, earning an MA in                   
              Chemistry.  Satellite two-way video and audio telecommunications               
              will allow participants from long distances to benefit from on-                
              site instruction. This new program will include offerings such as              
              General Chemistry from an Advanced Point of View, a two semester               
              Organic and Biochemistry Sequence and Physical Chemistry for the               
              Life Sciences.  These are not regular departmental offerings, but              
              are based on the expressed needs of these teachers. The third                  
              summer will be spent in a laboratory, such as Battelle and other               
              industrial labs. This program will provide a firm basis for the                
              teaching of chemistry including modern applications and an                     
              enhanced knowledge base of instructional strategies as well as                 
              career opportunities for future chemists.                                      
                                                                                             
              The NSF request is for the support of the first group of thirty                
              teachers plus the instructional costs for all three years.  The                
              support for the sixty other teachers as well as the                            
              institutionalization of the program will be forthcoming from                   
              other funds.  NSF funding is approximately 20% of the cost of the              
              whole project.
