Title       : A Model Program for Physical Science Enhancement for K-6 Teachers in Rural,
               Remote Eastern Oregon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1994     
File        : a9050312

Award Number: 9050312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396009             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Hermens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Oregon University
	      One University Blvd.
	      La Grande, OR  978502899    541/962-3700

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two-year project will enhance participant's content                       
              background and laboratory skills by incorporating the                          
              theories of physics and chemistry with applications. Teachers                  
              will be involved in hands-on activities which can easily be                    
              implemented in their classes.                                                  
              The project design includes both a summer workshop at Eastern                  
              Oregon State University and an academic year component                         
              delivered at different sites in eastern Oregon using a mobile                  
              classroom.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The summer workshop will have the following format.  Twenty                    
              teachers, (K-3 grades will be accepted in a three-week                         
              workshop.  Following this, there will be an additional three-                  
              week workshop with twenty teachers (4-6 grades).  In each                      
              workshop, one or two principals will be involved.  The format                  
              of the workshops will be a session of physics theory and                       
              another session of chemistry theory in the morning.  These                     
              sessions will be fundamental in nature and the participants                    
              will be furnished textbooks of similar level.  Each session                    
              will be 1 1/2 hours in length with a short break between                       
              them.  Next is a break for lunch, after which, a three hour                    
              session of hands-on activities or experiments for the                          
              teachers.  The design of these activities will closely follow                  
              the theory lectures presented in the morning sessions.  Only                   
              on Wednesday afternoon will the participants have an                           
              unstructured schedule to create their own activity, work in                    
              the curriculum library, or read.                                               
                                                                                             
              An unusual feature of this project is the mobile classroom. A                  
              science specialist will coordinate a meeting schedule with                     
              the school districts.  She will travel with the mobile                         
              classroom to provide inservice, during the academic year to                    
              teacher located at selected locations in eastern Oregon.                       
              Fully equipped for science instruction, this unit will arrive                  
              ready for teachers to participate in hands-on science                          
              activities during inservice sessions.  These sites will be                     
              visited six times a year.  The inservice will keep the                         
              teachers current, resolve problems stemming from unanswered                    
              questions from inquisitive students, and confront the teacher                  
              with a constant reminder of using science activities in the                    
              classroom.  Mobile classroom science activities are                            
              plannedfor immediate implementation at the appropriate grade                   
              level as the teacher's school.  Theory will be presented                       
              inconjunction with the hands-on segment in each case.                          
                                                                                             
              Six credits will be offered for the summer workshop and one                    
              credit will be offered for the mobile classroom inservice                      
              sessions.  Cost sharing in the amount of $127,924 equals                       
              33%of the NSF award.
