Title       : A Model Teacher Enhancement Program to Encourage Experience-Based Instruction in
               Human Genetics in Middle School Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9050332

Award Number: 9050332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lowell J. Bethel                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252614             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Micklos micklos@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory will undertake a three-year                      
              program to train 336 middle school instructors in New York                     
              and Maryland to teach a 15-20 hour unit, Exploring Human                       
              Genetics.  The workshop presupposes no specific experience in                  
              genetics and focuses on science as a problem-solving venture.                  
              Human genetics meshes well with the traditional middle school                  
              emphasis on human health, fulfills critical thinking                           
              objectives, and encourages discovery-based learning.  Twelve                   
              pairs of lead teachers will be trained in each state; they,                    
              in turn, will instruct an additional 144 teachers at 12                        
              "second-round" regional workshops the following year.  All                     
              participants will be provided with a teaching kit containing                   
              text and all necessary lab materials needed to initiate an                     
              experience-based program at their school.  A follow-up held                    
              several months after the training workshop will further                        
              encourage implementation and networking between participants.                  
                                                                                             
              This program is appropriate in light of the national                           
              commitment to sequence the human genome, with its attendant                    
              personal and social implications; it is part of the DNA                        
              Literacy Program, which extends the traditional postgraduate                   
              training mission of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory to the                       
              precollege level.  Exploring Human Genetics follows the DNA                    
              Science curriculum, which has been taught to 1,600 high                        
              school teachers in 24 states.  The National Science                            
              Foundation support of the high school program has been highly                  
              leveraged, forming the basis of what is arguably the largest                   
              commitment to biotechnology and genetics education in this                     
              country.  Similarly, this project will serve as a national                     
              model for using human genetics as a means to illustrate                        
              scientific problem-solving at the middle school level.                         
                                                                                             
              An amount equivalent to 40.6% of the NSF award is being                        
              contributed as cost-sharing.
