Title       : Introduction of HPLC-GPC into the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1990     
File        : a9050640

Award Number: 9050640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28556              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney L. Olsen rolsen@piper.hamline.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hamline University
	      Snelling & Hewitt Avenues
	      Saint Paul, MN  55104    612/641-2800

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project enabled the institution to acquire a Hewlett-Packard              
              High Performance Liquid Chromatograph, complete with diode array               
              and refractive index detectors, PC, monitor, plotter, software                 
              packages and columns.  They have made extensive use of the                     
              instrumentation in Organic Chemistry and upper division                        
              laboratories.  In Organic Chemistry laboratories, students are                 
              introduced to HPLC techniques of separating natural materials                  
              such as dopamine and norepinephrine, nucleosides, and                          
              polypeptides.  Students are also introduced to the determination               
              of polymer molecular weights by gel permeation phase                           
              chromatography.  Theory and practice of liquid normal and reverse              
              phase chromatography are introduced in Analytical Chemistry and                
              more fully developed in Instrumental Methods, and Industrial                   
              Chemistry.  Since significant portions of Advanced Laboratory                  
              Techniques and student research courses are devoted to the study               
              of polymers and biomolecules, the instrument finds extensive used              
              in these laboratories.  In Advanced Laboratory Techniques,                     
              students prepare a Universal Calibration curve for determining                 
              molecular weights of polymers and then complete a series of                    
              experiments from which they may formulate relationships between                
              polymer molecular weight, catalyst concentration and                           
              polymerization temperature.  Several ongoing student research                  
              projects use this instrument for polymer molecular weight                      
              determination and for separation and characterization of                       
              biomolecules, such as nucleotides and nucleosides.                             
                                                                                             
              The institution has contributed to this project in an amount                   
              equal to the NSF funds.
