Title       : The Development of an Innovative Model for the Preservice Preparation of
               Elementary Teachers for Enhanced Science, Mathematics, and Technology Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1996   
File        : a9050015

Award Number: 9050015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1671994            (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmett L. Wright birdhunt@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean A. Zollman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy F. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Willard A. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              21        Mathematics                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this five-year project is to develop, field                     
              test, revise, institutionalize, and disseminate a model                        
              research-based preservice program to prepare elementary                        
              teachers for enhanced science, mathematics, and technology                     
              teaching. A team of eight scientist and ten science educators                  
              will work in conjunction with 25 experienced elementary                        
              teachers and four principals to totally restructure the                        
              courses in content and pedagogy and the field experiences for                  
              preservice teachers in the preparatory program.  One major                     
              goal of the work is to coordinate the set of experiences so                    
              that there is a consistency in the environment and                             
              epistomological underpinnings for the content and the methods                  
              courses and the classes in the schools where these students                    
              will have extensive field experiences.                                         
                                                                                             
              The students will take 27 semester hours of mathematics and                    
              science content.  Eight hours of methods will be distributed                   
              so that the students will be engaged in thinking about                         
              teaching elementary school science and mathematics as it                       
              relates to the particular science or mathematics area being                    
              emphasized in the content courses.  Each of the methods                        
              courses will have an accompanying field experience with                        
              teachers that are knowledgeable about what the students are                    
              studying at the university.  The program will have students                    
              engaged in studying science and mathematics and working in                     
              schools over a three year time span.                                           
                                                                                             
              Another important aspect of the work is the careful attention                  
              that the P.I. and the project staff will pay to evaluating                     
              the impact of the intervention and its component parts on all                  
              of those involved--preservice teachers, experienced teachers,                  
              scientists, science educators, and, most importantly, the                      
              students of the new elementary teachers in their early years                   
              of teaching.  The project recognizes that many new teachers                    
              leave teaching in the first one to three years.  This project                  
              will provide support for the graduates during the first year                   
              in an attempt to network these new teachers in such a way                      
              that more of them will stay in teaching.                                       
                                                                                             
              Kansas State University will cost share in excess of 56% of                    
              the amount requested from NSF.
