Title       : Instructional Equipment for Field Work in Climatology and Meteorology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1990    
File        : a9050419

Award Number: 9050419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marvin E. Kauffman                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine S. Grimmond grimmon@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The project will enable undergraduate students taking                     
              courses in the Climate & Meteorology Program to have direct                    
              experience with climatological instrumentation.  This will affect              
              both majors and non-majors as the intention is to introduce                    
              students to exposure to equipment in the three introductory                    
              courses as well as selected advanced courses.  The new equipment               
              will allow students to undertake measurements in laboratories and              
              to prepare individual research projects which will link local                  
              weather conditions, which they have measured, to the synoptic                  
              conditions.  The advanced students will be able to take courses                
              in measurement theory and techniques, micrometeorology and                     
              hydroclimatology, where they will become familiar with the state-              
              of-the-art techniques for measuring the transport of energy and                
              water, and the wind temperature and humidity profiles from the                 
              ground to approximately 1.5 km into atmosphere.  To permit this                
              the equipment that will be purchased will consist of introductory              
              weather stations, electronic micrometeorological equipment,                    
              anemometers, psychrometers, time domain reflectometry soil                     
              moisture system, sonic anemometer thermometer, lyman alpha                     
              hygrometer, bowen ratio system, and a tethersonde system.  In the              
              U.S. exposure to micrometeorological instrumentation is                        
              relatively limited at undergraduate level but has been found to                
              be successful in Australia,  Canada and New Zealand, even at                   
              first year level.  This would permit a similar type of beneficial              
              learning experience to be had for students taking courses in the               
              Climate & Meteorology Program.
