Title       : Equipment for a Forensic Science Course for Nonscience Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1992 
File        : a9050606

Award Number: 9050606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24723              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Kaplan lkaplan@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The equipment purchased through this project was for a laboratory              
              program associated with a course designed for students who are                 
              not majoring in the natural sciences.  The course, "Chemistry and              
              Crime:  From Sherlock Holmes to Modern Forensic Science", is a                 
              one semester course designed to teach the fundamentals of                      
              forensic science ranging from atomic absorption spectra and paint              
              analysis to infrared spectroscopy and drug analysis to                         
              electrophoresis and DNA analysis.                                              
                                                                                             
              The funds were used to purchase equipment for six experiments.                 
              (1) Gas chromatography is being used to determine the                          
              concentration of alcohol in blood, to determine the identity of                
              accelerants used in arson and to characterize a sample containing              
              a mixture of drugs.  (2) High pressure liquid chromatography is                
              being used to separate and identify drugs in suspect samples.                  
              (3) The drugs present in samples separated by high pressure                    
              liquid chromatography are being identified by infrared                         
              spectroscopy.  (4) DNA profiles for suspect identification are                 
              being obtained by using restriction enzymes and electrophoresis                
              equipment and power supplies.  (5) Visible spectrometers are                   
              being employed for determining the blood and breath levels of                  
              alcohol.  These experiment have supplemented a series of                       
              experiments previously in place, on a limited basis, with                      
              phenomenal success.  The various pieces of equipment acquired for              
              the forensic science laboratory are also used in the organic and               
              biochemistry laboratories.  A "crime lab" equipped so that the                 
              above experiments can be conducted has created an environment to               
              stimulate the interest of the traditional nonscience majors.  It               
              has made the study of chemistry more interesting, more                         
              challenging and more rewarding.                                                
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to this project in an amount equal to              
              the NSF funds.
