Title       : A Multidimensional Program to Enhance Subject Matter Competency of an Improve
               Collaboration Among Teachers of Grades 5-12
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9050334

Award Number: 9050334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368123             (Estimated)
Investigator: Myron A. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year project, serving 81 less well-prepared                         
              teachers of grades 5-12 is directed primarily towards the                      
              improvement of science education in rural Minnesota through                    
              the enhancement of subject matter competency and pedagogy.                     
              The objectives of the program are: to improve the subject                      
              matter competency of teachers; to generate and increase                        
              collaboration and cooperation among teachers of different                      
              grade levels; to develop leader teachers who will work with                    
              their peers within their own and other school districts; and                   
              to enhance further the expertise of master teachers from                       
              throughout the country.  These objectives will be                              
              accomplished through: summer workshops in earth science, life                  
              science and physical science; an academic year inservice                       
              program, and; a year-long program for master teachers who are                  
              called Guest Instructors.  Three Guest Instructors, one for                    
              each subject area, will be selected from a national pool of                    
              applicants.  Each will become a member of the appropriate                      
              department at the college during one summer and academic year                  
              and will teach part-time, assist Gustavus professors during                    
              the summer workshops, aid in the evaluation of the workshops,                  
              assist in the preparation for the next summer, and serve as                    
              the principal figure in conducting the academic year                           
              inservice program.  Nine teachers, three each from middle,                     
              junior high and senior high school, will participate in each                   
              of three summer workshops.  Each workshop would be made up of                  
              three teams-one from each school level-that would act as                       
              cooperative learning groups.  Each team would use content and                  
              pedagogy presented during the workshop to prepare projects                     
              for implementation into the classroom at the appropriate                       
              grade levels.  Workshop participants would range                               
              geographically from rural Southern Minnesota during the first                  
              year to all of rural Minnesota during the third year.                          
              Coordinators of some of Minnesota's 33 rural education                         
              districts have played a role in the planning of the project                    
              and will aid in selection of teachers, project dissemination                   
              and coordination of activities of the new teacher leaders.                     
              During the academic year, each Guest Instructor will assist                    
              each of the participants who were in the summer workshop in                    
              the preparation for and the presentation of the lessons                        
              developed in the workshops.  He/she also will encourage and                    
              assist qualified teachers to become leader teachers as they,                   
              in turn, prepare to work with other teachers.  School                          
              districts will provide some financial assistance for in-house                  
              facilities as well as released time for the leader teachers                    
              to visit other classrooms.  The NSF share of this project is                   
              $368,123 which is matched by $262,379 from Gustavus Adolphus                   
              College.  The matching funds are more than 71% of the grant                    
              amount.
