Title       : Restoring the Earth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1990 
File        : a9050230

Award Number: 9050230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : July 15,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Berger   (Principal Investigator current)
              James Lipscomb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ETV Endowment of S C Inc
	      1029 Woodburn Road
	      Spartanburg, SC  293022866    803/737-3240

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The RESTORING THE EARTH television series will be                         
              presented by the Restoring the Earth organization in                           
              association with South Carolina Educational Television and                     
              James Lipscomb Inc., a television documentary producer.                        
              RESTORING THE EARTH is about the greatest challenge facing our                 
              species today: restoring our ailing Planet to health.  The                     
              story is told in five, hour-long documentary programs designed                 
              for initial release on public television and later use in                      
              classrooms.  This series brings viewers an intimate look at the                
              struggles and triumphs of men and women engaged in the science                 
              and technology of environmental restoration, amidst the                        
              diversity and glory of the natural world.  RESTORING THE EARTH                 
              is a hopeful look at our environmental condition, showcasing                   
              success stories and good tidings, while enhancing public                       
              scientific understanding of the looming threats to life on                     
              Earth.  The unifying theme is environmental renewal - the                      
              healing of damaged resources and the re-creation of healthy                    
              ecosystems from the wreckage of forests, rivers, prairies,                     
              wetlands, and wildlife.  The series also shows how urban areas                 
              are being ecologically redesigned.  Each program is self-                      
              contained and can be presented alone or as part of the series.                 
              The programs are about restoring rivers and streams (Program                   
              1), restoring wildlife (Program 2), healing lakes and                          
              rebuilding wetlands (Program 3), restoring forests, mines, and                 
              prairies (Program 4), restoring the air, stabilizing the                       
              climate, and building ecologically sound cities (Program 5).                   
              The programs include stories such as, "River Revival," "The                    
              Prairie Makers," "Predator's Return," "The Marsh Builders,"                    
              "Floodplains Aflame," "Streams Reborn," "Lake Revival," "Quiet                 
              Mines," "The Toxic Temple," "Wetlands Regained," and                           
              "Tomorrow's Cities."  The RESTORING THE EARTH television series                
              highlights humanity's capacity for repairing environmental                     
              damage to the Earth.  Each episode will relate what has been                   
              done, what is being done, and what can be done to solve current                
              environmental problems and restore the Earth.
