Title       : Incorporation of a Diode Array UV-Visible Spectrophotometer in the Undergraduate
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1990     
File        : a9050712

Award Number: 9050712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1990     
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11166              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee R. Sharpe sharpe@grinnell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie J. Lyons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A Diode Array (DA) UV-Visible spectrophotometer has greatly                    
              enhanced the undergraduate laboratory experience.  The instrument              
              is used in three primary laboratory environments:  general                     
              chemistry laboratory, instrumental analysis, and independent                   
              student research.  In the general laboratory, students use the DA              
              UV-Vis. spectrophotometer in the analysis of the manganese                     
              content of steel.  This allows students the opportunity to use                 
              modern, computer based instrumentation in the first chemistry                  
              course.  This helps to demonstrate to the students the role,                   
              pervasiveness and power of instrumentation in chemistry.  In the               
              Instrumental Analysis course, a laboratory block of "tandem                    
              techniques" is integrated to demonstrate the additional                        
              information one can obtain from a tandem technique as compared to              
              the component techniques used independently.  In order to develop              
              a cohesive laboratory, it is necessary to include a combined                   
              spectroscopy-electrochemistry technique.  An ideal example is                  
              ultraviolet-visible spectroelectrochemistry which requires a DA                
              UV-Vis. instrument.  The block of laboratories involving the                   
              student and comparison of tandem techniques with each other and                
              with their individual component techniques provides broad                      
              exposure to, and appreciation for the advantages of tandem                     
              techniques.  Finally, undergraduate research is one of the best                
              educational experiences for students, and the time they have for               
              it is limited.  Therefore, this project is to providing the most               
              effective instrumentation possible to ensure a productive,                     
              positive research experiences; the UV-Visible diode array                      
              spectrophotometer is used extensively in the summer research                   
              program as well as by student researchers during the academic                  
              year.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The institution has contributed to this project in an amount                   
              equal to the NSF funds.
