Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research on Elliptic Genera, Elliptic Cohomology and
               Modules over the Steenrod Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1994       
File        : a9202041

Award Number: 9202041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Landweber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator will continue his study of elliptic genera               
              and elliptic cohomology.  A new family of periodic cohomology                  
              theories was found in 1986 in joint work with Douglas Ravenel and              
              Robert Stong; it is the intention to study the central problem of              
              determining the intrinsic geometric nature of these cohomology                 
              theories, in light of the recent work on constructing elliptic                 
              homology by M. Kreck, S. Stolz, and M. Hovey.  Further problems                
              dealing with variants of the usual level-2 elliptic genus, yielding            
              level-1 modular forms related to the Thom spectrum MO<8>, and level            
              N (N > 1) modular forms related to Jacobi polynomials, will be                 
              studied.  In addition, it is hoped that connections can be                     
              established linking knot invariants and quantum groups to elliptic             
              cohomology.                                                                    
                   This project is concerned with reducing geometric information             
              to a subject for calculation.  The nature of the geometric                     
              information involved is the crux of the problem.  While questions              
              about lengths, areas, angles, volumes, and so forth virtually cry              
              out to be reduced to calculations, it is far different with what               
              are known as topological properties of geometric objects.  These               
              are properties such as connectedness (being all in one piece),                 
              knottedness, having no holes, and so forth.  All systematic study              
              of such properties, for example, how to tell whether two geometric             
              objects really differ in respect to one of these properties or are             
              only superficially different, or how to classify the variety of                
              differences that can occur, all these have only truly been                     
              comprehended and mastered when they have been reduced to matters of            
              calculation.  Modern algebra furnishes many of the tools and the               
              attitudes toward the tools that are needed, and the interplay                  
              between the algebra and the topology remains a fascinating subject.            
              Elliptic cohomology, invented by the investigator and several co-              
              workers, bids fair to be one of the important tools in the arsenal             
              available to algebraic topologists.
