Title       : Polymerized Bicontinuous Cubic Lipid Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1994      
File        : a9202035

Award Number: 9202035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330092             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Armstrong nra@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9295,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Several classes of biological and synthetic lipids from                        
              hydrated membrane systems that display a variety of lamellar                   
              and nonlamellar phases as a function of temperature, pressure                  
              and concentration.  This proposal focuses on inverted cubic                    
              phases which are found between lamellar and hexagonal phases.                  
              The inverted cubic phases of interest are those which are                      
              bicontinuous with respect to the polar (aqueous) and nonpolar                  
              (lipid) phases.  The interpenetrating network of aqueous                       
              channels and lipid surfaces of the bicontinous cubic phase                     
              permit the passage of water soluble species through the                        
              structure.  These free standing structures have the morphology                 
              of zeolite only with biocompatible lipid surfaces, and as such                 
              can be envisioned to have many applications in bioseparations                  
              and membrane reactor techniques.                                               
                                                                                             
              Once formed, cubic lipid phases are sometimes stable for                       
              weeks, however their temperature range is usually narrow and                   
              frequently occurs at temperatures higher than room or even                     
              physiological temperatures.  The PI has pioneered the                          
              technique of stabilizing lipid bilayers and vesicles by                        
              attaching polymerizable reactive groups, particularly                          
              diacetylenic groups, to the constituent lipids, and then                       
              initiating a polymerization after the supramolecular assembly                  
              has formed.  The aim of the proposed research is to apply this                 
              technique to the stabilization of cubic structures.  In                        
              particular, the proposed research will design and synthesize                   
              polymerizable lipids which are expected to display a                           
              bicontinuous cubic phase characterize the polymerized and                      
              unpolymerized phases by differential scanning calorimetry, X-                  
              ray diffraction and NMR spectroscopy.
