Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9202051

Award Number: 9202051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sagun Chanillo chanillo@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work done on this project divides into two categories,                    
              problems arising from oscillatory integral theory and those                    
              arising from the theory of weights.  Both are tied to the                      
              analysis of partial differential equations in various guises.                  
              The oscillatory integrals reflect the propagation of                           
              singularities of linear partial differential equations.  Using                 
              the FBI-transformation, work will be done in determining                       
              regularity of complex vector fields, extending earlier results of              
              Hormander.  Other work will focus on Lebesgue and Sobolev                      
              estimates for Airy-type integrals applicable to boundary problems              
              for wave equations.  Further refinement of research on weighted                
              integrals will be used to obtain estimates on nodal sets and                   
              eigenfunctions along lines initiated by Fefferman and Donnelly.                
              It is expected that one can use Carleman-type inequalities to                  
              improve estimates on the eigenfunctions.  Additional work will                 
              done on inverse boundary value problems to seek an existence                   
              counterexample for the case where the potential has a large weak               
              type norm.                                                                     
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                    
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              to state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative                 
              and quantitative meaning from them and validate methods for                    
              expressing solutions.
