Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analytical & Numerical Aspects of Inverse Problems for
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9202042

Award Number: 9202042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264332             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Vogelius   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This research will focus on analytical and numerical aspects              
              of inverse problems for partial differential equations, and in                 
              particular:  1) inverse "source" problems for semilinear elliptic              
              equations, and 2) inverse "coefficient" problems for linear                    
              elliptic equations with spatially varying coefficients.  The data              
              used for reconstruction in both cases consists of overdetermined               
              (Dirichlet or Neumann) boundary data.  The analytical component                
              of the work concerns such questions as identifiability and                     
              continuous dependence.  For the inverse "source problem", the PI               
              furthermore will investigate the relation to the well known                    
              Schiffer (or Pompeiu) conjecture; for the inverse "coefficient"                
              problem the PI will continue his investigation of bounds as well               
              as the relation between the isotropic and aniostropic cases. The               
              numerical work will be devoted to the design of effective                      
              reconstruction methods which to the largest extent possible rely               
              on structural information about the solutions of the underlying                
              PDE.                                                                           
                   The research has direct applications to several important                 
              practical problems, for instance:  1) the interpretation of                    
              magnetic diagnostics for Tokamak (fusion) devices,  2) medical                 
              impedance imaging, and 3) nondestructive testing of mechanical                 
              parts.  Part of the research is concerned with determining the                 
              sufficiency of the proposed boundary data for the various                      
              reconstructions (proving uniqueness and continuous dependence                  
              results).  Another part of the research involves the design of                 
              effective algorithms, for instance for the detection and location              
              of cracks using real experimental data.  There will be an active               
              involvement of post-doctoral researchers as well graduate                      
              students and hopefully even some advanced undergraduate students               
              in various aspects of the research.
