Title       : Behavioral Control of Teams of Mini-Robots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1992   
File        : a9202423

Award Number: 9202423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Bay bay@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              This award is in the Small Grants for Exploratory Research mode.               
              The objective of this project is the design of behavioral control              
              techniques for a simulated network of army ant robotic devices.                
              The devices envisioned are small, inexpensive, and identical                   
              mobile platforms which cannot transport material individually,                 
              but can cooperate to lift and carry arbitrarily large objects.                 
              The behavioral control approach seeks to minimize the complexity               
              of the units and the communications necessary by designing their               
              collective function into their group behavior rather than through              
              individual performance.  Each "ant" will be programmed to respond              
              to sensory stimulus with simple reactions.  The collective effect              
              of many such reactions will be the desired maneuvering task, in                
              much the dame way teams of humans can transport heavy objects                  
              with minimal communications.  Sensory inputs necessary will                    
              include applied forces and the attitude of the load being                      
              carried.  The set of behavioral reactions designed will be                     
              implemented in a computer simulation.  The simulation will also                
              model the dynamics of the load, the force and attitude sensors,                
              "beacon" signals emitted by the units, and the possibility of                  
              uneven or rough terrain.  The speed, stability and accuracy of                 
              the material transport system will be evaluated in order to                    
              further develop the controls and to suggest behavioral approaches              
              to broader army-ant problems, such as team-forming,                            
              reorganization, navigation, and message-passing.  The result of                
              the work will be a paradigm for material transport using modular               
              networks of small machines as opposed to using large robots to                 
              transport small objects.//
