Title       : The Synergistic Effects of Ceramic Materials Synthesis UsingVapor-Enhanced
               Reactive Sintering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1994    
File        : a9202948

Award Number: 9202948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Moore jjmoore@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Wirth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis W. Readey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1774,9146,9162,9294,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In this program, materials processing and synthesis                            
              capabilities of two techniques (enhanced vapor transport and                   
              self-propagating high-temperature synthesis or reactive                        
              sintering) will be combined to produce ceramics and ceramic-                   
              ceramic composites with unique microstructures and properties,                 
              including porous ceramics, foamed or expanded ceramics, fine                   
              ceramic powders, and ceramic whiskers.  The research is aimed                  
              at attacking a major limitation of current combustion                          
              processing, namely lack of control over and uniformity of                      
              microstructures produced.  Enhanced vapor transport, which can                 
              stem from either the ambient gas permeating the packed powder                  
              preform or the presence of vapor production within the powder                  
              compact during processing, has been shown to be a good way to                  
              control microstructure during conventional sintering.  The                     
              general approach to be followed in this program will be                        
              centered around development of understanding of the                            
              microstructure development during reactive sintering/SHS                       
              processing in the presence of such enhanced vapor transport.                   
              Two model systems, a simple one-component TiB2 ceramic system,                 
              and a more complex TiB2-Al2O3 ceramic composite system, will                   
              be studied, with combustion synthesis of these materials being                 
              carried out both in argon and in a reactive gas (e.g., HCl);                   
              effects of gas composition, particle size, "green" density,                    
              and degrees of dilution of the reactants on product morphology                 
              will be examined.  Complementary modeling studies will be                      
              included to help develop a better understanding of the                         
              underlying mechanisms controlling the resulting                                
              microstructure.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Combustion synthesis has been demonstrated to be an effective                  
              process for producing a wide variety of both oxide and                         
              nonoxide ceramics.  Under controlled conditions, ceramic-                      
              ceramic and metal-ceramic composites can be fabricated in-                     
              situ, with considerable energy savings and decrease in process                 
              complexity relative to alternate procedures for producing                      
              materials with desired properties. (In some cases, combustion                  
              synthesis actually offers the only route to certain desired                    
              products.)  As indicated above, a current major limitation of                  
              combustion synthesis is the lack of control and uniformity of                  
              the microstructures produced; gaining understanding and                        
              control of the microstructure development will represent a                     
              major advance in this materials production technology.
