Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Coupling of Solitary Internal Waves With Small-
               Scale Disturbances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1993      
File        : a9202064

Award Number: 9202064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Triantaphyllos R. Akylas trakylas@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Solitary internal waves are common features in the ocean,                 
              due to existing temperature and salinity variations, and play an               
              important part  in the transport of energy and momentum.  Our                  
              current theoretical  understanding of internal solitary-wave                   
              dynamics is based, to a large  extent, on weakly nonlinear long-               
              wave theories which are derived on the  assumption that only long              
              waves are present.  On the other hand, there  is evidence from                 
              laboratory and field observations that, in general,  large-                    
              amplitude solitary internal waves do not remain locally confined               
              as suggested by these approximate theories, but, rather, they                  
              develop  short-wavelength oscillatory tails that cause radiation               
              damping.  This  radiation, in turn, provides a nonlinear                       
              mechanism for coupling  large-amplitude solitary-wave                          
              disturbances with short-scale oscillatory  waves of different                  
              modes.  For example, it is possible for solitary  internal waves               
              to transfer energy to short-scale surface waves that  remain                   
              phase-locked with the internal waves P a situation reminiscent of              
              the surface rips that often accompany internal waves in the                    
              field, and  are visible in radar images of the sea surface.                    
                   In order to fill the gap currently existing in our                        
              theoretical  understanding, this research program investigates                 
              the generation of  oscillatory tails and the related radiation-                
              dampling mechanism of  solitary internal waves, using singular-                
              perturbation and numerical  methods.  Particular emphasis is                   
              placed on calculating the amplitude of  short-wave tails under                 
              realistic conditions, including the possibility  of deep fluids                
              and the presence of a free surface.  For this purpose, a                       
              nonlinear WKB technique will be developed for weakly nonlinear                 
              disturbances, and fully numerical computations will be carried                 
              out for large-amplitude solitary waves.  In addition, the                      
              transfer of energy  from solitary waves to small-scale                         
              disturbances of different modes  (short-scale surface or lower-                
              mode internal waves) will be examined in  comparison with other                
              physical processes, like viscous dissipation, that  occur in                   
              practice.
