Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Logic and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1993  
File        : a9202833

Award Number: 9202833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316800             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Ward Henson henson@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl G. Jockusch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The project will concern mathematical logic and its                       
              connections with other areas of mathematics, especially algebra and            
              analysis.  C. Ward Henson will continue developing his model theory            
              for Banach spaces and will investigate topics in nonstandard                   
              analysis, including descriptive set theory on hyperfinite sets.  In            
              addition, he will study the computational complexity of logical                
              decision problems, including the theory of the real exponential                
              field.  Carl Jockusch will work in classical recursion theory and              
              its connections with other areas.  In particular, he will study                
              degrees of unsolvability, both in their own right and in connection            
              with model-theoretic structures (especially Boolean algebras and               
              certain groups).  L. van den Dries will investigate definability in            
              algebraic and analytic structures.  In particular, he will                     
              investigate O-minimality in expansions of the ordered field of real            
              numbers and questions connected with A. Wilkie's recent proof that             
              the elementary theory of the expansions of this ordered field by               
              exponentiation is model complete.  He will also study the model                
              theory of local and Henselian fields.                                          
                   Mathematical logic is a natural tool for studying any                     
              discipline expressed in a formal language, which should bring most             
              of mathematics itself under its focus.  Algebra and number theory              
              and certain parts of analysis are particularly natural subjects for            
              this type of treatment.  Large parts of the instant project bear               
              this out.  A typical result of the investigators' recent work is               
              the proof of a completeness conjecture raised by Tarski:  Is there             
              a finite list of true identities combining polynomial formation and            
              exponentiation of constants from which all other such true                     
              identities can be derived?  (Counterexamples are known to exist if             
              exponentiation of variables is allowed.)  Another area in which a              
              natural role for logic can be found is the complexity of                       
              algorithms.  The investigators have been ingenious in finding such             
              niches as well as in exploring them, to the obvious benefit of both            
              logic and the other discipline involved.
