Title       : CEDAR: CEDAR/STEP Workshop on High-Latitude Plasma Structuring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1992    
File        : a9202348

Award Number: 9202348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21098              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cesar E. Valladares valladar@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The major objective of this joint CEDAR/STEP Workshop is to provide            
              an international forum for an in-depth discussion of plasma                    
              structuring issues as they pertain to high and middle latitudes.               
              Much new information has become available on the role played by the            
              interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) in ordering large scale (~ 100             
              km) plasma density and velocity structuring in the high latitude               
              region as a result of several CEDAR/STEP multi-technique                       
              observational campaigns.  Clustering of equipment near the major               
              incoherent scatter radar (ISR) sites along the 70oW longitude line,            
              many of them funded by CEDAR, and the EISCAT and MU radars have                
              provided extremely valuable and detailed corrdinated data sets;                
              hence the need for a forum for the presentation of such                        
              interdependent measurements.  It is the intent of this Workshop to             
              organize this new information on such scientific topics as:  high              
              latitude structured plasma density enhancements known as polar                 
              "patch" and auroral "blob" formations, their entry, exit, and small            
              scale (km to tens of m) structuring, as well as their dynamics and             
              conjugacy; observations of sun-aligned polar cap and auroral arcs,             
              their morphology, plasma and neutral dynamics, and their small-                
              scale structuring in sheared flow regions.  The modeling of these              
              featutres, using theoretical and empirical methods for a better                
              understanding of the physical parameters controlling their                     
              occurrence, will also be a major topic of deliberation.  In                    
              addition, results from a recent conjugate mid-latitude campaign                
              will be discussed to determine the factors controlling structuring             
              in this region, their inverse correlation with sunspot cycle and               
              relationship to gravity wave activity.  It is hoped that several               
              joint publications in the open literature will result from this                
              Workship, as well as firm plans for any other international joint              
              initiative necessary to cover gaps in our knowledge of specific                
              plasma structuring issues.
