Title       : Novel Quantum Dot/Host Materials for Photonic and Optoelectronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1994       
File        : a9202672

Award Number: 9202672
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk D. Kolenbrander kk@athena.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Klavs F. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lionel C. Kimerling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9162,9295,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              We will establish a new, non-equilibrium process for the                       
              preparation of quantum dots of arbitrary composition in a variety              
              of hosts.  This process features a versatile laser ablation                    
              supersonic expansion source for the synthesis of size-selected                 
              semiconductor quantum dots.  Gas phase processing of the dots is               
              extended with a molecule-particle CVD (MPCVD) technique which                  
              yields a dot/host composite which consists of semiconductor quantum            
              dots grown epitaxially within a crystalline semiconductor host.                
              These new materials systems are expected to yield new insights into            
              the interfacial, morphological, and phase stability of small                   
              systems and to provide a high-performance materials platform for               
              integrated photonic device structures.  The goals of the research              
              program are: 1) to provide a materials design knowledge base; 2) to            
              discover new optical phenomena which evolve from the interacting               
              fields within nanocomposite materials and to develop materials                 
              characterization methods for photonic materials; 3) to understand              
              and demonstrate the fundamental limits in monodispersity of                    
              heterogeneous systems and in the stability of materials under                  
              intense photon fields; and 4) to lay the ground work for the design            
              and fabrication of thin film optical components by employing                   
              varying dot and host compositions, sizes, and dot densities.                   
              %%%                                                                            
              A new approach for the synthesis and processing of novel quantum               
              dot thin film materials for nonlinear optical applications is being            
              explored in this research program.  The approach exploits a series             
              of new gas-phase processing techniques to produce an array of                  
              materials consistingg of semiconductor clusters of nonlinear                   
              optical materials of the elemental systems, Ge and Si, in epitaxial            
              environments of Si, GaAs, and ZnSe.  These dots, ranging in sizes              
              from the very small (~100 atoms) to the very large (~10,000 atoms)             
              systems, are expected to provide greatly enhanced nonlinear optical            
              properties over those of bulk semiconductors through quantum                   
              confinement effects.  The resulting crystalline materials differ               
              markedly from any quantum dot materials produced to date by using              
              a confining matrix as a means not only to isolate the clusters from            
              each other, but also to fully define and satisfy critical surface              
              properties of the confined cluster.   These materials represent a              
              significant potential for future nonlinear optical devices for                 
              advanced applications in  computing, information processing, and               
              communications.
