Title       : Materials Synthesis and Processing: Experimental and Theoretical Studies on
               Titanium Nitride Synthesis by Laser Assisted Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1995      
File        : a9202315

Award Number: 9202315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $554127             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jyotirmoy Mazumder   (Principal Investigator current)
              Aravinda Kar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jagannadham Kasichainula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1774,9146,9161,9162,9295,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Lasers have attracted considerable interest world wide because            
              of their versatility as a tool for many scientific and engineering             
              applications such as processing and synthesis of materials.  Among             
              various applications of laser, Laser Chemical Vapor Deposition                 
              (LCVD) and Laser Physical Vapor Deposition (LPVD) techniques can               
              be used to synthesize thin layers of materials with precise spatial            
              control.  Although the potential of Laser Induced Deposition (LID)             
              processes as a superior technique to produce thin films has been               
              demonstrated, little has been done to understand the fundamentals              
              of such processes.  For this reason, a research project                        
              encompassing experimental studies and development of mathematical              
              models for the film forming process during LID for a compound such             
              as Titanium Nitride (TIN) is researched in order to understand the             
              mechanism of such processes, and to develop a science base for                 
              laser-aided materials processing.  Morphology and stoichiometry of             
              TiN deposits for both LPVP and LCVD will be a major interest.  TiN             
              is chosen as the model material for the study for its wide                     
              application in various industries such as microelectronics, opto               
              electronics, tool and aerospace industries.  Applications of TiN               
              thin films as a diffusion barrier between Si and Al (for VLSI) is              
              often observed.  The experimental studies include the determination            
              of optical and electronic properties and characterization by                   
              various electron-optical techniques for TiN films formed by LID.               
              The surface temperature and chemical composition near the point of             
              deposition will also be determined.  These results will be used to             
              obtain information about the surface-decomposition fraction and                
              the cluster size in the film.  The chemical kinetic data will shed             
              light on the reaction rate law in the vapor phase during LPVD and              
              at the gas-solid interface during LCVD, and on the question of                 
              enhanced reaction rate during LID.  Along with the experimental                
              works, mathematical studies will be carried out by considering                 
              continuum mechanics for deposition at a high ambient pressure, and             
              by using the Monte Carlo (MC) simulation or molecular dynamics (MD)            
              technique for deposition at a low ambient pressure (Ultra High                 
              Vacuum, UHV) to model particle transport with chemical reaction                
              during LID.  MC or MD simulation can also be utilized to predict               
              the cluster size, and its effect on the film quality.  Such models             
              will be useful to determine the important process parameters, to               
              predict the performance of the LID systems, to design and optimum              
              LID system with optimum control.                                               
                   The researched work may allow the improved control laser-                 
              based thin film deposition processes for semiconductor processing              
              and the production of wear-resistant coatings.
