Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Critical Point Theory and Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9202044

Award Number: 9202044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abbas Bahri bahri@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The various directions of this research are bound by a                    
              common theme, the use of variational methods in addressing                     
              problems of mathematical analysis.  Areas of concern include                   
              dynamical systems, nonlinear partial differential equations and                
              geometry.  The methods, both analytical and topological, are                   
              rooted in previous work; in particular on variational problems in              
              which compactness assumptions are not available.                               
                   Among the topics to be investigated is symbolic dynamics, in              
              which the contribution of the periodic orbits provided by the                  
              Birkhoff-Lewis theorem connects the framework used in dynamical                
              systems with that used in variational theory.  A particular goal               
              is to carry over existing work to the case where the stable and                
              unstable manifolds of a hyperbolic fixed point intersect                       
              transversely.  This situation arises frequently in the study of                
              dynamical systems, for example in the restricted three-body                    
              problem.                                                                       
                   Related work will be carried out on collisions and existence              
              of periodic orbits of three-body type.  It is planned to                       
              establish the existence of infinitely many generalized solutions               
              and to demonstrate that these solutions have good properties,                  
              i.e. that one can attach to each of them a Morse index which                   
              describes the difference of topology that they induce in the                   
              level sets of the variational problem.                                         
                   Variational methods in science date back to the nineteenth                
              century when the mathematical framework of much of what we know                
              as the physical universe was laid out.  The principles of least                
              action and energy minimization still apply to many of the models               
              used in describing natural phenomena.  The present work continues              
              investigations into the mathematical consequences and equations                
              which arise from variational approaches to the study of complex                
              motions.
