Title       : Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Materials Related Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1992      
File        : a9202441

Award Number: 9202441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Krchnavek   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald S. Indeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth F. Kelton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick C. Gibbons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shankar M. L. Sastry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will provide a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)                 
              which will be dedicated to support fundamental research of                     
              materials.  Examples of research studies include the investigations            
              of quasicrystals and complex intermetallic crystals, polymer                   
              processing for optical waveguides, composite materials, nanophase              
              materials, and studies of magnetic recording media.  The SEM would             
              have a resolution of 3.5 nm at 30 Kv, an accelerating voltage range            
              of 0.2kV to 40 Kv, and a magnification range from 10x to 300,000x.             
              These specifications offer a large degree of flexibility for                   
              electron microscopy studies and will significantly help current                
              research efforts as well as future projects.  An integral part of              
              the SEM would be a Wavelength Dispersive Spectrometer (WDS) and an             
              Energy Dispersive X-ray Spoectrometer (EDS).  These two subsystems             
              give elemental analysis with submicron resolution in the lateral               
              direction.  This capability is important when studying multi-                  
              elemental systems such as intermetallics and composite materials.              
              The high lateral resolution allows studies of composition variation            
              within individual grains and at the grain boundaries.                          
              %%%                                                                            
              The Materials Science and Engineering Program at Washington                    
              University in materials science and applied physics spans several              
              departments over two schools.  These inlcude the departments of                
              mechanical, electrical, chemical and civil engineering in the                  
              School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, and physics and                    
              chemistry in the School of Arts and Sciences.  Graduate research in            
              the Materials Research Laboratory is active in the structure and               
              properties of metals, polymers, ceramics, composites, advanced                 
              metal and polymer processing methods, polymer processing rheology,             
              fracture mechanics of solids, and the fabrication, chemistry,                  
              physics, and mechanical behavior of composite materials.
