Title       : MCF: Implications of time-dependent foraging behaviors for population dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1992      
File        : a9202342

Award Number: 9202342
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Abrams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal seeks support for the principal investigator to learn            
              mathematical techniques and collaborate with mathematicians at the             
              University of British Columbia.  Its scientific goal is to                     
              determine how feeding behaviors which change adaptively with time              
              affect the population dynamics of species interacting in a food                
              web.  Previous work by the P.I. have shown that, when individuals              
              of a species adjust their foraging behavior in relation to food                
              availability and the risk of predation, interactions between                   
              species are changed greatly.  This situation produces indirect                 
              affects between species that have no direct feeding relationship,              
              and can completely reverse the effects of predator-prey                        
              interactions.  These previous models have assumed that time does               
              not affect the optimal feeding behavior directly.  Time does not               
              have a role in almost every natural system to which these results              
              apply.  It is therefore essential to extend the food web results               
              with models with time dependent foraging strategies.  Behavioral               
              ecologists, including two mathematicians at the University of                  
              British Columbia have done considerable work determining the nature            
              of time-dependent strategies when there are discrete alternative               
              feeding behaviors.  The P. I. will collaborate in extending these              
              results to situations in which foraging is defined by a continuous             
              variable, such a percent of time spent feeding.  The continuous                
              strategies will then be incorporated into food-web models to                   
              determine the applicability of conclusions from previous time-                 
              dependent models.
