Title       : An Interdisciplinary Approach to the Synthesis, Measurement and Optimization of
               Polyimide Properties for Multi-Chip Module Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1994      
File        : a9202696

Award Number: 9202696
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah L. Crawford                     
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Farris rjfarris@polysci.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1773,9162,9295,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              An interdisciplinary, group effort to synthesize,                              
              characterize, and optimize the properties of                                   
              photosensitive and non-photosensitive                                          
              polyimides for use as the multilayer dielectric                                
              for multi-chip module substrates has been                                      
              proposed.  The next generation of                                              
              supercomputers will require an increase in                                     
              speed.  Unfortunately, since the residual stress                               
              in the dielectric increases with the number of                                 
              layers, the reliability of the dielectric layer                                
              based on current polyimides will decrease.                                     
              The increase in layers and the decrease in the                                 
              width of the circuit paths necessitates the use                                
              of photosensitive polyimides which typically                                   
              exhibit a reduction in properties.  Thus, there                                
              is a pressing need to 1) produce polyimides                                    
              with lower residual stress and 2) learn how to                                 
              optimize a mechanical design utilizing these                                   
              materials using structural analysis methods.                                   
                                                                                             
              First, DuPont will prepare a number of new,                                    
              non-photosensitive polyimides that have low                                    
              stress.  Then, DuPont, IBM, UMass, and                                         
              UNH will characterize the elastic, optical, and                                
              electrical properties using several new and                                    
              several well established techniques.  These                                    
              properties will be used as input to IBM's                                      
              finite element model of the multilayer                                         
              dielectric to predict the stress level and hence                               
              the reliability of the new substrates.  The                                    
              effect of processing variables (heat, solvents,                                
              etc.) on the critical physical properties will                                 
              also be determined.  Once a suitable range of                                  
              techniques and properties have been                                            
              established, DuPont will synthesize                                            
              photosensitive polyimides and the properties                                   
              will be characterized again.  Then, a model                                    
              substrate will be fabricated by IBM and the                                    
              thermo-mechanical performance will be                                          
              characterized by UNH.  The failure modes, if                                   
              any exist, will also be observed at UMass                                      
              using hot-stage optical microscopy.  This                                      
              combined interdisciplinary effort has been                                     
              made possible by the recent advances in                                        
              experimental methods to characterize thin film                                 
              materials that have been pioneered at UNH
