Title       : Magnetotail Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1994  
File        : a9202126

Award Number: 9202126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Kaufmann dick.kaufmann@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              The plasma sheet varies from a thin stretched configuration during             
              substorm growth phase to a broad dipolar configuration during                  
              substorm expansion phase.  Magnetotail electric currents flow                  
              primarily from dawn to dusk through the plasma sheet.  Part of this            
              cross-tail current is diverted to the ionosphere, where auroras are            
              produced.  The overall goal of the proposed project is to obtain a             
              better physical understanding of how magnetotail current is carried            
              by individual particles under a variety of conditions.  Special                
              emphasis will be placed on the inner tail.  The current carrying               
              ions will be studied by tracing individual particle orbits.                    
              Several types of ion trajectories are found in different regions of            
              the magnetotail.  Adiabatic orbits characteristic of the ring                  
              current and radiation belts are present at low altitudes.  Chaotic,            
              quasi-adiabatic, and trapped orbits alternate farther out, in the              
              region of most interest.  Quasi-adiabatic orbits usually dominate              
              in the distant tail.  Electrons behave adiabatically in all the                
              regions that will be studied.  The first stage of analysis combines            
              these groups of particles to generate a series of self-consistent              
              plasma sheet models, each applying to a small region of the tail.              
              In a self-consistent model, the charged particles must carry the               
              electric current that generates the magnetic field in which the                
              orbits were traced.  The local models then will be coupled in order            
              to study current diversion and larger scale mangetotail structures.            
              Finally, the structures must be mapped and coupled to the                      
              ionosphere.
