Title       : New Photonic Materials from Genetically Engineered Bacteriorhodopsins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1994     
File        : a9202209

Award Number: 9202209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Needleman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9294,9295,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              New Photonic Material from Genetically Engineered                              
              Bacteriorhodopsin.  There exists a need for photonic materials                 
              that have superior photochromic, photovoltaic, or nonlinear                    
              optical (NLO) characteristics.  This research will develop a new               
              family of materials based on the protein bacteriorhodopsin                     
              (BR), a unique biological material which has promising                         
              photochromic, photooltaic, and nonlinear optical properties                    
              needed for device application (e.g. holographic recording                      
              films, associative holographic memories, spatial light                         
              modulators, etc.). To fully realize the potential of devices                   
              based on BR one must produce mutant BRs at a scale suitable for                
              rapid analysis and fabrication and be able to screen these mutant              
              Brs rapidly for important photochromic properties (second harmonic             
              generation). Mutants construction from the gene coding for                     
              BR (bop) will use an expression system which has recently been                 
              developed.  In this system mutant BR's are synthesized in their                
              natural host and not in E. coli as is currently the custom.                    
              This method allows the rapid and facile production of large                    
              quantities of mutant proteins derived by site-directed                         
              mutagenesis.  The photochromic properties, the photovoltaic                    
              properties, and the nonlinear optical properties of the BR variants            
              will be assessed.  This effort involves the close collaboration of             
              investigators with expertise in three different areas: genetics                
              (Richard Needleman). photochemistry (Janos Lanyi) and physics                  
              (George Rayfield).  A strong industrial collaboration (Bend                    
              Research Inc, Bend Oregon) is also part of this program.                       
              %%%                                                                            
              There exists a need for materials that have superior responses to              
              light than man-made products currently in existence.  This research            
              will develop a new family of materials based on the protein                    
              bacteriorhodopsin (BR), a unique biological material which has                 
              promising light sensitive and photoelectric properties                         
              needed for device application (e.g. holographic recording                      
              films, associative holographic memories, spatial light                         
              modulators, etc.). To fully realize the potential of devices                   
              based on BR one must produce mutant Brs at a scale suitable for                
              rapid analysis and fabrication to screen these mutant Brs for                  
              important photochromic properties. Mutants proteins will be                    
              obtained from the gene coding for BR inserted into a bacterial                 
              expression system involving the natural host; this method allows               
              the rapid and facile production of large quantities of mutant                  
              proteins derived by site-directed mutagenesis.  The photoelectronic            
              properties of these light sensitive proteins will be assessed by               
              investigators with expertise in three different areas: genetics,               
              photochemistry, and physics.  A strong industrial collaboration is             
              also part of this program.
