Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Contributions to the Theory and Methods of Empirical
               Bayes Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9202382

Award Number: 9202382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sallie Keller-McNulty                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francisco J. Samaniego fjsamaniego@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Most procedures labeled "Empirical Bayes" that are in use at              
              present are frequentist rather than Bayesian; although often the               
              motivation for employing Empirical Bayes procedures is the                     
              conceptual or the computational difficulty of the analogous Bayes              
              procedures.  This research broadens the  Empirical Bayes                       
              framework and then examines the  comparative behaviors of the                  
              several methodologies with respect their performance and their                 
              feasibility.  Theoretical results defining conditions of                       
              superiority for Empirical Bayes methods will be sought.                        
              Empirical results from simulations and theoretical results for                 
              properties of Empirical Bayes estimators will be applied to                    
              reliability theory.                                                            
                   Statistical analyses draw on models or on prior information               
              and expert opinion to set the framework for analyzing data.  In                
              certain circumstances the data itself can be used to determine                 
              the framework as well as be analyzed within the framework.                     
              Procedures of this type are called "Empirical Bayes;" and these                
              can be viewed in some sense as a hybrid of model-based                         
              (frequentist) and prior information-based (Bayesian) procedures.               
              This research will investigate the circumstances under which each              
              class of procedures is significantly superior to the others for                
              applications in reliability testing and estimation.
