Title       : Plasma Immersion Ion Implantation for Surface Material Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1994      
File        : a9202993

Award Number: 9202993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $501000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan W. Cheung cheung@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ture K. Gustafson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles K. Birdsall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Lieberman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1775,9146,9162,9295,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In plasma immersion ion implantation (PII), ions                               
              are extracted directly from a plasma environment                               
              (in which the target is located) and accelerated                               
              through a high voltage sheath into the target.  With                           
              a high ion-density plasma produced by electron                                 
              cyclotron resonance (ECR) sources, the space                                   
              charge region between the plasma and a negatively                              
              biased target can sustain a potential difference up                            
              to 200kV, with an ion implantation flux as high as                             
              10 16/cm1-sec.  this dose rate is equivalent to 10                             
              monolayers of implanted atoms per second, and is a                             
              factor of one hundred to a thousand higher than                                
              conventional ion implantation.  Other unique                                   
              features of this technique include: no ion mass                                
              selection, no beam transport optics, and ion energy                            
              and angular distributions controlled by the plasma                             
              gas pressure and the applied bias waveforms.  By                               
              adding a sputtering electrode into the plasma which                            
              is powered by a separate voltage supply (i.e., a                               
              triode configuration), the system can be used for                              
              sputtered ion implantation and ion assisted                                    
              physical/chemical vapor deposition.   Work to date                             
              on silicon device processing indicates the PIII is                             
              well-suited for high throughput, large area surface                            
              processing and is compatible with the cluster tool                             
              concept for future manufacturing equipment.  In                                
              the grant the exploration of the formation of                                  
              metastable metallurgical phases due to the high                                
              implantation rate of the PIII technique and the                                
              possibility of performing high dose rate ion beam                              
              mixing and deposition concomitantly.  this will be                             
              achieved by using programmable pulses with                                     
              variable pulse width, duty factor and voltage levels.                          
              The proposed work is to explore the science and                                
              engineering of PIII for synthesis and modification                             
              of novel electronic and optical materials.  The PI                             
              will also investigate using PIII to synthesize high                            
              bandgap semiconductors such as GaN and AINm,                                   
              to modify surface chemistry for selective metal                                
              deposition, to form novel thin dielectric films with                           
              composition gradients, to perform bandgap tailoring                            
              with buried GeSi alloys, and to improve the                                    
              mechanical stress and electromigration reliability of                          
              submicron interconnects.
