Title       : Problem Solving Environments and Methods for the Developmentof PDE Based
               Applications on Parallel Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1994      
File        : a9202536

Award Number: 9202536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elias N. Houstis   (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,2865,9216,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project has three technical thrusts:                              
                                                                                             
                  1.  The design of knowledge based PSEs (Problem Solving                    
                      Environments) for PDE (Partial Differential                            
                      Equation) based applications.                                          
                                                                                             
                  2.  The development of a software engineering framework                    
                      for solving PDE problems quickly and efficiently on                    
                      a network of parallel machines with multimedia                         
                      front-ends.                                                            
                                                                                             
                  3.  The development of an infrastructure of scalable                       
                      algorithms to support the solution of certain                          
                      PDEs on a variety of massively parallel machines.                      
                                                                                            
              PDEs are the fundamental mathematical tools for describing the                 
              physical behavior of many application processes in science and                 
              engineering.  Most of the existing PDE software systems deal                   
              primarily with the solution of specific classes of PDE                         
              problems on sequential or vector machines.  This project will                  
              study the design and implementation of the software                            
              engineering platform, ParPDElab, for generating PSEs and the                   
              related algorithmic infrastructure for any class of PDE                        
              problems and PDE based applications.  The hardware facility                    
              assumed consists of a network of parallel processors with                      
              different architectures and software environments.                             
                                                                                             
              The primary design goal in ParPDElab is to create a problem                    
              solving and programming environment that shifts the emphasis                   
              from programming and hardware issues to the analysis of                        
              science and engineering issues.  This environment will be                      
              almost machine independent and will attempt to unify some of                   
              the well known parallel computational paradigms.  It will be                   
              knowledge based in the sense that it will be aware of its                      
              infrastructure and the compatibility requirements of the                       
              atomic elements involved.  Furthermore, it will be capable of                  
              making some decisions for the user.  The system will be open                   
              ended and the easy interfacing of foreign systems will be one                  
              of the primary considerations in the design of ParPDElab.  To                  
              achieve the above design objectives, one must address the                      
              issue of integration of numeric, symbolic, multimedia, and AI                  
              processing.  This integration will be attempted by utilizing                   
              existing technologies while developing some new methodologies                  
              for the future.
