Title       : Properties of Correlated and Multilayer Two-Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9202255

Award Number: 9202255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert A. Fertig fertig@pa.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Theoretical investigations will be carried out on two-dimensional              
              quantum semiconductor systems studying effects of disorder, finite             
              temperatures and unique device structures with and without a                   
              magnetic field.  The behavior of edges in the Wigner crystal regime            
              in a strong magnetic field will be considered and a method for                 
              calculating relaxation, reconstruction and melting of the edge                 
              electrons under various circumstances will be studied.  The                    
              consequences of transport and electromagnetic absorption of such               
              effects will be considered.  A detailed study of defects in the                
              Wigner crystal  will be undertaken using a variational wavefunction            
              approach which should help determine the importance of quantum                 
              fluctuations and will be a first step in understanding both the                
              melting transition and finite temperature transport.  Edge states              
              in the quantum Hall regime will be studied with emphasis on the                
              effects disorder may have on the low-lying excitations of such                 
              systems.  Finally, a careful study of the influence of potential               
              inhomogeneities in a two-layer system on interplane tunneling will             
              be undertaken.                                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              This theoretical study will focus on the properties of a new state             
              of matter associated with a gas of strongly interacting electrons              
              confined to two-dimensions.  Usually this state of matter is found             
              at the semiconductor interface in a strong magnetic field.  One                
              possible outcome of this electron gas is to condense into a                    
              crystalline state, the Wigner crystal.  The research will study the            
              behavior of this Wigner crystal.  Besides being of fundamental                 
              physical interest, there may be ramifications of this research on              
              microelectronics.
