Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Pedology and 10-Beryllium Dating of Colluvial
               Deposits in the Blue Ridge Mountains of North Carolina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1996   
File        : a9405198

Award Number: 9405198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9820               (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall J. Schaetzl schaetzl@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1304,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9405198  SCHAETZL       As early as the 1880s, geomorphologists like William
              Morris  Davis developed and tested models of landscape change in the  central
              and southern Appalachian Mountains.  Only recently have  new approaches and
              theories been used to interpret the complex  intermixture of landforms in the
              region, however.  New methods  for dating materials offer considerable promise
              for developing a  chronology of landforms and materials.  This doctoral 
              dissertation research project will elucidate the geomorphic and  soils history
              of the southern Blue Ridge as recorded in colluvial  deposits and associated
              soils from the Little Tennessee River  basin of western North Carolina.  Sets
              of colluvium samples drawn  from carefully selected series in tributary valleys
              will be  extracted in addition to other data derived in the field.  The 
              relative ages of the colluvial samples will be determined by  examining soil
              morphological properties, ratios of iron species,  and rations of
              differentially weatherable minerals.  The samples  also will be examined using
              relatively new dating techniques that  measure an isotope of beryllium (10-Be).
               Dates determined using  this method should allow identification of a maximum
              surface  exposure age for each sample, thereby enabling examination of the 
              properties and evolutionary histories of these deposits and  relative soils in
              a more quantitative frame of reference.       This project will advance
              knowledge about geomorphological  and pedological change in the Blue Ridge
              province in the southern  Appalachians, providing a much firmer chronological
              context  within which to examine processes of landscape and soil  evolution. 
              In addition, it will explore the utility of 10-Be  dating procedures.  As a
              doctoral dissertation improvement award,  this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising  student to establish a strong independent research
              career.
