Title       : RUI: Approaches to Somatic Immunoglobulin Diversification in Vitro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9405257

Award Number: 9405257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Goldsby ragoldsby@amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9169,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9405257  Goldsby    Diversity is the hallmark of the antibody repertoire, and
              somatic  mutation generates significant diversity during secondary immune 
              responses in mice and humans.  The V regions of genes encoding  immunoglobulin
              in B cells undergo rates of somatic mutation as high  as one base per thousand
              per generation.  This is an extraordinary  mutation rate and corresponds to the
              introduction of one new  immunoglobulin mutation for every two cell divisions. 
              The  mechanism underlying hypermutation remains one of the major  unsolved
              problems of immunology.  The availability of culture  systems and cell lines
              that would permit the observation and study  of this phenomenon in vitro would
              provide a significant expansion  of our capacity to analyze this process. 
              Because the ileal Peyer's  patch (IPP) of cattle contains more than one hundred
              million B  cells and is the site of massive, developmentally regulated, 
              extensive, somatic mutation of Ig genes, it has been chosen as a  target tissue
              from which to establish in vitro systems that  somatically diversify
              immunoglobulin V genes.  A variety of  approaches are planned to optimize the
              in vitro culture of IPP B  cells, including the addition of mitogens and
              cytokines, culture on  outgrowths of IPP follicular "stromal" cells and the
              culture of  individual IPP follicles.  The assay for occurrence of somatic 
              diversification of bovine lambda V genes will employ RT-PCR and  single strand
              conformational polymorphism (SSCP) as an assay.  The  development of a system
              that supports the transfer of this process  of somatic immunoglobulin V gene
              diversification from tissue to  tissue culture well facilitate the analysis of
              the dell and  molecular biology of immunoglobulin gene diversification.  %%%  A
              major component of the mammalian immune response is the ability  to produce a
              vast array of antibodies that are capable of  specifically binding a wide range
              of foreign substances (antigens)  and facilitating their removal from the
              blood.  The range of  s pecificities that the antibodies of an individual can
              recognize is  termed the individual's antibody repertoire.  The molecular 
              mechanism(s) by which the vast diversity of an organism's antibody  repertoire
              is generated remains one of the central questions of  modern immunology.  One
              of the major mechanisms that generates  antibody diversity is by a rapid rate
              of mutation in the genes that  encode the foreign antigen-binding portions of
              antibody molecules.   The overall objective of this project is to develop cell
              culture  systems that will support the continued diversification of antibody 
              genes.  This research will take advantage of certain unique  properties of the
              development of the immune system in sheep and  cattle which suggest that this
              project should be feasible.  If this  research is successful, the availability
              of this culture system  will greatly facilitate the analysis of the cellular
              and molecular  mechanisms of immunoglobulin gene diversification.  The research
               will be done at an undergraduate institution and will directly  involve
              undergraduate students in this cutting edge problem.  ***
