Title       : In Vitro Studies on Nucleosome Dissolution and Assembly During Transcription
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9405618

Award Number: 9405618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vaughn E. Jackson jacksonv@mcw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Medical Col of Wisconsin
	      8701 Watertown Plank Road
	      Milwaukee, WI  532263548    414/257-8296

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9405618  The goal of this project is to understand the mechanisms in
              which polymerases transcribe through nucleosomes. The overall  hypothesis to be
              tested is that transcription-induced positive stress disrupts histone-histone
              interactions within the  nucleosome such that the nucleosome unfolds. The
              individual histone-DNA interactions are subsequently disrupted by the 
              polymerase one histone at a time. The disruption of histone-histone contacts is
              seen as a pre-requisite to efficient  release of the individual histones. To
              test this hypothesis the transcriptional effect on nucleosomes is divided into
              two  components, transcription-induced stresses which is an indirect effect and
              polymerase-DNA interactions which is a direct  effect. Closed circular DNAs
              containing varying levels of positive stress are reconstituted with either
              histone H2A,H2B  or H3,H4 and in combinations. The interactions are
              characterized by treatment with competitor DNAs and subsequent analysis  on
              sucrose gradients and non-denaturating agarose gels. More detailed information
              regarding histone-DNA and histone--  histone interactions are obtainable by
              DNAase I foot-printing and protein crosslinking. The direct effect of RNA 
              polymerase is studied by utilizing a well defined polymerase, T7 RNA
              polymerase, and constructing 145 bp DNA fragments  which position the
              elongating polymerase at precise positions on those DNAs. By reconstitution of
              the polymerase-DNA  complex with histones and analysis by hydroxyl radical
              footprinting, it will be possible to evaluate the disruptive  influence of a
              polymerase on histone-DNA and histone-histone interactions. In vitro
              transcription experiments will be done  to correlate the previous results with
              the authentic process. Previous studies have indicated that
              transcription-induced  stresses can be eliminated by inclusion of RNAase A
              which removes the RNA as the polymerase transcribes. It is therefore  possible
              to assay the transfer potential of the individual histones in the presence  or
              absence of these stresses by  inclusion of a competitor DNA. Selective transfer
              of specific histones may be expected dependent on whether the induced  stresses
              are present. This variability in transfer is expected to influence
              transcriptional efficiency. It is expected  that the results of these
              experiments will provide a further understanding of mechanisms that facilitate
              transcription  and may also have broad application to an understanding of the
              histone-DNA dynamics which occur in the regulation of genes  by
              sequence-specific transcription factors.  %%% The DNA of a eukaryotic cell is
              packaged into semi-regular repeated structures that are called 'nucleosomes'.
              In each  nucleosome, 145 bp of DNA are wrapped in a left-handed coil 1 .8 times
              around two each of four highly basic proteins.  These proteins, histones
              H3,H4,H2A, and H2B, require high NaCI concentration to cause dissociation from
              the DNA. These  very strong binding energies are in two interactive forms:
              interactions with the DNA and protein-protein interactions  between the
              histones. When all eight histones are in association with each other in a
              nucleosome, the combined binding  energies of each histone with DNA generates
              an extremely stable structure. Any transient release of histone from the DNA 
              would be prevented from total dissociation due to the continued interaction
              with the other histones in the complex. During  transcription, the RNA
              polymerase enzyme must access this highly protected DNA. Therefore, gene
              regulation to a large  extent is defined by nuclear mechanisms which are
              designed to circumvent these large binding energies. Transcription, DNA 
              replication and repair, as well as the sequence-specific binding of factors
              which control these processes are all  dependent on these same mechanisms. By
              disrupting histone-histone interactions within the nucleosome, histones H2A,H2B
               and/or H3,H4 could be transiently released such that RNA polymerase would be
              able to transcribe on a histone deficient  template. We propose th at the
              source of the energy which disrupts these histone-histone contacts is the
              formation of  transcription-induced stresses in the DNA. This hypothesis is  
              tested by studying histone interactions with DNAs that have been constructed
              with topological stresses that mimic the  stresses that would be produced by
              RNA polymerase. A further analysis is done with an in vitro transcription
              protocol  which is designed to minimize variables.   It is expected that the
              results of these experiments will provide a further understanding of mechanisms
              that facilitate  transcription and will also have broad application to an
              understanding of the histone-DNA dynamics of a broad range of  nuclear
              functions .  ***
