Title       : Molecular Genetics of Fission Yeast Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1994    
File        : a9405372

Award Number: 9405372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9125,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405372  Grodzicker  This grant supports the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
              course, The Molecular Genetics Fission Yeast, to be held in the fall of
              1994-1998.  The course provides a short, two week, intensive training in
              classical and molecular approaches to the use of fission yeast as an
              experimental organism.  It is designed to prepare the student to enter directly
              into research that makes use of advanced and/or specialized techniques and
              concepts in molecular genetics, classical genetics and biochemistry that can be
              applied to many studies, including cell cycle regulation and growth control. 
              The emphasis is placed not only on techniques but on the approaches to
              experimental problems.  The course is organized to instruct students in three
              major areas.  In the first, which is the cell biology of fission yeast,
              students gain expertise in the use of fluorescent probes for microscopy.  In
              addition, state of the art techniques for cell cycle analysis, such as flow
              cytometry and synchronization of cells by elutriation are presented. 
              Biochemical experiments are also presented to enable students to connect
              genetic and biochemical data and prepare them to relate these approaches to
              their own work.  The course also provides scientific expertise in the powerful
              classical genetic analyses possible in yeast.  Students learn approaches to
              identifying mutant genes, mapping genes and to tetrad analysis.  Finally,
              students gain expertise in molecular genetics.  Students are trained in the
              theory and practice of the use of recombinant DNA technology in studies in
              yeast.  The faculty are chosen on the basis of their contributions to and
              knowledge of field.  The faculty invite lecturers who give up-to-the-minute
              reports on current research.  The lecturers have all made significant
              contributions to their fields.  The trainees range from graduate students to
              senior investigators, and are chosen by the course faculty.   %%%  This grant
              supports an annual two-week course in the molecular genetics of fission yeast
              at  Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in the fall of 1994-1998.  Because of the
              short duration of the course, senior, as well as junior individuals can attend
              and receive a short, intense period of training in an environment remote from
              other demands on their time and attention.  The course provides an unusual
              opportunity for scientists to retrain in another speciality or to apply the
              work of a new field to their own research interests.  ***
