Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reconstruction of Late Quaternary Climate
               Patterns from Lacustrine, Aeolean, and Alluvial Deposits of the Salt Basin in
               West Texas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1994      
File        : a9405247

Award Number: 9405247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Currey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin H. Haskell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1304,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9405247  CURREY       In order to better understand the possible direction and 
              consequences of future climate changes, geographers and other  earth scientists
              must first identify and understand the dynamics  of climatic changes that have
              occurred in the past.  Paleoclimatic changes can be analyzed through
              examination of the  responses of geomorphic systems, records of which are
              preserved  in stratigraphic records and other characteristics of different 
              landforms.  This doctoral dissertation research project will  examine
              environmental change during the late Quaternary Period in  the Salt Basin of
              western Texas.  Deposits from a number of  different sites in and near playa
              basins that once were lakebeds  will be gathered and analyzed using a variety
              of dating  procedures.  Stratigraphic sections beneath the floor of the  playa
              will be examined to identify materials contained within  lake sediments,
              thereby providing evidence of short-term climatic  shifts.  Peripheral sections
              beside the playas contain evidence  of aeolian activity in gypsum dune
              deposits.  Other features  along the playa margin, such as spits and beach
              ridges, permit  interpretation of deep-water lacustrine processes.  Further
              away  from the playas, landforms produced by wind and running water  record
              variability of formative environments.  Among the research  techniques that
              will be used to analyze materials derived from  sample sites are
              thermoluminescence and optically simulated  luminescence (TL/OSL) dating,
              radiocarbon dating, and stable  isotope rate analysis.       This research will
              provide valuable new insights about the  chronology of climate and landscape
              change in the southern Great  Plains.  In doing so, it will further the
              comprehensive picture  of environmental change in North America in the wake of
              the last  major glaciation, thereby advancing understandings of Earth  system
              history, a major facet of the U.S. Global Change Research  Program.  As a
              doctoral dissertation improvement award, this  award also will pr ovide support
              to enable a promising student to  establish a strong independent research
              career.
