Title       : The Novel Iron-Sulfur Clusters of Hydrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9405783

Award Number: 9405783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Adams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9169,9181,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9405783  Adams  This project seeks to expand upon our knowledge of the
              structure, function and chemical reactivity of  biological iron-sulfur (FeS)
              clusters, the most ubiquitous electron carriers in nature. We are investigating
               the structure and properties of a novel type of FeS center, termed the H
              cluster, found at the catalytic site  of hydrogenase. In earlier studies, it
              was shown the novel H cluster in mesophilic hydrogenases is  probably comprised
              of four Fe atoms and has two types of nitrogenous ligands, one of which is
              displaced  when the cluster covalently binds CO, a potent inhibitor.
              Hydrogenases have now been purified from the  "hyperthermophilic" bacterium,
              Thermotoga maritima (Tm), which grows up to 90 C, and from an  archaeon
              (archaebacterium) termed ES-4 which grows at 110 C, the upper temperature limit
              for life. The  ES-4 enzyme has the lowest iron content of any known
              hydrogenase. It has an optimum temperature for  catalysis above 100 C and is
              stable at 95 C for at least 24 hours. Extensive biochemical and spectroscopic 
              studies of this hydrogenase are proposed to investigate the nature of its
              catalytic FeS center. In addition,  crystals of ES-4 hydrogenase suitable for
              structural determination have been obtained that diffract past  2.8 A. The gene
              for ES-4 hydrogenase will therefore be cloned to provide the amino acid
              sequence for  crystallographic analyses. Attempts will also be made to obtain
              an heterologous expression system for the  gene encoding a hyperthermophilic
              hydrogenase. Once structural information is available from  crystallography,
              this will enable proposed mechanisms of both "hyperthermostability" and of
              catalysis by  the FeS H cluster to be directly tested by site-directed
              mutagenesis. An ultimate goal of this research is  to construct an H cluster
              within an exceptionally thermostable 4Fe-ferredoxin that has been purified from
               Pyrococcus furiosus, an archaeon which grows up to 105 . In the prior funding
              period, the secondary  structure of this ferredoxin wa s determined by 2D-NMR,
              and its gene was cloned and expressed in  Escherichia coli. Modification of its
               4Fe-4S  cluster through mutagenesis will be explored as a potential  model for
              the H2-activating cluster of the hyperthermophilic hydrogenases.  %%%  Hydrogen
              gas (H2) is an important intermediate in a variety of processes in the chemical
              and energy  industry and is considered by some as the fuel of the future. Many
              microorganisms are also able to either  consume or produce H2, and these
              reactions are catalyzed by an enzyme termed hydrogenase.  Hydrogenases have
              been proposed as the key catalyst in several biologically-based systems for
              both the  production of H2 from renewable resources and for the use of H2 in
              chemical syntheses. However, the  instability of hydrogenases from conventional
              bacteria severely limit their practical application. In  addition, it is not
              known how these enzymes catalyze H2 activation, as structural information is
              not  available for any hydrogenase. So far it has been established that an
              unusual type of iron-sulfur-containing  center termed the "H" cluster is
              intimately involved in catalysis, but the structure for the hydrogenase H 
              cluster or its mechanism of action are not known. This proposal focuses on
              hydrogenases from so-called  hyperthermophilic microorganisms, which have the
              remarkable property of growing near and even above  100 C. We have purified
              hydrogenase from an hyperthermophile which grows up to 110 C, the current 
              upper temperature limit of life, and shown that the enzyme is stable for 24 hr
              at 100 C. Moreover, we  have obtained crystals of this hydrogenase which are
              suitable for structural determination. Using  biochemical, spectroscopic and
              crystallographic analyses, our objectives are to obtain a complete  description
              of a hyperthermophilic hydrogenase at the molecular level, including structures
              for the protein  and its H2-activating iron-sulfur cluster, elucidating its
              catalytic mechanism, and an explanation of its  remarkable stability. These 
              goals will be achieved by an intensely collaborative effort involving 600 liter
               fermentations and large scale anaerobic protein purifications,
              crystallography, a variety of biochemical,  kinetic, potentiometric and
              molecular biology techniques, and a range of both conventional and 
              developmental spectroscopies. In addition, we will attempt using recombinant
              DNA techniques to  construct a model of the H2 activating H cluster in a small
              extremely stable protein. The results from the  proposed research will extend
              our knowledge of the structures and roles of biological iron-sulfur clusters, 
              and will provide the first detailed insight into how H2 is activated
              enzymatically. The availability of  hyperthermophilic hydrogenases and stable
              models of them may also have important practical applications.  ***
