Title       : The Role of Proteases in a Signal Transduction Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9405619

Award Number: 9405619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert DeLotto r-delotto@mskcc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sloan Kettering Canc Res
	      
	      New York, NY  10021    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Extracellular serine proteases are required in several  signal transduction
              systems in order to generate  extracellular ligands.  These include some
              relatively well  characterized systems involving EGF, TGF-a, CSF-1, and KL-1. 
              The proteases involved in these systems, however, have not  been extensively
              characterized.  A newly described signal  transduction system is one which
              specifies the dorsal-  ventral axis during the embryonic development of
              Drosophila  melanogaster.  The available data suggest that at least  three
              serine proteases are required in this signaling  pathway.  This investigator is
              interested in elucidating the  role of these proteases and understanding how
              their  activities are regulated.  These serine proteases are  encoded by the
              maternal effect genes snake, easter, and  gastrulation defective.  These
              proteases are secreted into  an extracellular compartment called the
              perivitelline space  as inactive proenzymes (zymogens).  Activation of the 
              zymogens involves a protease cascade and the end product of  the cascade is
              proteolytic cleavage of the spaetzle protein  into a ligand for the Toll
              receptor.  This investigator has  developed a method of producing biologically
              active  recombinant proteases; he has set up several in vivo and in  vitro
              assays for the activities of these enzymes.  The  biochemical interactions of
              these components are fundamental  to the mechanism by which a signal is
              produced in the  perivitelline space.
