Title       : Nucleotide Binding and Functions of the Subunits of the Chloroplast ATP Synthase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1996   
File        : a9405713

Award Number: 9405713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Mc Carty rem1@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9198,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              McCarty  9405713  Several aspects of the chloroplast ATP synthase will be
              studied.   These include the interactions of nucleotides with the catalytic 
              portion of the enzyme (CF1) and the functions of the y and e  subunits of CF1
              and subunit III of CF0.  The kinetics of the  exchange of nucleotide bound to
              CF1 with medium nucleotide will be  measured over a wide range of ATP
              concentrations, as well as under  turnover conditions.   The nature of the
              sites that promote  exchange and the kinetic competence of exchange can be
              established.   The binding of nucleotide (2',3'-trinitrophenyl-ADP or -ATP) to
              CF1  will be followed by stopped-flow fluorescence.  A simple procedure  has
              been developed that effectively depletes CF1 of nearly all of  its bound
              nucleotide.  The reloading of nucleotides to sites on the  depleted enzyme will
              be examined.  Differential scanning  calorimetry will used to determine the
              stability of the nucleotide-  depleted enzyme.  Isothermal titration
              calorimetry will be used to  study the thermodynamics of nucleotide binding. 
              Combined  biochemical molecular biological approaches will be utilized to 
              examine functions of the y and e subunits of CF1.  The  identification regions
              of the y subunit that interact with e, as  well as those needed for rapid ATP
              hydrolysis, will be pursued.   Mutagenesis experiments, in collaboration with
              Dr. Mark L. Richter,  will also be carried out.  Using molecular biological
              methods and  reconstitution, the ability of truncated and/or mutated forms of 
              the e subunit to inhibit ATPase activity and to block proton  conductance when
              reconstituted with CF1 lacking e will be  determined.  Interactions between
              subunit III of CF0 and CF1 will  be studied by biochemical means.  The binding
              of CF1 and e-depleted  CF1 to vesicles that contain subunit III will be tested
              and  chemical cross-linking of CF1-subunit III preparations carried out.  %%% 
              Photosynthesis by green plants and algae provides oxygen and is the  ultimate
              source of energy for almost all orga nisms.  During  photosynthesis, light
              energy from the sun is converted to chemical   energy in the form of reduced
              organic molecules, many of which are  foodstuffs.  The synthesis of adenosine
              triphosphate (ATP) is an  essential part of photosynthesis and part of the
              energy of light is  used to power ATP synthesis.  This proposal focuses on the
              enzyme  that makes ATP, ATP synthase.  The ATP synthase is a part of green, 
              energy-converting membranes of the photosynthetic organelle known  as the
              chloroplast.  Several different avenues of research are  proposed, including
              studies on the interaction of the ATP synthase  with ATP and other similar
              molecules and how various components of  the enzyme interact.  These
              experiments will give valuable  information about how the ATP synthase works
              and how its activity  is regulated.  Most of the ATP in animal cells is made in
               mitochondria by an ATP synthase similar to the chloroplast ATP  synthesis. 
              The chloroplast and mitochondrial enzymes differ in  their modes of regulation
              of activity, but probably have a similar  mechanism.   ***
