Title       : Genetics, Mechanism and Regulation of Cellulose Synthesis inA. Tumefaciens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1996       
File        : a9405844

Award Number: 9405844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann G. Matthysse matthysse@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9405844  Matthysse  It was propose to continue our investigation of the
              mechanisms of  cellulose synthesis by A. tumefaciens.  In previous research,
              two  operons required for cellulose synthesis were identified and  sequenced. 
              In the same studies, an in vitro cellulose synthesis  system was also
              developed.  With this in vitro cellulose synthesis  system together with mutant
              cells in the cel (cellulose synthesis)  genes, the role of each one of the cel
              gene products in cellulose   formation may be determined.  By using the same in
              vitro cellulose  synthesis system and mutant collection, putative intermediates
              in  cellulose synthesis were found.  The chemical structure of these 
              intermediates will be determined.  In addition, cellulose synthesis  in A.
              tumefaciens is increased in the present of plant cells or  plant extracts.  The
              mechanism of this regulation will be examined.  %%%  Cellulose, which is made
              by plants and by some bacteria and fungi,  is one of the most abundant
              biologically produced materials on  earth.  It is a relatively simple molecule
              consisting of a linear  chain of beta-1,4-glucose molecules.  However, the
              detailed  mechanism of cellulose synthesis is not well understood.  It is not 
              now known whether all organisms which make cellulose use similar  pathways, or
              whether there are different pathways used by different  groups of organisms. 
              The regulation of cellulose synthesis is also  poorly understood.  In this
              research project, the mechanism and  regulation of cellulose synthesis by a
              bacterium called  Agrobacterium tumefaciens will be examined.  The advantages
              of  using a bacterium to study cellulose synthesis are that the  bacteria are
              relatively simple and often allow more easily for the  determination of genes
              required and the individual role(s) of the  same gene products in a complex
              biosynthetic pathway.  In an  earlier study, the genes for cellulose formation
              by this bacterium  were determined.  Now with a collection of mutant cells and
              the  development of a cell-fre e cellulose synthesis system, it is hoped  that
              the function of each one of the genes of cellulose synthesis  can be
              determined, that the chemical steps in the pathway for  cellulose formation
              will be identified, and that experiments can be  undertaken to begin to
              understand how the microbial pathway is  regulated for cellulose formation. 
              ***
