Title       : Pattern Formation by Motile Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1996     
File        : a9405284

Award Number: 9405284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard C. Berg hberg@biosun.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elena O. Budrene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1305,9183,9197,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Berg  9405284  Under certain conditions, cells of chemotactic strains of the 
              bacteria Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium aggregate in  spots or
              stripes distributed in symmetrical arrays.  Each aggregate  contains a large
              number of cells that have migrated toward a  discrete locus in response to a
              signal generated by the cells  themselves.  This signal is produced when cells
              are suspended in  liquid media and exposed to environmental stress, or to
              succinate,  fumarate or malate (intermediates of the tricarboxylic-acid cycle),
               or when cells are grown in soft agar with one the these compounds  as
              substrate.  The primary signal is aspartate, produced from  fumarate and
              ammonia.  A secondary signal is glutamate, produced by  an unidentified
              pathway.  We propose 1) to establish the general  mechanisms regulating pattern
              formation, 2) to identify the  glutamate pathway, 3) to learn how these
              pathways are activated by  different kinds of stress, and 4) to learn whether
              aggregation has  an adaptive value.  To meet the first goal, we will obtain a
              more  quantitative description of aggregate formation in liquid media, 
              characterize different modes of pattern formation in soft agar,  including
              migrating slugs, map gradients of aspartate, and attempt  to construct suitable
              mathematical models.  More broadly, we hope  to learn how large numbers of
              identical cells are able to come  together in response to chemoattractants to
              form multicellular  bodies and symmetrical patterns.  This is a cross-field
              endeavor  that links sensory transduction responses to stress and secretion  of
              signal molecules to the problem of biological self-organization.   It does so
              with a model system readily amenable to genetic and  biochemical manipulation. 
              %%%  Bacteria are the simplest free-living organisms.  Species that are  well
              understood include Escherichia coli, that lives in your gut,  and Salmonella
              typhimurium, that causes food poisoning.  Both cell  types are motile and can
              change the way they swim in response t o  changes in concentration of certain
              chemicals.  We have found  conditions under which the cells excrete chemical
              attractants (the  amino acids aspartate and glutamate).  As a result, the cells
              swim  toward one another and aggregate.  When cells are grown on a gel-  like
              medium (agar), these aggregates form a variety of remarkable  geometric
              patterns, which change depending upon the amount of  available nutrient.  If
              the nutrient concentration is high enough,  the aggregates behave like
              multicellular organisms, moving over the  surface of the agar and consuming one
              another.  Can we understand  this biological self-organization in molecular
              detail?  The answer  is yes, because we a dealing with a model system made of
              cells  readily amenable to genetic biochemical manipulation.  This work  links
              several areas of basic biology of current interests,  including motile
              behavior, metabolism, response to stress, self-  organization and pattern
              formation.  ***
