Title       : Determination of the Lid Residues Critical for Catalysis by Cholestrol Oxidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1995 
File        : a9405394

Award Number: 9405394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicole S. Sampson nicole.sampson@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9162,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Sampson  9405394  An intriguing problem of interfacial catalysis is exemplified
              by  the enzyme cholesterol oxidase.  This water soluble enzyme extracts 
              cholesterol out of the lipid membrane bilayer, with a net movement  of
              approximately 10A, into a deep active site pocket.  The  substrate is oxidized
              and isomerized, and the resulting ketone is  returned to the lipid bilayer. 
              There is no obvious pathway,  however; for the substrate to reach the active
              site.  Examination  of the X-ray crystal structure reveals an active site that
              is 11A  long (suitable for binding cholesterol), adjacent to the FAD  cofactor,
              and closed off from solvent by two surface loops (5 and  20 residues long). 
              (The dehydroisoandrosterone bound structure  reveals a 1-2 A movement in one of
              the loops to accommodate the  steroid in the binding site; cholesterol
              presumably causes a larger  rearrangement with its C-17 tail.)  It is
              postulated that these two  loops must open to expose the hydrophobic active
              site to the  substrate once the oxidase has diffused to the lipid membrane 
              surface.  The questions that will be addressed are:  (1) what is  the mechanism
              of the oxidative process and is it the rate-limiting  step in the enzymatic
              reaction?  (2) if we substitute side-chains  of the surface loops with alanine
              by site-directed mutagenesis,  what happens to the ability of the enzyme to
              sequester substrates  and intermediates and to catalyze their transformation? 
              The  consequences of the alanine-substitution mutations on the following 
              properties will be investigated:  (i) the catalytic rate and on the 
              rate-limiting step, using kinetic isotope effects.  (ii) the  oxidative
              process, by studying the effects of (a) deazaFAD  reconstitution (b)
              cyclopropyl radical traps (c) mutagenizing the  putative general base.  (iii)
              the affinity for and the turnover of  hydroxysteroids with various alkyl C-17
              tails.  All of these  experiments will lead to a model for binding and
              catalysis at the  two-dimensional lipid interface.  This model  will be
              relevant to  understanding the mode of action of other steroid binding proteins
               and enzymes, for example, the enzymes required for the biosynthesis  of
              steroids and proteins involved in sterol transport.   Furthermore, cholesterol
              oxidase is used extensively in clinical  applications for the determination of
              serum cholesterol levels.   Understanding how the structure effects catalysis
              will result in  the design of a cholesterol oxidase more suitable for 
              immobilization and clinical assay purposes.  How mechanical  conformational
              changes in proteins effects binding and catalysis  will be better understood as
              a result of the proposed research.   The capability to alter and modify enzyme
              function for a specific  purpose is still in the infant phases of development,
              and a set of  general rules for creating structure and function is only
              beginning  to emerge from the wide range of observations that have been made.  
              It is with the type of detailed study outlined in this proposal  that these
              rules will become more apparent.  %%%   Arteriosclerosis is a widespread
              disease amongst the American  population.  This coronary disease is partly a
              result of high  levels of cholesterol in the blood.  One way to reduce the 
              incidence of this disease is to monitor the blood cholesterol  levels of
              individuals and to prescribe measures to reduce  cholesterol levels for those
              with unhealthy levels of cholesterol.   Our research will lead to the
              development of more facile and  inexpensive tests of blood cholesterol levels,
              that will lead to  easier prescription of preventative measures.  The goal of
              the  proposed research is to study how the structure of the protein  catalyst,
              cholesterol oxidase, relates to function.  From the  structural information
              that is available, it is not clear how the  substrate, cholesterol, binds to
              the catalyst or how it is  released.  It has been proposed that two fragments
              of the catalyst  are essential for binding and release of cholesterol.  We will
               modify the structure of t hese fragments using molecular biological 
              techniques.  The modifications affect binding and release of  cholesterol, use
              assays of serum cholesterol levels.  In addition,  this study will lead to
              basic insight into the mechanisms of  steroid (for example, cholesterol)
              transformation and transport in  the body.  It may be possible in the long term
              to develop new  biomaterials using information obtained from this type of
              study.   The interaction of the protein with the lipid interface is not well 
              understood.  Two dimensional lipid interfaces may be constructed  with novel
              proteins attached to them which will allow the  development of biosensors for
              cholesterol or other steroids.  These  biomaterials may be more stable and less
              susceptible to biological  degradation than some materials currently available.
               ***
