Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human Disturbance and Site Factors Influencing
               Spatial Patterns of Forest Regeneration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1994     
File        : a9405356

Award Number: 9405356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall J. Schaetzl schaetzl@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9405356  SCHAETZL       Studies by geographers, ecologists, and other scientists
              of  the complex dynamics of human-environmental interaction have  tended to
              focus on the initial disturbance of natural systems,  but increasing attention
              now is being given to understanding how  the processes through which human
              activities and natural  processes relate during subsequent periods.  The
              regeneration of  forest areas that have been cleared is one topic for which
              these  complex interactions are especially apparent.  This doctoral 
              dissertation research project will compare patterns of forest  regeneration in
              the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, where dense  forests were cleared by logging
              and fires in the late 19th  Century.  Some of these areas have experienced
              active  regeneration, while others remain "stump prairies" that  essentially
              are devoid of trees.  The project will focus both on  the factors that have
              influenced this differential regeneration  and on the impacts of vegetative
              patterns on current soil-  development processes.  Following identification of
              patterns of  forest composition before clearance through examination of 
              General Land Office survey records, contemporary stands of  homogeneous
              composition will be mapped using aerial photography.  Field observations will
              be made in a sample of sites of forest  composition, soil texture, soil
              fertility, and soil horizon  development.  These data will be analyzed along
              with  microclimatic data and information from historical sources to  identify
              the determine how various natural and human factors  influenced regeneration
              processes in different sites.  Analyses  of relationships between vegetative
              patterns and soil-development  processes will be undertaken through
              observations of the movement  of selected nutrients through the soil in
              different locations.       This project will provide valuable information about
              the  importance of specific natural and human factors in the ongoing  dynamics
              of change in forested regions, and it will address  import ant questions
              regarding processes that alter the  composition and quality of soils.  As a
              doctoral dissertation  improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable  a promising student to establish a strong independent research 
              career.
