Title       : Characterization of Arabidopsis Mutants Altered in Fucose- Containing Cell Wall
               Polysaccharides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9405739

Award Number: 9405739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolf-Dieter D. Reiter wdreiter@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405739  Reiter       In an effort to further understand the synthesis, 
              structure and function of the plant cell wall, a direct  biochemical screening
              procedure has been used to isolate  mutants of Arabidopsis with alterations in
              their cell wall  polysaccharide composition.  Three different loci have been 
              identified that either lead to the complete absence of L-  fucose in cell wall
              material (mur1) or to an approximately  50% reduction in the amount of this
              monosaccharide (lines  mur2 and mur3).  To fully exploit the usefulness of
              these mutant lines, it is  necessary to understand the biochemical or
              regulatory  lesions leading to the mutant phenotypes, and to get access  to the
              affected genes.  The proposed research will use  biochemical tools to define
              the changes leading to the  observed alterations in cell wall composition. 
              Experiments  will be carried out to determine whether the mutant lines  show
              defects in precursor availability, or whether they are  deficient in some
              aspects of glycosyl transfer.  These  questions will be addressed by
              quantifying the amount of GDP-  fucose (the substrate for fucosyltransferase)
              and by  determining structural changes in fucose containing cell  wall
              polysaccharides.  The studies will be complemented by  assaying
              fucosyltransferase activities , and the activity of  enzymes in  the de novo
              synthesis of GDP-L-fucose.  All selected mutations will be mapped relative to
              molecular  markers as a prerequisite to get access to the affected  genes by
              map-based procedures.  The mur1 mutation appears to  be particularly amenable
              to genetic analysis because a large  number of independent alleles is already
              available, and an  easy immunological screening procedure can be used to 
              construct a genetic map of high resolution.  Accordingly,  attempts will be
              made to clone the MUR1 gene either from  tagged libraries or by map -based
              procedures.  The  availability of this gene would allow some insights into the 
              regulation of sugar nucleotide interconversion pathways in  hi gher plants, and
              permit the modification of cell wall  composition in other plants including
              economically important  species.  %%%    The cell walls of higher plants play
              pivotal roles during  plant growth and development, and determine the physical 
              properties of all parts of the plant.  Examples include the  softness of
              fruits, the strength of textile fibers, the  digestibility of forage, and the
              processing characteristics  of wood during paper production.  Furthermore,
              plant cell  walls present the interface between the plants and their 
              environment and play important roles in the defense of  plants against pests. 
              Finally, plant cell wall material  accounts for most of the newly synthesized
              terrestrial  biomass, making it the most important renewable source of  reduced
              carbon, which can be used as raw material for the  chemical industry and for
              fuel production.  Accordingly, it  is highly desirable to understand the
              mechanism by which  plant cell wall material is synthesized, and to get access 
              to the genes controlling the properties of plant cell wall  material.  This
              will ultimately open up opportunities to use  tools of biotechnology to modify
              plant cell walls in ways  that are desirable from an economically and/or
              ecological  point of view.    ***
