Title       : Biochemistry and Regulation of Daunomycin Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1997    
File        : a9405730

Award Number: 9405730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John N. Reeve   (Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Strohl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9169,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405730  Strohl  Research is aimed at analyzing the structure and function of 
              daunomycin biosynthesis polyketide synthase related genes and the  enzymes of
              the daunomycin biosynthesis polyketide synthase complex.   Daunomyucin is
              synthesized by several different species of  Streptomyces.  In studies, we
              found that the structure of the  daunomycin polyketide synthase (DPS) gene
              cluster of Streptomyces  sp. C5 contains differences from previously sequenced
              Type II  polyketide gene clusters.  Unique features of this st. C5 DPS gene 
              cluster include the presence of a third open reading frame directly  downstream
              of the polyketide synthase gene, an additional gene  encoding a putative
              acytransferase, and the absence of the acyl  carrier protein gene downstream
              from the other polyketide synthase  genes.  Instead, in the C5 DPS gene
              cluster, there is an acyl  carrier protein gene "upstream" from the polyketide
              synthase genes.   In this work, we will determine the DNA sequence between the
              acyl  carrier protein  and daunomycin polyketide synthase genes and  analyze
              its function by complementation of mutants blocked in the  early stages of
              daunomycin biosynthesis.  We will examine the  structure of DPS using
              antibodies against the putative enzyme  components to determine if DPS contains
              a third subunit suggested  by the sequence data.  We also will probe
              protein-protein  interactions between polyketide synthases and other daunomycin
               biosynthesis proteins using the two-hybrid genetic system as well  as by
              ordinary methods of co-elution by gel filtration  chromatography,
              co-immunoprecipitation, and chemical crosslinking.   Finally, we will work to
              isolate and characterize the putative  acyltransferase encoded by the gene
              associated with the DPS gene  cluster.  Our studies will provide new insights
              into structure and  functional differences between DPS and Type II polyketide 
              antibiotic synthases.  Data from these studies will aid our  understanding
              about the enzymology of secondary metabolite  biosynthesi s, provide rationale
              for tailoring pathways for  formation of novel hybrid secondary metabolites,
              and contribute to  understanding the physiological and molecular regulation of 
              antibiotic biosynthesis.  %%%  Daunomycin is used as a chemotherapeutic agent. 
              We have been  studying the biochemistry of its formation in Streptomyces, a
              type  of bacterium, for the purpose of getting the microbe to make more  of the
              compound or to make more potent analogues of it.  Recently  we isolated a
              fragment of DNA that contains more than thirty genes  involved in the formation
              of the compound.  Our goals are to  analyze this DNA fragment further, to
              examine the structure-  function of enzymes encoded by the DNA for daunomycin
              production,  and test the ability of these enzymes to form clusters involving 
              protein-protein interactions.  Our studies will help predict how  new molecules
              can be made through cell engineering.  ***
