Title       : "Molecular Characterization of the Additional Components of MPF Activity"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9405699

Award Number: 9405699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian Kuang jkuang@notes.mdacc.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas MD Anderson Ctr
	      1515 Holcombe, Box 202
	      Houston, TX  77030    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405699  Kuang       One of the central problems in cell biology is the  control
              mechanism regulating the initiation of mitosis and  meiosis (M phase) during
              the cell cycle.  Maturation  promoting factor (MPF), which is an M
              phase-specific  activity functionally defined by its ability to induce  Xenopus
              oocyte maturation (meiotic division), is  hypothesized to be the mitotic
              inducer in all eukaryotic  cells.  Although currently MPF activity is
              attributed solely  to the p34cdc2 kinase/cyclin B complex, this proposal has 
              provided evidence for the working hypothesis that MPF  activity is due to an
              autocatalytic system consisting of  p34cdc2/cyclin B, and at least three
              distinct proteins  recognized by the anti-phosphoepitope antibody MPM-2, and 
              the kinase(s) that phosphorylate these MPM-2 antigens.  The  three MPM-2
              antigens with MPF activity include the  identified activator of cdc2 kinase,
              cdc25, and two  unidentified activators of cdc2 kinase, designated MPF-QE1  and
              MPF-QE2.  The kinase(s) that phosphorylate these three  MPM-2 antigens are in
              turn activated by p34cdc2/cyclin B.  To examine this hypothesis, the proposed
              research is aimed  at the purification and molecular cloning of MPF-QE1, MPF- 
              QE2 and the kinase that phosphorylates the MPM-2 epitope on  them. 
              Availability of their cDNA clone will facilitate the  generation of the
              purified proteins and antibodies against  them.  These reagents will allow the
              characterization of  their respective contribution in the activation of cdc2 
              kinase and M-phase induction.  It is likely that information  generated from
              the molecular characterization of the  additional components of MPF activity
              will significantly  facilitate our understanding of the regulation of M-phase 
              induction during the eukaryotic cell cycle.  %%%  This proposal concerns the
              study of the process called cell  cycle, by which all cells proliferate.  Cell
              proliferation  under normal conditions gives rise to the multitude of cells 
              that living organisms are composed of and allows  for their  growth and
              regeneration.  Conversely, uncontrolled cell  proliferation often results in
              disorders such as cancer.  Thus the control of cell cycle is one of the most 
              fundamental problems in biology.  This proposal addresses  the control of cell
              cycle, the molecular mechanism that  regulates the initiation of mitosis.  The
              driving hypothesis  of the proposal is that MPF is a multicomponent system that
               plays the role of the "decision committee" for the  initiation of mitosis. 
              The ultimate goal of the proposal is  to identify all important components of
              this  process and to  determine their interaction in the cell cycle process. 
              ***
