Title       : Testing Alternative Hypotheses for Patterns of Tooth Breakage in Carnivores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1994      
File        : a9405916

Award Number: 9405916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Blaire Van Valkenburgh bvanval@biology.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9405916  van Valkenburgh         The complete or partial loss of an important
              tooth,  such as a canine, would seem a serious injury for a  predator. Severely
              blunted canine teeth are inferior weapons  for both killing and threat
              purposes, and broken cheek teeth  are poor tolls for  slicing meat and crushing
              bone. However,  recent surveys of tooth fracture incidence in several living 
              species of large carnivores have revealed that breakage  occurs regularly, and
              that canine teeth are among the most  likely to break. Furthermore, a parallel
              study of tooth  breakage in North American predators of the Pleistocene  Rancho
              La brea tar pits documented very high numbers of  broken teeth in four large
              species: the dire wolf,  sabertooth cat, American lion and coyote. Tooth
              fracture  frequencies were three to five times that observed for  modern
              species. Based on preliminary data, it was argued  that teeth are more likely
              to break when animals eat bone,  and that bone-eating is more common when
              animals are hungry  and prey is difficult to acquire. Thus, it was hypothesized
               that the four Pleistocene species ate bone more often and  consumed the
              carcasses of their prey more fully than do  modern large carnivores. This
              greater bone consumption was  likely due to greater competition among these
              Pleistocene  animals than we observe at present. Both the species  diversity 
              and probably the population densities of large  predators were greater during
              the late Pleistocene than at  present, intensifying the levels of competition
              among them.       Although increased bone eating seems a likely cause of  the
              greater numbers of broken teeth in the fossil animals,  it is not the only
              possible explanation. Others include  larger prey size, different killing
              behaviors, or larger  predator size. It is the intent of this proposal to
              improve  our understanding of the causes of tooth fracture in mammals  in
              general , and carnivorans (members of the mammalian order  Carnivora), in
              particular. Using established museum in  gen eral, and collections, tooth
              breakage will be assessed in  47 species of the order Carnivora ( e.g.,
              weasels, racoons,  cats, dogs, hyenas, bears) that vary widely in diet, prey 
              size, and body mass. On average, 60 skulls or more than 1000  teeth will be
              examined for each species. The association  between tooth breakage incidence
              and five factors (aspects  of feeding behavior such as prey size, how often
              they hunt,  amount of bone consumed) will be explored with statistics.  In
              addition, eleven species, including the coyote, gray  wolf, and puma, will be
              used for a study of tooth fracture  incidence within species across their
              geographic range. All  eleven were chosen because preliminary data indicate
              that  different populations within each species  eat different  amounts of bone
              or meat and this dietary variation might  affect the number of teeth broken in
              life. The study of  modern species will be accompanied by a study of tooth 
              breakage in predators from seven Pleistocene fossil  deposits, four Old World
              and three New World. These fossil  sites will be used to test whether the high
              frequencies of  tooth breakage in the four predators of Rancho La Brea are 
              typical of large predators elsewhere during the Pleistocene.  The proposed
              study is the first large-scale survey of the  frequency of dental injury in any
              mammalian order. It will  amass a large data base on rates of  tooth wear and
              tooth  breakage for a number of species that vary greatly in body  size and
              food habits. The study is significant because it  will provide: 10 data on
              naturally occurring rates of  injury; 2) a new perspective on tooth function
              and  evolution; 3) new tools for the analysis of past  communities.
