Title       : DNA Triplexes and Replication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9405794

Award Number: 9405794
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325708             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergei M. Mirkin mirkin@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Mirkin  This project focuses on the role of DNA triplexes in DNA 
              replication. We will study homopurine-homopyrimidine sequences with  varying
              extents of mirror symmetry that form intramolecular H-DNA  triplexes in vitro.
              We have recently shown that these sequences  cause purified DNA polymerase to
              terminate in double- or  single-stranded DNA templates. Termination sites
              precisely match  triplex junctions defined by chemical probing. Therefore, we 
              suggest that the formation of triplexes prior or during DNA  polymerization is
              responsible for premature termination of DNA  synthesis. We have also found
              that certain orientations and  positions of these sequences severely affect the
              maintenance of  bacterial plasmids in vivo. The specific aim of this project is
              to  prove that the formation of triplexes inhibits DNA replication both  in
              vitro and in vivo. We will study the influence of DNA triplexes  on DNA
              synthesis in the reconstituted replication system of  bacteriophage T7 and
              analyze the effects of accessory replication  proteins, including
              single-stranded DNA-binding protein and  helicase-primase, on triplex-caused
              termination. We will  characterize the formation of H-like DNA structures in
              E.coli cells  by chemical modification of intracellular DNA followed by
              sequence  level detection of modified bases using Maxam-Gilbert sequencing.  We
              will measure the repression caused by cloned triplex-forming DNA  sequences of
              the replication of the pBluescript plasmid in E.coli   cells by assaying the
              rate of replication by the incorporation of  radiolabeled precursors into DNA.
              We will then visualize the fine  pattern of replication fork movement by
              two-dimensional gel  electrophoresis. The long term goal of this work is to
              reveal the  mechanisms of the inhibitory effect of triplexes on DNA synthesis 
              in vitro and to understand the role of these structures in the  regulation of
              DNA replication in vivo.  %%%  DNA usually exists as a matched pair of long
              molecules in a  structure called double- stranded or duplex DNA. However,
              particular  DNA segments may form an unusual structure where three, rather than
               two, DNA strands interact with each other. This structure is called  triplex
              DNA. We have found that the purified cellular machinery  necessary to duplicate
              DNA can not efficiently pass through triplex  structures within DNA, leading to
              a block replication. Such an  effect could be used to selectively inhibit the
              multiplication of  particular DNAs such as bacteria or viruses. This aims to
              elucidate  the inhibitory effects of triplexes on DNA replication, both in 
              test tubes and in living cells.  ***
