Title       : Regulation of Skeletal Myofiber Type Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1996     
File        : a9405895

Award Number: 9405895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Wade   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research examines the molecular mechanisms by  which coordinate
              gene activation is regulated during the  embryonic formation, maturation, and
              diversification of  mammalian skeletal muscle tissue.  In recent years, 
              tremendous progress has been made towards understanding the  molecular
              mechanisms that activate muscle-specific genes as  committed myoblasts undergo
              the transition to terminally  differentiated myotubes.  A fundamental, but much
              less well  defined, aspect of myogenesis is the maturation of muscle  cells
              into specific types of myofibers.  During the past NSF  support period, the PI
              characterized the gene encoding the  human slow-twitch isoform of troponin I
              (TnIs) and has shown  that multiple cis-acting components are involved in the
              cell  type-expression of the TnIs promoter; an upstream muscle-  specific
              enhancer, a second muscle-specific enhancer within  intron 1, and a
              muscle-specific minimal promoter.  In  conjunction with collaborators, the PI
              demonstrated that a  TnIs promoter/CAT construct exhibits appropriate muscle 
              fiber type-specific expression in transgenic mice, but  preliminary results
              have indicated that the transgene (which  lacks the intron enhancer) is
              aberrantly regulated during  embryogenesis.  The hypothesis to be tested is
              that gene  regulation during early and late stages of muscle  development
              requires separate regulatory elements which bind  different combinations of
              trans-acting factors; the upstream  elements may play a major role in the
              innervation dependent  restriction of TnIs gene expression to slow twitch
              muscle  fibers and the downstream sequences, such as the intron 1  enhancer,
              may play a major role in earlier stages of  myofiber formation.  In order to
              map the upstream sequences  conferring fiber type-specific gene expression, the
              PI  established an in vivo muscle injection assay with which to  study
              differential gene expression in fast versus slow  twitch muscles of adult rats.
               This system enables the PI  the unique opportunity to un derstand the
              molecular  mechanisms by which fiber type specificity is regulated.  The PI
              will use the in vivo injection assay to delineate cis-  acting components
              involved in the fiber type-specific  expression of the TnIs gene.  Once such
              cis-elements are  narrowly defined in vitro mutagenesis studies will be used 
              to monitor the consequences of modifying these fiber-  specific regulatory
              elements.  Additional lines of  transgenic mice will be produced in order to
              study the role  of these sequence elements in the regulation of gene 
              expression during muscle development and maturation.  The  expression of
              transgene constructs in embryonic and adult  mice will be monitored by reporter
              gene activity assays  along with Northern blot, immunohistochemical, and in
              situ  hybridization analyses.  The following questions will then  be addressed:
               1)  What are the cis-acting sequences and  trans-acting factors that restrict
              TnIs gene expression to  slow-twitch fibers in adult skeletal muscle, and how
              might  these be related to the components governing muscle-specific  expression
              in vitro?  2)  How do "muscle-specific" and  "fiber-specific" regulatory
              elements contribute to the  spatial and temporal control of gene expression
              during  muscle development and maturation in vivo?  3)  Do the  upstream and
              intron enhancers mediate separate aspects of  TnIs gene regulation in primary
              versus mature myofibers?
