Title       : Negative Regulation and function of the aac(2')-Ia gene in P. stuartii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1998     
File        : a9405882

Award Number: 9405882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368823             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Rather pxr17@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405882  Rather  Providencia stuartii is a gram negative member of the
              Enterobacteriacea and closely related to the Proteus spp. It contains a
              chromosomal 2'-N-acetyltransferase gene  aac(2')-la  that was originally
              identified because overexpression resulted in high-level resistance to the
              aminoglycoside class of antibiotics.  Subsequent studies have demonstrated that
              aac(2')-la is universally present in Providencia stuartii and may encode an
              enzyme that acetylates peptidoglycan, a modification proposed to control the
              activity of autolysins.  The ability of the AAC(2')-la enzyme to inactivate
              aminoglycosides by acetylation may occur due to the structural similarities
              between peptidoglycan and the aminoglycosides.   Wild-type P. stuartii strains
              express the aac(2')-la gene at low levels and do not exhibit aminoglycoside
              resistance.  However, spontaneous mutants with increased aac(2')-la expression
              can be selected on media containing aminoglycosides and occur at frequencies
              between 10-6 and 10-7.  Using transposon (mini-Tn5Cm) mutagenesis, insertional
              mutations have been isolated in three distinct trans acting loci, aarA, aarC,
              and aarD, which result in high-level aac(2')-la expression.  Mutations in these
              loci also result in dramatic changes in cell morphology, indicating that
              aac(2')-la expression is also negatively regulated by cell to cell signaling
              via a diffusible factor termed AR-factor.  AR-factor accumulation leads to
              decreased levels of aac(2')-la expression.  Cells defective in a locus
              designated aarE, fail to produce AR-factor and exhibit high level aac(2')-la
              expression and a spherical cell morphology instead of the wild-type rod shape. 
              The objective of this research is to characterize the complex negative
              regulatory mechanisms controlling aac(2')-la expression, and to begin
              addressing the cellular function of this gene in P. stuartii.  This will
              involve isolation and sequence analysis of the aarA, aarC, aarD, and aarE
              genes.  The role of these genes in aac(2') la regulation will be  addressed by
              determining if they act independently, or in a cascade-like manner.  Dependence
              pathways for expression of the aarA, C, D, and E genes will be examined by
              probes to these genes in Northern blots using RNA prepared form wild-type and
              aar A, C, D, and E mutants.  The role of AR-factor in expression of these
              regulatory genes will also be examined by RNA analysis, as will the effect of
              AR-factor on aac(2')-la transcription.  To determine if AR-factor regulates
              additional genes, random transcriptional fusions to lacZ will be generated
              using mini-Tn5 Km lacZ and screened for induction or repression by AR-factor. 
              Finally, the role of aac(2')-la in P. stuartii will be addressed by a
              constructing a P. stuartii strain with the aac(2') deleted and/or constructing
              a strain with the chromosomal aac(2')-la gene under inducible control.  These
              strains will allow us to directly address the proposed role of aac(2')-la in
              peptidoglycan acetylation and demonstrate if aac(2')-la overexpression is
              sufficient to change the morphology of P. stuartii.  %%%  This research may
              illuminate unsuspected areas of cell growth and development.  ***
