Title       : Production and Regulation of Organelle Transport in Melanophores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9405763

Award Number: 9405763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378707             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leah T. Haimo leah.haimo@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9169,9181,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9405763  Haimo     The proposed studies seek to elucidate the mechanism by 
              which cells control the direction of movement of organelles  along
              microtubules.  As a model system, pigment granule  transport in melanophores
              from Tilapia mossambica and  Fundulus heteroclitus will be examined.  The cells
               cyclically aggregate and disperse pigment to and from the  cell center.  
              Dispersion is mediated by kinesin and  requires protein phosphorylation by cAMP
              dependent protein  kinase, while aggregation is mediated by dynein and requires
               protein dephosphorylation by calcineurin.  The current  studies seek to
              determine if the regulatory control is  exerted on dynein, on kinesin, or on
              both motors.  Studies  will be undertaken to localize the motors during each 
              direction of transport and to determine if the ability of  either motor to
              interact with pigment granules or  microtubules differs when obtained from
              cells undergoing  opposite directions of transport.  During pigment granule 
              dispersion, the granules saltate, making transient  retrograde excursions
              during a process of overall  anterograde movements.  Phosphatase activity will
              be  inhibited in melanophores undergoing dispersion to determine  if saltations
              require transient dephosphorylation events. In  addition, dynein activity will
              be inhibited in aggregated  cells or kinesin activity will be inhibited in
              dispersed  cells to determine if these inhibitions result in  spontaneous
              dispersion or aggregations.  The results of  these studies should reveal if it
              is dynein or kinesin that  is regulated.  A protein of 70 kD is specifically 
              phosphorylated during dispersion and dephosphorylated during  aggregation. 
              This protein is immunoprecipitated with  antibody to kinesin heavy chain. 
              Studies will be undertaken  to identify this protein and elucidate how its 
              phosphorylation state might regulate pigment transport.   %%%  The regulation
              of skin coloration in fish is due to the  distribution of pigment granules in
              certain skin cells  called melanophores .  When these granules are tightly 
              aggregated near the center of the cell, the fish appears  light.  When the
              granules are dispersed throughout the cell,  the fish appears dark.  When
              stimulated (e.g., by changes in  ambient light conditions, fright, or other
              causes), the fish  will change its coloration appropriately.  The mechanism 
              whereby these subcellular pigment granules move inside the  cell involves
              cellular motor proteins which transport the  granules along stationary tracks,
              or cytoskeletal  structures.  The cytoskeletal structures are  called 
              microtubules, and radiate out into the cytoplasm from a  central location in
              the cell called the microtubule  organizing center.   The
              microtubule-associated cellular  motor proteins are called kinesin and dynein. 
               The goal of  this project is to elucidate exactly how the pigment  granules
              become associated with the motor proteins, and how  the directionality of the
              movement is controlled by the  cell.  The significance of the project extends
              well beyond  simply understanding how fish change color, since 
              microtubule-mediated intracellular motility is key to many  critical cellular
              functions, including cellular division  (movement of chromosomes during
              mitosis), nerve cell  function (movement of synaptic vesicles bearing 
              neurotransmitters from their site of synthesis to their site  of release from
              the neuron), and ciliary and flagellar  beating (sliding of microtubules to
              produce waves of motion  necessary for swimming of sperm and protozoans and for
              mucus  movement along the lining of the respiratory tract).  Thus, 
              understanding the mechanisms which regulate the activity of  motor proteins is
              a cutting edge problem in cell biology.  Furthermore, since the cellular
              machinery is so very small  (the diameters of cytoskeletal elements are in the
              nanometer  range), a complete understanding of how these  chemomechanical
              transducers work can provide a valuable  paradigm for nanofabrication
              engineering of "smart"  materials.  ***
