Title       : GRGC: Coll Resc: Climatic & Environmental Responses of the Western Equatorial
               Pacific to Long- and Short-Term Global Warming in the Late Paleocene and Early
               Eocene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1994    
File        : a9405784

Award Number: 9405784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55312              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Bralower bralower@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1571,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9405784   Bralower       This project is designed to test several hypotheses
              regarding  climate dynamics of, and marine biotic response to, gradual and 
              abrupt global warming in the late Paleocene and early Eocene (ie.,  across the
              Paleocene/Eocene (P/E) boundary).  We have collected  closely spaced sediment
              samples from across this boundary at two  holes of site 865, atop Allison Guyot
              in the western equatorial  Pacific Ocean.  Our primary objectives are to
              establish late  Paleocene through middle Eocene changes in tropical sea surface
               temperature and thermocline structure, vertical carbon isotope  distributions,
              net productivity, bottom water redox conditions (as  recorded by benthic
              foraminifera), and the effect of these changes  on micro-organism evolution. 
              To this end, we will reconstruct at  high resolution: 1) carbon and oxygen
              isotope records from several  species of planktonic (surface and deep dwelling)
              and benthic  foraminifera, 2) quantitative planktonic and benthic foraminiferal
               assemblage records, 3) quantitative nannofossil assemblage records,  and 4) an
              integrated chemobiostratigraphic record.  Our overall  intent is to develop a
              better understanding of the environmental  dynamics of the tropical oceans
              during periods of rapid global  warming.  Our comprehensive, multi-parameter
              data set will be  integrated in existing data sets from mid and high latitudes,
               alleviate the lack of data from the tropical Pacific, and help  define    the
              boundary conditions for global climate  reconstructions and modeling.  We will
              investigate  the biological  and chemical consequences of the largest
              disturbance of the global  carbon cycle in the last 90 million years,   and its
              affect on  tropical climate.  By defining the physical, chemical, and 
              biological responses of the tropical ocean to the rapid global  warming at the
              Paleocene/Eocene boundary, we can test hypotheses  relating to the stability of
              tropical SST, and address the paradox  in modeling early Eocene climate: warm
              high latitudes  (requiring  high heat transport from the low to the high
              latitudes), at low  temperature gradients and low overall wind speeds (thus no 
              mechanism for the high heat transport).
