Title       : Mechanistic enzymology of the oxidation of thiosulfate to sulfate by a
               multienzyme complex form Thiobacillus versutus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1994      
File        : a9405690

Award Number: 9405690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei-ping Lu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Lu  9405690  One of the major reduced inorganic sulfur compounds present in 
              nature, thiosulfate is used by thiobacilli and other  chemolithotrophic
              sulfur-oxidizing bacteria as energy source for  growth and for CO2
              incorporation into cell material.  The  activities of these bacteria have long
              been recognized to play a  vital role in the oxidative phase of the global
              sulfur cycle and  for this reason have also been used in industry to breakdown 
              sulfide minerals.  Thiosulfate utilization occurs via a  thiosulfate-oxidizing
              multienzyme complex (TOMC) which catalyzes  complete oxidation of thiosulfate
              to sulfate with a c-type  cytochrome and water.  TOMC consists of four
              essential components:  components A and B, cyt c551, and cyt c552.5.  TOMC is
              the first  purified enzyme system involved in the oxidation of reduced 
              inorganic sulfur (other than sulfite) to sulfate.  The objectives  of the
              present research are to: 1) determine the reaction pathway  and putative
              intermediate(s) formed in the oxidation reaction; 2)  determine the role(s) of
              components A and B; 3) characterize the  multiple hemes in the c-type
              components, and understand how  electrons derived from thiosulfate oxidation
              are transferred  through these hemes; and 4) determine the structure and
              function of  the manganese cluster in component B. A major outcome of the 
              research will be to determine the metabolic pathway for the  conversion of
              thiosulfate to sulfate.  The work is valuable to our  understanding of this
              unique mode of life in nature, and it will  contribute substantially to our
              knowledge about sulfur  biochemistry, microbial metabolism and evolution, and
              enzymology.  %%%  Bacteria such as thiobacilli utilize reduced inorganic sulfur
               compounds, such as sulfur, sulfide and thiosulfate, as their energy  source
              for growth.  These cells play an essential role in the  global sulfur cycle. 
              For practical purposes, the bacteria have  been used in industry to breakdown
              sulphide minerals in  microbioleaching processes to recover cop per, uranium,
              gold and  nickel. Significant progress has recently been made in our 
              understanding of the physiology and bioenergetics of sulfur  oxidation.  The
              thiosulfate-oxidizing multienzyme complex from  Thiobacillus versutus is the
              only purified and characterized enzyme  system to date, which catalyzes the
              complete oxidation of  thiosulfate to sulfate.  It provides a unique system to
              reveal the  enzymology of thiosulfate (sulfur) oxidation  This work is valuable
               to our understanding about this unusual mode of life.  It will  contribute to
              knowledge about sulfur biochemistry, microbial  metabolism and evolution, and
              enzymology.  The studies may help to  develop improved industrial methods for
              using sulfur-oxidizing  bacteria in large-scale bioleaching and desulfurization
              processes.  ***
