Title       : Structural Studies on Heme Containing Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1997     
File        : a9405218

Award Number: 9405218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Poulos poulos@UCI.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9187,BIOT,ENVI,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9405281  Poulos  The overall goal of this project is to further our
              understanding on  the mechanism of heme containing enzymes using protein 
              crystallography as our main tool. These enzymes carry out two   processes
              fundamental to all living systems. First, the heme group  activates either O2
              or H2O2 and stores the oxidizing equivalents of  the oxygen or peroxide in the
              active site. Second, the oxidizing   equivalents now stored at the heme active
              center are used to  oxidize other molecules. These other molecules can be
              another  redox protein or an organic molecule. Our goal is to compare  several
              crystal structures of different heme enzymes in order to  understand how these
              enzymes catalyze cleavage of the peroxide or  O2 O-O bond. Because the heme
              group and its activated  oxointermediates exhibit distinct spectral properties,
              it is  possible to correlate the crystal structure information with the 
              spectral data to obtain a deeper insight into the precise mechanism  of oxygen
              activation and the structure of the resulting activated  intermediate. The
              second part of the reaction involves oxidation of  substrate by the enzyme. If
              the substrate is another protein, the  problem becomes one of protein-protein
              recognition and long-range  electron transfer through proteins. Small molecule
              oxidation also  involves electron transfer from the substrate to the enzyme but
               in this case, we expect the enzyme to possess a more conventional  small
              molecule binding pocket which specifically recognizes the  substrate.
              Comparative crystal structure information is essential  to understand the
              diversity of reactions and substrates used by  various peroxidases and
              oxygenases.  %%%  Peroxidases and oxidases also are attracting increasing
              attention  by the biotechnology community. These enzymes are, in some cases, 
              able to oxidize toxic pollutants such as chlorinated biphenyls. One  of the
              more important advances in this area was our recent  structure determination of
              lignin peroxidases supported by NSF.  Lignin perox idase is secreted by certain
              fungi that are able to  degrade lignin, a complex aromatic polymer that
              provides the outer  coating around cellulose in woody plants. Lignin is the
              second most  abundant polymer on earth and presents a major problem in the
              paper  pulp industry since lignin degradation requires rather harsh  chemical
              treatments. There is considerable interest in developing  less harsh biological
              processes for lignin degradation. Moreover,  because of the unusual reactivity
              of lignin peroxidase, there is  optimism that this peroxidase can be utilized
              for the degradation  of toxic pollutants. Our structural work has provided the
              basis for  understanding how such reactions occur. Of particular importance 
              are recent developments in our ability to clone and overexpress  heme enzymes.
              This opens the way for using protein engineering to  alter the active sites of
              peroxidases and other heme enzymes in  order to optimize their use for
              degrading molecules of interest  such as toxic pollutants. The crystal
              structure data is essential  for such an undertaking. It also should be
              emphasized that over the  years, NSF has been the primary means of support for
              heme enzyme  crystallography.  The first two heme enzyme crystal structures 
              solved were cytochrome c peroxidase and cytochrome P450, both of  which were
              solved in our lab with support provided by NSF.  These  two structures alone
              have provided the basis for research in dozens  of other labs. and countless
              spin-off projects.  NSF also supported  solution of the lignin peroxidase
              structure.  Hence, it is not an  understatement to claim that NSF is directly
              responsible for a  majority of what we know today about heme enzyme structure
              and  function and it is very likely that there will be significant and 
              important practical applications of this work in the near future.   ***
