Title       : Allele-Specific Analysis of Imprinted Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1996     
File        : a9405373

Award Number: 9405373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Mann jmann@coh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beckman Res Inst Cty Hope
	      1500 E. Duarte Road
	      Duarte, CA  910103000    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9405373  The broad long-term objective is to elucidate the mechanism
              and  significance of the epigenetic phenomenon of genomic imprinting in 
              mammalian development. Genomic imprints effect differential expression of 
              certain genes according to parental origin, i.e., in the same cell, the  two
              alleles at one locus are expressed unequally. These genes are  important
              developmentally, as lethalities and developmental anomalies are  coincident
              with their abnormal expression. The specific aims are to (i)  develop a highly
              sensitive allele-specific expression assay for each of  the four known
              imprinted genes, (ii) utilize these assays to determine  the allele-specific
              expression pattern of imprinted genes throughout  pre-implantation and
              post-implantation development, and (iii) determine  the nature of the 'leaky'
              expression of imprinted alleles in ES cells;  such alleles have been shown to
              be completely silent in other situations.  The experimental design and methods
              to be employed, in accordance with  the specific aims, are: (i) Develop a
              Single Nucleotide Primer Extension,  SNuPE, assay for each of the four known
              imprinted genes so as to be able  to determine allele-specific expression of
              each. This assay is PCR-based,  and relies on a single known nucleotide
              difference in maternal versus  paternal transcripts. It can detect
              quantitatively the ratio of maternal  versus paternal RNA molecules to one part
              in a thousand in a small number  of cells. To find the necessary nucleotide
              differences, DNA from the  laboratory domesticus and feral castaneus subspecies
              will be sequenced  and compared. (ii) These two subspecies will be crossed to
              produce Fl  embryos, and the allele-specific SNuPE expression assays performed
              on  tissues microsurgically isolated from pre-implantation, early 
              post-implantation, and later stages of embryonic development. (iii) Fl ES  cell
              lines will be derived and differentiated in chimeras to determine if  the leaky
              expression is reversible in vivo. The degree of activity  of  specific alleles
              will be determined by the SNuPE assays.  %%%  Genes exist which display
              differential expression depending upon the  parental origin of the gene.  Such
              genes are identified as imprinted.   They are known to be important in
              organismal development in that  developmental anomalies and lethalities are
              coincident with their  abnormal expression but mechanisms for imprinting are
              not known.  This  work will expand our understanding of the significance and
              mechanism(s)  of the genetic phenomena of imprinting.  ***
