Title       : GRGC: Modeling and Validating Cretaceous Climate and Ocean Circulation Based on
               New Boundary Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9405737

Award Number: 9405737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Hay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,1571,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              19405737  Hay    It has been common practice to run an atmospheric (AGCM) or
              oceanic  (OGCM) general circulation model and search for results that might  be
              confirmed or rejected by geologic data.  AGCM output describes  average
              conditions over large areas, but the non-marine geologic  deposits providing
              the best record of climate were rarely laid down  under average conditions. 
              This mismatch between the model results  and the geologic data that might be
              used for their validation has  been a major problem in paleoclimate studies.  A
              new AGCM, GENESIS,  designed specifically for paleoclimate research, and a new
              method  for validating the results of a paleoclimate model, the Proxy 
              Formation Model (PFM), can be used together to make more realistic  simulations
              that can be validated by comparison with real data.  A  validated AGCM can then
              be used to drive  an OGCM to investigate  circulation of the ocean.    GENESIS
              began as a heavily modified version of CCM1 and differs  from it in treatment
              of water vapor transport, atmospheric  convection from the earth's surface,
              solar radiation related to  aerosols, cloud parameterization, vegetation, soil,
              snow and sea  ice.  Its ocean  is a slab, with heat capacity and ocean heat 
              transport included.  GENESIS has independent AGCM and surface  grids, allowing
              for much better representation of surface  paleogeographic, vegetation, and
              soil conditions.    The PFM is a quantitative link between climate model data
              and  geologic observations.  PFM's are being developed for sedimentary 
              deposits that form under known climatic conditions.  1) evaporites;  2)
              bauxites and laterites; 3) coal (peat).  The PFM prescribes  boundary
              conditions that must have existed at the location where  the deposits occur. 
              This additional "grid point" is inserted into  the climate model, and the
              calculated environmental parameters  (temperature, humidity, etc.) are compared
              with conditions required  for formation of the deposit.  Under  this proposal,
              we will  develop 4 additional    PFM's : 1) sand deserts; 2) coastal sea ice; 
              3) mountain glaciers; 4) ice sheets.    The climates of the Early and Late
              Cretaceous were different from  each other and both were different from Late
              Cenozoic climates.  In  the Early Cretaceous there was high-latitude sea ice,
              strong mid-  latitude  seasonality, and a tendency for the "Atlantic" to become
               anoxic.  In the Late Cretaceous there was no high-latitude ice,  less
              seasonality, and a more oxic ocean (with two brief notable  exceptions).  The
              differences were a response to changing boundary  conditions: 1) from isolation
              of the western Tethys-Atlantic-Indian  seaway from the eastern
              Tethys-Panthalassic Ocean during the Early  Cretaceous to more open connections
              in the Late Cretaceous: 2) rise  in the atmospheric content of CO2 from a lower
              level in the Early  Cretaceous to a high level in the Late Cretaceous: 3)
              increase in  poleward ocean heat transport form a low level  during the Early 
              Cretaceous to a high level in the Late Cretaceous: and 4) rise of  sea level to
              a mximum in the Late Cretaceous.     The paleogeography, paleoclimatology
              energy balance of the Earth in  the Cretaceous are well enough known to run
              AGCM's and subsequently  OGCM's that can be rigorously validated using PFM's
              based on  geologic data.
