Title       : Coordination of a Human Arm and a Robot Manipulator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9405276

Award Number: 9405276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuan F. Zheng Zheng.5@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Zheng  This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award.   The
              research studies coordination mechanisms for a manipulator to  work
              cooperatively with a human operator's arm.  By coordinating a  robot
              manipulator with the operator's arm, unstructured  environments can be
              approached through the intelligence of the  human operator, while the load of
              the object can be shared by the  manipulator and the human operator. A
              three-step approach is taken  to study the arm-manipulator coordination problem
              relative to  compliant motion, reflexive motion, and motion learning.  A 
              compliant motion approach is applied to the interaction of a robot  with a
              human operator in order to make the robot move in accordance  with motion of
              the human operator.  Reflexive motion is a new  mechanism to be developed in
              this research.  The purpose is for the  manipulator to respond appropriately to
              the intention of the human  operator when the operator applies a cueing force
              to the  manipulator via the object being cooperatively handled.  The result  is
              that the manipulator will move actively and the human operator  will not need
              not to apply continuous cueing forces to the  manipulator.  Another new
              mechanism being explored is motion  learning.  This allows a manipulator to
              learn a trajectory that  best coordinates with the human operator during the
              compliant and  reflexive motion stages.  As a result, when the  same
              manipulation  task is repeated, the manipulator can use the learned trajectory,
               further reducing the load on the human arm.  This research will  lead to a
              theoretical foundation for the development of human arm-  manipulator
              coordination technologies which could greatly extend  the range of robotic
              applications with benefit to manufacturing,  service, and construction
              industries.
