Title       : The Molecular Code for Cooperative Free Energy Transduction in Human Hemoglobin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9405492

Award Number: 9405492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary K. Ackers ackers@biochem.wust1.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jo Holt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405492  Ackers  Previous work under this grant achieved a breakthrough in this 
              problem by developing strategies that resolve the functional  energetics of
              hemoglobin tetramers in all ten states of hemesite  ligation, using non-oxygen
              ligands. This has opened the door to  obtalning previously-inaccessible
              knowledge regarding properties  of the intermediate species and their roles in
              the cooperative  mechanism. Work using the  2 analog cyanomet indicates that:
              (a)  the hemoglobin molecule acts as a three-state molecular switch to  control
              ligand affinity; (b) the intermediate state has a  quaternary T structure and
              has stored energy through  ligand-induced tertiary structure changes; (c) this
              free energy  of "tertiary constraint" pays for the early stage of 
              cooperativity prior to the quaternary T~R switch; (d) the T  structure can
              accommodate tertiary constraint in only one dimeric  half-molecule, leading to
              a Symmetry Rule for the quaternary  transition: T~R switching occurs when each
              dimeric halfmolecule  acquires ligated hemesites.  In current work, we are
              extending  these studies to mutant hemoglobins in order to map the  structural
              pathways of free energy transduction and to establish  the connections with
              oxygen binding. We shall use multiple  combinations of altered amino acid
              residues and ligated hemesites  to determine contrlbutions of local residue
              energies to the  quaternary T to R switch. Parallel studies will test the 
              correspondence between cyanomet ligation and oxygenation. This  research will
              use a combination of techniques, including  quantitative low temperature
              isoelectric focusing and high  precision binding of oxygen. The results from
              this research will  serve as a model forstudying "molecular codes" in other
              complex  regulatory protein assemblies.  %%%  The goal of this research program
              is to determine the molecular  mechanism of cooperative oxygenation in human
              hemoglobin. We are  attempting to decipher the rules and energetic driving
              forces  whereby the ten molecular for ms (each with a structurally-unique 
              combination of ligated and unligated heme sites) respond to the  interactions
              with heme-site ligands and with small regulatory  molecules including protons,
              chloride ions, and 2,3-  diphosphoglycerate.  ***
