Title       : Determinants of mating type in the oomycete, Phytophthora infestans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1996     
File        : a9405179

Award Number: 9405179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard S. Judelson howard.judelson@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1305,9109,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405179  Judelson  Loci determing the A1 and A2 mating types (sexual
              compatibility types) of the oomycete, Phytophthora infestans, will be
              genetically characterized and isolated by mapbased (positional) cloning
              techniques.  P. infestans is a destructive plant pathogen and a good
              experimental system within the oomycetes, an important but little-studied group
              of diploid lower eukaryotes that include many economically significant
              pathogens of plants and animals.  In preliminary studies, polymorphic DNA
              markers linked to the A1 and A2 loci were isolated and their pattern of
              segregation analyzed in three crosses.  Those results suggest that mating type
              is determined by single loci determining the A1 and A2 types.  The mating type
              regions segregate  in a novel pattern reminiscent of balanced lethals, as only
              two of the four possible genotypes are observed in viable progeny.  This
              non-Mendelian phenomenon may possibly address one of the complications of
              determining mating type in oomycete fungi, which are diploids, by eliminating
              ambiguous genotypes from progeny inheriting alleles from both parents.  Also,
              long-range restriction mapping using the DNA markers suggests that the region
              containing the mating type loci has been narrowed so far to a 90 kb region.  In
              the present study, after completing the genetic and physical characterization
              of the regions containing the mating type determinants, the mating type loci
              will be isolated by chromosome walking.  Complementation assays, using reliable
              transformation procedures that I have developed for P. infestans, will
              ultimately prove that the loci have been cloned.  In addition, genes regulated
              during mating will be isolated to enable the future dissection of the
              regulation of the mating process.  %%%  The subject of this project, the
              analysis of mating type in the fungus Phytophthora infestans, represents an
              opportunity to study an important aspect of the biology of the oomycetes.  The
              plant diseases caused by oomycetes are widespread, highly destructive, a nd
              very difficult to control.  Therefore, the importance of developing expertise
              in manipulating oomycetes can not be overstressed.  In the long term, these
              studies may have significant practical applications.  If the factors which
              control mating can be identified, it might be possible to control plant
              diseases caused by oomycetes by engineering plant defenses to respond to the
              mating hormones, or by stimulating the mating cycle which effectively turns off
              pathogenic growth in heterothallic species.  These studies may also lead to
              diagnostic markers for population studies necessary to assess strategies for
              controlling disease.  Studies in P. infestans will naturally lead to an
              understanding of other oomycetes as well.  ***
