Title       : Role of HMG-I(Y) Proteins in Chromatin Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1994    
File        : a9405332

Award Number: 9405332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond Reeves reevesr@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9405332  Members of the mammalian HMG-I(Y) family of "high mobility
              group"  (HMG) nonhistone chromatin proteins are of considerable current 
              interest because they appear to play important roles in the  chromosome
              structural changes occurring during the cell cycle and  also because they have
              recently been demonstrated to participate in  the transcriptional regulation of
              a number of inducible mammalian  genes in vivo.  The HMG-I(Y) proteins are
              distinguished from other  HMG proteins by their ability to specifically bind to
              stretches of  A-T rich DNA both in vitro and in vivo.  Available evidence 
              suggests two different, though not mutually exclusive, models of  how the
              HMG-I(Y) proteins might function in chromatin as gene  transcription regulatory
              proteins.  The first postulates a  nucleosome positioning or "phasing" role for
              HMG-I(Y) whereby  binding of the protein to A-T sequences establishes a
              "boundary"  that influences placement of adjacent nucleosomes in important 
              areas such as some gene promoter/enhancer regions.  The second  model proposes
              that by inducing bends in substrate DNA HMG-I(Y)  facilitates the binding of
              transcription factors to enhancer  sequences and also functions to bring
              together separated enhancer  regions so that they can form a multiprotein
              complex necessary for  transcription initiation.  The objectives of a one year
              research  project are to begin initial experiments to critically test certain 
              predictions of the first of these two models.  We will employ  carefully
              selected in vitro systems to quantitatively evaluate the  binding of HMG-I(Y)
              to reconstituted monomer and dinucleosomes of  defined DNA sequence and
              investigate whether these proteins can  alter nucleosome positioning/phasing in
              such systems.  In addition,  we will also initiate experiments employing a
              newly developed DNA  affinity cleaveage procedure to determine both the
              position and  orientation of HMG-I(Y) protein on free substrate DNAs and in 
              chromatin reconstitutes.  %%%  Members of the ma mmalian HMG-I(Y) family of
              "high mobility group"  (HMG) nonhistone chromatin proteins are of considerable
              current  interest because they appear to play important roles in the 
              chromosome structural changes occurring during the cell cycle and  also because
              they have recently been demonstrated to participate in  the transcriptional
              regulation of a number of inducible mammalian  genes in vivo.  The HMG-I(Y)
              proteins are distinguished from other  HMG proteins by their ability to
              specifically bind to stretches of  A-T rich DNA in vitro and in vivo. 
              Available evidence suggests two  different, though not mutually exclusive,
              models of how the HMG-  I(Y) proteins might function in chromatin as gene
              transcription  regulatory proteins.  The first postulates a nucleosome
              positioning  or "phasing" role for HMG-I(Y) whereby binding of the protein to
              A-  T sequences establishes a "boundary" that influences placement of  adjacent
              nucleosomes in important areas such as some gene  promoter/enhancer regions. 
              The second model proposes that by  inducing bends in substrate DNA HMG-I(Y)
              facilitates the binding of  transcription factors to enhancer sequences and
              also functions to  bring together separated enhancer regions so that they can
              form a  multiprotein complex necessary for transcription initiation.  The 
              objectives of a one year research project are to begin initial  experiments to
              critically test certain predictions of the first of  these two models.  We will
              employ carefully selected in vitro  systems to quantitatively evaluate the
              binding of HMG-I(Y) to  reconstituted monomer and dinucleosomes of defined DNA
              sequence and  investigate whether these proteins can alter nucleosome 
              positioning/phasing in such systems.  In addition, we will also  initiate
              experiment employing a newly developed DNA affinity  cleaveage procedure to
              determine both the position and orientation  of HMG-I(Y) protein on free
              substrate DNAs and in chromatin  reconstitutes.  The findings from these
              experiments will begin to  address, in  a precise and quantitative manner, the
              important  question of how the HMG-I(Y) non histone proteins potentially 
              influence the structure and function of reconstituted nucleosomes  in vitro. 
              And perhaps more importantly, the results obtained from  these in vitro studies
              will set the parameters for, and define the  limits of, future experiments
              aimed at elucidating the in vivo  function of these unusual and intriguing
              nonhistone proteins.  ***
