Title       : Improvements to the Florida Museum of Natural History Lepidoptera Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9729020

Award Number: 9729020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110490             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline Y. Miller jmiller@virtu.sar.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee D. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The Lepidoptera collections of the Florida Museum of Natural  History (FLMNH)
              Allyn Museum of Entomology (AME) represent  one of the most significant
              regional, national and  international systematic research resources in North 
              America.  Composed of a number of impressive older  collections, other
              donations, and field work completed by  the curatorial staff and other
              investigators, including  several biodiversity surveys, the AME collections
              contain  more than 1.1 million specimens and are 92-95% complete in  the
              representation of genera worldwide.  Among the  institutions in the Western
              Hemisphere, the collections of  AME rank comparable with and exceed the
              holdings of some  major  institutions in butterflies alone.    Collection
              growth as the result of donations of private  collections and biological survey
              studies in progress has  increased markedly over the past seven years.  In the 
              interim, the storage capacity to integrate these specimens  into the main
              collection in order to make them readily  available for research and use by the
              scientific community  has dramatically decreased.  These collections along with
               voucher specimens derived from previous and current  biodiversity studies in
              addition to a backlog of more than  80,000 processed specimens have further
              exacerbated the  situation.  Due to critical lack of appropriate storage 
              facilities and very limited access, some data and specimens  are not available
              for study.    This project will improve the collection in four areas: (1)  the
              installation of additional mechanical storage units to  incorporate significant
              collections, voucher specimens  derived from biodiversity surveys, and a
              backlog of  processed specimens, (2) additional part-time personnel to  aid in
              the complete reorganization, transfer and integration  of these specimens and
              collections, (3) assistance in the  sorting of specimens  into groups to be
              forwarded on loan  for identification, and (4) provide support for visiting 
              taxonomic specialists to assist in the ident ification and  integration of
              specimens into the collection.    At the completion of the project, the entire
              collection will  be reorganized and expanded to accommodate this backlog of 
              specimens.  The identification and integration of all  processed, backlog
              specimens and other donations in kind  received should be completed.  The
              increase in collection  storage and reorganization will conserve and make these
               unique research resources available for further study,  enhance curation, and
              aid in the future computerization of  collection data.
