Title       : Collaborative Research on Democracy and Risk and Return
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a9729766

Award Number: 9729766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis P. Quinn quinnd@gunet.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Prior research on democracy's effect on economic performance generally, often
              implicitly, contains an unsound assumption, which is that voters demand the
              highest possible rate of growth.  A different assumption can be drawn from an
              analysis of the likely risk/return preferences of voters.  It is that a
              democracy's performance will reflect not an unconstrained desire for growth,
              but a balancing of a desire for growth and the risks involved in attaining
              higher growth.  The research in this project develops the hypothesis that the
              way in which democracies will differ from dictatorships is that democracies
              will seek either low volatility growth strategies or higher volatility
              strategies that are predictably well compensated by higher rates of growth. 
              Initial investigation has shown that when two dimensions of economic
              performance are examined - - the rate and variability of growth - - countries
              with a high level of democracy in 1972-73 unquestionably showed superior
              economic performance compared to non-democracies in a cross-sectional
              regression analysis of a sample of 108 countries, 1974-1989.    The researchers
              develop and extend the investigation by addressing the following questions:  1)
               does a higher initial level of democracy lead to improved economic performance
              in a broader sample of countries for the longest period of time available?  2) 
              as opposed to base-year democracy, what is the connection between within-period
              democratization and democratization and growth in both its dimensions?  3) 
              what are the political correlates of volatility in the rate of growth?  The
              main objective of the project is to examine the core hypothesis of the
              research, which is whether or not democracy is, as the investigators argue, the
              economically efficient form of government.  Another objective is to establish
              the robustness of the findings from a pilot study, and to re-examine previous
              studies of voting and economic performance in light of the reported results. 
              This research examines one of the most important question in the study of
              political economics:  does democracy affect national economic performance and
              if so, how?  The data collected will be of use to other scholars interested in
              the question.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
