Title       : Stable Dynamic Optimization Strategies for Large-Scale Chemical Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1998   
File        : a9729075

Award Number: 9729075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236905             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lorenz T. Biegler lb01@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Biegler CTS-9729075  Strategies for process optimization have seen widespread
              applications over the past decade.  These have been applied in the design of
              new chemical processes, real-time optimization of process units and plants in
              petrochemical processes, and for sophisticated analyses related to the
              operability and flexibility of chemical processes.  The vast majority of these
              applications have been for steady state process models, described by systems of
              algebraic equations.  Simultaneously, development of powerful, large-scale
              dynamic simulation tool are also becoming widespread and equation based dynamic
              process models have been constructed with up to 100,000 differential-algebraic
              equations (DAE).    The success of dynamic process simulation has led to the
              demand for optimization tools that deal readily with process models described
              by differential algebraic equations (DAEs).  However, development of dynamic
              optimization strategies has lagged that of simulation for a number of reasons. 
              Among these are conceptual limitations of current optimization strategies. 
              These become important for DAE models that are highly constrained or have
              unstable dynamic modes.  The latter are often true in reactive and
              reactive-separation systems including exothermic reactors and reactive
              distillation.  The PI is planning on developing a simultaneous formulation for
              dynamic optimization that includes a stable large-scale decomposition based on
              boundary value formulations.  Novel nonlinear programming, strategies that
              detect unstable modes, exploit problem structure for large scale decomposition
              and adapt leading, edge methods for the treatment of large sets of inequality
              constraints will be considered.  The development of these strategies will be
              aided by research collaborations with applied mathematicians that specialize in
              nonlinear programming and DAE solution algorithms.  The combination of these
              strategies will lead to large-scale dynamic optimization strategies that can be
              applied to dynamic simulation  models currently considered in industrial
              applications.  The methods developed will be validated by large scale
              industrial applications in reaction engineering and reactive distillation.
