Title       : Values at Sea: Environmental Ethics for Marine Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9729435

Award Number: 9729435
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98399              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorinda G. Dallmeyer dorindad@uga.cc.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ben G. Blount  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mac V. Rawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank B. Golley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Hodson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J.W. Clark Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia
	      Boyd Graduate Studies Res
	      Athens, GA  30602    404/542-3030

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
Program Ref : 7419,7915,9123,9178,9179,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While the surface environments of the planet Earth are dominated by the oceans,
              the vast majority of analytical discussions of environmental ethics address
              terrestrial or fresh-water environments.  Efforts made to date to address
              marine environmental ethics have focused on particular topics, like whaling or
              fisheries management.  Additionally, unlike the terrestrial or fresh-water
              environments, human impact on the oceans remains relatively unregulated. The
              objective of this project is to develop a holistic approach to marine
              environmental ethics that can contribute to improving theory and practice, as
              well as policy discussions in this area.  The project has several phases. 
              While investigating various problems for ethics, policy, and marine
              environments, an interdisciplinary group of faculty at the University of
              Georgia will develop a syllabus for a marine environmental ethics course in the
              first project phase.  Since the subject is broad and new, the second phase of
              the project involves an intensive, three-day workshop including outside experts
              to refine the syllabus and develop contributions for a book on the topic.  Once
              the course has been offered and tested, there will be a week-long workshop for
              college-level instructors in the areas of policy, ethics, and marine sciences
              who wish to incorporate marine environmental ethics into their course
              offerings.  The investigators will also initiate day long short courses on
              marine environmental ethics for resource users, policy makers, and citizen
              groups.  The combination of theoretical research, expert workshops, teaching
              workshops, curriculum development, and outreach to user groups will increase
              the body of knowledge about ethics of the marine environment.  The
              investigators propose to develop an ethical framework that will serve as a
              guide to policy makers and as a basis for graduate education in marine ethics. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
