Title       : Modeling Traffic Dynamics for Internet Traffic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9729082

Award Number: 9729082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kavitha Chandra kavitha_chandra@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,9221,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research objective is  to  develop  traffic  and  performance  models  for 
              the  Internet.  Internet applications exhibit growth  trends, short and long
              term traffic  variability  and  pose  dif-  ferent  quality  of  service
              demands on the network. This traffic  environment requires that networks
              migrate to dynamic routing and  resource  allocation  paradigms  for efficient
              sharing of network  resources.  Baseline traffic models and techniques  to  
              validate  and  adaptively  update these models must be in place in the net- 
              work to support dynamic network  functions.  This  work  proposes  measurement 
              driven time-series modeling approaches for capturing  traffic characteristics
              and other seasonal and exogenous  factors  that  influence  traffic 
              variability on the Internet. The models  will be developed to capture  both 
              the  short  time-scales  over  which  the arrival processes can be stationary
              as well the longer  time-scale non-stationary features. Real-time traffic
              monitoring,  measurement  and  modeling  algorithms that can adaptively update 
              and predict traffic descriptors will be designed  for implementa-  tion at
              network nodes.    The preliminary research plan is aimed  at  determining 
              feasible  traffic  measurement strategies for the longer term research work 
              proposed above. Traffic measurements will be taken at a small set  of  access 
              routers on the Internet.  A baseline traffic sampling  and characterization
              methodology will be outlined.  Packet voice,  variable  bit rate video and
              traditional Internet traffic will be  considered at the flow level. The effect
              of increasing granularity   in  traffic measurements and relative increase in
              information  content useful for resource allocation  will  be  examined.  This 
              preliminary  work  will  determine  the  relevant time scales for  traffic
              monitoring and measurements and  a  better  understanding  of  the types of
              modeling tools that must be in place at Internet  nodes to successfully
              implement adaptively controlled service a nd  routing  disciplines.  The 
              results of this research plan will be  integral for the PI's long term research
              interests  in  designing  an  adaptive  dual mode connection and flow level
              traffic charac-  terization scheme to be used  in  admission  control, 
              end-to-end  resource  reservation and adaptive routing decisions in broadband 
              packet networks.    Refer to  http://morse.uml.edu/~kchandra/traffic_rsrch.html
              for   ongoing research activities.
