Title       : GOALI: Microscopic Basis of Polymer-Supercritical Fluid Phase Behavior:
               Polymer-Solvent Interactions and Chain Stiffness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9729720

Award Number: 9729720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346140             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. McHugh   (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. van Zanten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9729720  McHugh, M./Johns Hopkins U.    This is a GOALI
              Collaboration project between industry and Johns Hopkins. The long-term
              objective of  the research proposed here is to develop a new generation of
              supercritical fluid (SCF)-based technologies for polymer processing.  However,
              rigorous models for SCF solvent-polymer solution behavior, both at the
              macroscopic and the microscopic levels, are still in the nascent stages of
              development.  It is, therefore, exceptionally difficult to design reliably
              efficiently chemical processes that utilize the unique characteristics and
              capabilities of SCF solvents.  Hence, the immediate research objective is to
              address the physics and chemistry of SCF-polymer solutions.    In addition to
              high-pressure phase behavior measurements, a variety of scattering techniques
              will be utilized to investigate SCF-polymer solutions at elevated pressures and
              temperatures.. For each polymer-SCF pair, the cloud-point curve will be
              measured over a broad range of P-T space to modulate energetic interactions
              relative to entropic contributions to the Gibbs free energy of mixing.  A
              coarse-grain indication of the balance of SCF-polymer interactions relative to
              SCF-SCF and polymer segment-segment interactions can be gleaned from an
              examination of the characteristics of the cloud-point curve in P-T space. 
              Light scattering techniques will then be used to probe polymer dimensions and
              interactions in the single-phase region.  Static light scattering will be used
              to determine polymer radii of gyration and second osmotic varial coefficients.
              The measured second osmotic virial coefficient defines an equivalent hard
              sphere radius for the polymers in solution.  Dynamic light scattering will be
              used to measure the polymer hydrodynamics radius.  A comparison of the hard
              sphere and hydrodynamic radii yields insight into the interactions that  occur
              in the solution at submacromolecular length scales.  Small angle neutron
              scattering will be used to determine the polymer persistence  and contour
              lengths in an SCF solvent environment.  Perrsistence length values are
              particularly useful for determining the influence of polymer conformational
              entropy on phase behavior and polymer segment-solvent interactions.  This
              supremolecular to macromolecular length scale approach will enable us to
              develop a more detailed understanding of  the molecular thermodynamic
              principles that govern the observed solution behavior.    The phase behavior
              and scattering studies will focus on several different molecularly simple SCF
              solvents and two different classes of homopolymers:  nonpolar poly(olefins) and
              polar polymers.  The polymers will vary in backbone architecture to reveal the
              influence of polymer crystallinity, chain branching, polarity, and hydrogen
              bonding on the phase behavior and the chain dimensions  in the single-phase
              region.  We will also investigate the impact of chain "stiffiness" by focusing
              on polymers that have similar intermolecular potential functions, but different
              statistical segment lengths, such as poly(acrylates) and poly(methacrylates). 
              The polymer-SCF solvent systems are chosen to isolate particular phenomena and,
              thus, allow a systematic exploration of the factors that govern polymer
              solubility and behavior in SCF solvents.
