Title       : International Symposium on Linked Employer-Employee Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1998      
File        : a9729862

Award Number: 9729862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia I. Lane jilane@american.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The intention of the conference is to enable statistical agencies, economists,
              and statisticians to better understand the effect of economic changes on
              workers and firms.  The employment and earnings effects of labor market
              legislation, firm restructuring, trade and technological change are important
              policy questions, but cannot be answered without looking at both the demand and
              supply side of the labor market (firms and the workers employed by those firms)
              at the same time.  Linked data enable us to do this.  Some European countries
              have begun this process, but because linking is relatively new, there has not
              been much interaction across countries.  The conference has three main goals. 
              It will establish a basis for international comparability of data, and a
              network between North American and European researchers involved in these
              issues.  It will help the North American and European research community learn
              how to address linkage, access and confidentiality issues so that research on
              key employment and earnings issues can be compared across countries.  It will
              demonstrate the value added from these linkages and help identify the resulting
              issues which can now be investigated.  There are a number of outlets for
              disseminating these results.  The best academic style papers, for example, will
              be published in a special issue of Labour Economics: An International Journal. 
              A survey of the conference will be published in The Monthly Labor Review.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
