Title       : Openness/Secrecy, Authorship, Ownership: Studies in the Technical, Practical,
               and Knowledge Traditions of Premodern and Early Modern Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1999   
File        : a9729871

Award Number: 9729871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela O. Long   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Contemporary scientific and technical cultures include beliefs and practices
              concerning how knowledge is transmitted, who owns the knowledge, and at what
              point it should be openly disseminated (or whether it should be kept secret). 
              Science is often presumed to be open, while technology is secret.  Such
              understandings and the practices related to them are shaped by a complex system
              of intellectual property law as well as by institutional and tacit, individual
              practices.  Yet the historical foundations of such values, laws and practices
              are not well understood.  The purpose of this project is to complete a
              book-length history of the values of openness, secrecy, authorship and
              ownership of intellectual property as these pertain to premodern traditions of
              knowledge, practice and technology.  The study will examine technical and
              practical writings from antiquity through the early seventeenth century.  In
              method the study will first examine particular texts, then explore how those
              texts were appropriated, understood or misunderstood, and utilized by later
              cultures.  The study will also examine how attitudes toward the transmission of
              knolwedge and towards authorship were influenced by changes in the
              conceptualization of knowledge itself and by changes in the relationships among
              the ancient categories of knowledge (episteme), technical production (techne),
              and military action (praxis).  The book will demonstrate how values concerning
              the ownership and transmission of knowledge are widely variable and depend on
              particular cultures and societies rather than on universal structures of
              thought.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
