Title       : US-PRC Protocol for Cooperative Research in Earthquake Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1998      
File        : a9729630

Award Number: 9729630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132500             (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Lee gclee@mceermail.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                9729630  Lee  The overall objective of the US-PRC Protocol for Cooperative 
              Research in Earthquake Engineering is the continued  collaboration between the
              National Science foundation and  the People's Republic of China for the
              advancement of  earthquake engineering and consequently earthquake hazards 
              reduction.  The purpose of this request is to seek NSF  support to allow the
              National Center for Earthquake  Engineering Research (NCEER) to assist NSF in
              organizing its  annual protocol coordination meetings between US and Chinese 
              representatives.  NCEER proposes to provide administrative  and logistical
              support, and participant support, toward  coordination and implementation of
              three (3) US meetings,  and participant support for two (2) meetings in China
              under  this program.  These meetings will take place over a five  year period,
              beginning in the fall of 1997.    Through the implementation of this agreement,
              NCEER will act  as an agent for NSF, assuming responsibility for organizing 
              annual protocol coordination meetings between the US and the  People's Republic
              of China.  As such, NCEER proposes to  effectively coordinate all logistical
              details as required by  NSF for the organization and conduct of three US
              meetings  during years 1, 3, and 5 of this agreement.  In addition to 
              organizing the three US meetings, NCEER will coordinate US  and Chinese
              participation, accounting for participant  expenses for approximately six
              Chinese participants, with an  additional four US participants to be supported
              at the US  hosted meetings.    NCEER's technical focus and international reach
              has allowed  the Center to become recognizable worldwide, with  international
              cooperation becoming a more prominent  component of its research program with
              each additional year  of operation.  NCEER continues to strengthen its 
              international ties, and handles a myriad of details, in both  the technical and
              logistical sense, while hosting and  visiting its many international partners. 
              The current  administrative infra structure facilitates the execution of  the
              programs that are currently in place and embraces new  opportunities to expand
              on this strong capability and assist  NSF.  ***
