Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Equipment in Support of Parallel Processing
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1998  
File        : a9729858

Award Number: 9729858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Franklin jbf@ccrc.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ron K. Cytron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry L. Kalman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Will D. Gillett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger D. Chamberlain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9729858  Franklin, Mark A.  Washington University    CISE Research
              Instrumentation: Equipment in Support of Parallel Processing Research    This
              research instrumentation enables research in the following areas:- Patterns and
              Image Recognition,- Computational Biology, and- Discrete Event Simulation.   
              The instrumentation grant funds the purchase of UtraSPARC II processors, data
              storage, interfaces, backup  disk, and software. The parallel processor  will 
              support research requiring considerable computational resources to sustain
              current efforts and make additional progress. A brief description of the
              projects follows.    - Mammogram Screening: Research will continue in the
              development of automated  means for detecting cancer from mammograms. The goal 
              is to improve existing parallel implementations  for  effective clinical 
              usage. The techniques employed combine the technologies of artificial neural
              networks and wavelet transforms.    - MCD (Multiple Complete Digestion)
              Mapping: Research will continue on  a form of high-resolution,
              restriction-fragment DNA mapping (MCD mapping). The mapping problem is
              fundamental to DNA  based genetic  research.  With genomes of enormous size
              (millions to billions of base pairs), even relatively simple support activities
              such as software testing are extremely time consuming. The requested equipment
              will be used to develop parallel algorithms which are faster and more accurate.
                 - Discrete-Event Simulation: Research will continue  on  developing parallel
               discrete-event  simulation  algorithms  for  modeling large computer
              communications  networks.   Effective   network designs  are needed for the
              continued expansion and improvement of the Internet and World Wide Web.
              Parallel  simulation  techniques  will  be used to evaluate system performance
              when relatively rare events occur.  For  example, blocking  probability
              evaluation  in  modest  sized networks requires processing more than 10
              trillion events.
