Title       : Studies with Liquid Helium Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9729805

Award Number: 9729805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Hallock hallock@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9729805  Hallock    This  proposal  will support a component of the experimental
               low  temperature    physics    program   at    the    University    of 
              Massachusetts/Amherst.  The objectives  are:  (1)  to  study  new  aspects  of 
              the He-3-He-4 mixture film system, (2) to  study  in  more  detail capillary
              condensation and avalanche phenomena  with  helium  in  porous materials, (3)
              to conduct studies with  helium  films  on patterned substrates in one and two
              dimensions, with  a  focus  on  two dimensional localization, and (4) to  bring
               to  a  conclusion  our study of helium in the context of C60 substrates. 
              Experimental  methods  include quartz  crystal  resonance,  third  sound, and
              heat capacity studies of the thermal properties of He-  3/He-4   mixture  
              films;   and   high   resolution   capacitance  measurements  of capillary
              condensation and avalanche  events  in  porous materials. The work will lead to
              an improved understanding  of helium on hydrogen, including "two transitions"
              in the case of  mixture   films;  a  test  of  the  appropriateness   of  
              recent  theoretical work concerning avalanche events in magnetic  systems  for 
               the  description  of  similar  events  seen  in  hysteretic  capillary
              condensation, and an improved understanding of a method  for  determining  pore
               distributions and draining  phenomena  in  porous  materials.  In addition to
              contributing  to  progress  in  understanding the behavior of helium films
              themselves,  the  work  will  have relevance to the wider community in the
              areas of Fermi  systems,  avalanche phenomena, capillary condensation,  and 
              non-  linear  phenomena.  The project provides excellent  training  for 
              graduate  students in a number of important techniques  that  are  used   in 
              technical  fields  as  well  as  fundamental  research  projects.  %%%  Helium 
              is  a remarkable substance with special liquid properties  when  cooled near
              the absolute zero of temperature. This proposed  grant  will  study various
              problems in condensed  m atter  physics  using the unique properties of liquid
              helium, particularly liquid  helium  films,  as the vehicle to facilitate the
              study.  In  some  cases  the  helium itself will be the subject of  the  study,
               in  others,  helium will serve as a convenient fluid to  explore  the 
              phenomena of interest. In particular, the grant will allow  study  He-4  and 
              He-3/He-4  mixture  films  and  thereby  enhance   our  understanding  of 
              phase transitions on two dimensional  surfaces  and  on  weak  binding 
              substrates such  as  hydrogen.  Capillary  condensation  phenomena and
              avalanche events in porous  materials  will  be  studied to gain a deeper
              understanding  of  how  porous  materials  drain, an understanding that cannot
              be  reached  using  ordinary  liquids. Finally, studies of helium on  C60 
              substrates  will  be  concluded. The project provides excellent training  for 
              graduate  students in a number of important techniques  that  are  used   in 
              technical  fields  as  well  as  fundamental  research  projects.  ***
