Title       : The Shikimic Acid Pathway and Polyketide Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2000   
File        : a9729528

Award Number: 9729528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin A. Reynolds   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9729528  Kevin A. Reynolds  In streptomycetes variations of the shikimic acid
              pathway provide building blocks for numerous important natural products.
              Cyclohexanecarboxylic acid (CHC) is derived by a reductive biosynthetic process
              from shikimic acid and is found in numerous antibiotics such as ansatrienin and
              asukamycin. CHC is also used in directed biosynthetic fermentations to prepare
              doramectin (an analog of avermectin), an important antiparasitic veterinary
              product. Dihydroxycyclohexanecarboxylic acid (DHCHC) is also derived from
              shikimic acid and is used as a starter unit in the biosynthesis of the
              immunosuppressants FK506, rapamycin and ascomycin.  This project involves an
              analysis of the CHC, DHCHC, and shikimic acid pathways in Streptomyces collinus
              and Streptomyces hygroscopicus. The specific objectives are as follow:    1) To
              continue an analysis of the unique, individual enzymes involved in CHC
              biosynthesis in S. collinus and to determine if the genes encoding this pathway
              are clustered. These genes will be used to engineer the complete CHC pathway
              into a blocked mutant of S. avermitilis, creating a new mutant that can produce
              doramectin without addition of CHC to the fermentation broth. In the long term
              coexpression of these genes (or those involved in DHCHC biosynthesis) with
              hybrid polyketide synthases may provide approaches for production of novel
              polyketides.    2) To clone and sequence genes encoding dehydroquinate
              dehydratase, dehydroshikimate dehydrogenase, and a deoxy-arabino-heptulosonate
              7-phosphate synthase, in a rapamycin-producing strain of Streptomyces
              hygroscopicus. Disruption of these genes will then be used to determine their
              role in providing shikimic acid for both primary metabolism and DHCHC
              biosynthesis. In the long term these studies will provide a) an understanding
              of the regulation of the shikimic acid pathway in organisms that produce
              shikimate-derived natural products, and b) genetic approaches to increase the
              yields of these products in fermentation process es. Blocked mutants generated
              in this study will also be used to obtain rapamycin analogs by directed
              biosynthetic experiments.    3) Time permitting to initiate the purification of
              an enzyme involved in DHCHC biosynthesis in a rapamycin producing strain of S.
              hygroscopicus.    This project represents an excellent opportunity for graduate
              students and postdoctoral fellows to obtain broad-based training in enzymology,
              molecular biology, and organic chemistry. It is through such interdisciplinary
              approaches that secondary metabolic pathways can be understood and harnessed to
              create additional diversity in natural product biosynthetic processes.
