Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Emotional Expression and Japanese Enka Music
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1998     
File        : a9729002

Award Number: 9729002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet S. Smith jssmith@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Emotional expression in language shows great variation  crosslinguistically; how
              and to what extent are questions central  to linguistic and cognitive
              anthropology. Preliminary research on  written materials indicates that
              emotions which we English  speakers would call 'love' can be subdivided in
              Japanese into two  native categories, koi and ai. Japanese also has different 
              grammatical characteristics of emotional expression, the  discursive rules for
              which are not yet thoroughly understood for  two of three descriptive word
              classes. Furthermore, many  anthropological and popular sources describe a
              preference for  nonexpression or underexpression of emotion as a Japanese 
              cultural ideal. The interaction of these semantic, grammatical,  and cultural
              phenomena has never been examined. There are,  however, sites in Japanese
              culture where emotional expression is  valued and expected, which would allow
              data collection through  interview and participant observation.       Enka is
              an overtly emotionally expressive, indigenous  Japanese musical genre whose
              lyrics often focus on love and its  loss, and nostalgia for one's hometown,
              similar in some respects  to American country music. Enka music will provide a
              culturally  appropriate frame, not only yielding data for analysis through 
              examining its lyrics but also as a basis for elicitation of  discourse about
              emotions by native speakers. This project will  analyze both grammatical and
              semantic aspects of conversational  Japanese and the poetic lyrics of enka
              music to describe the  linguistic and cultural phenomena characteristic of
              emotional  expression in Japanese, with specific attention to potential 
              discursive evidence for categories of koi and ai.
