Title       : Double Layer Effects at Well Characterized Electrochemical Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9729314

Award Number: 9729314
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Ronald Fawcett wrfawcett@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This research project, supported by the Analytical and Surface  Chemistry
              Program, involves an experimental and theoretical study  of the structure and
              properties of single crystal noble metal  electrodes and gold electrodes
              modified by self-assembled  monolayers.  Professor Fawcett and his students at
              the University  of California at Davis will use a variety of voltammetric
              methods  and impedance spectroscopy to characterize these electrode surfaces 
              immersed in various nonaqueous solvents.  The distribution of  potential over
              the double layer at these electrode/solution  interfaces and the effect of
              solvent on this property will be  determined.  In concert with this
              experimental thrust theoretical  work will be pursued to develop analytical
              expressions for these  double layer properties that can be easily used by 
              experimentalists.    The double layer properties of single crystal noble metal 
              electrodes and gold electrodes modified by self-assembled  monolayers in
              various nonaqueous solvents will be studied  experimentally and theoretically
              in this project.  Professor  Fawcett and his students at the University of
              California at Davis  will use a variety of electrochemical methods and
              impedance  spectroscopy in this work and analytical expressions that describe 
              the double layer at these electrode/solution interfaces that can be  easily
              used will be developed.  The results from this work will be  contribute to  
              understanding the effects of solvent on the  distribution of potential at these
              interfaces and this knowledge  has relevance to a variety of `green`
              technologies.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
