Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Acquisition of a Compute Server for Image
               Analysis Research that Emphasize Empirical Performance Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1997  
File        : a9729904

Award Number: 9729904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59232              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin W. Bowyer kwb@csee.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence O. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sudeep Sarkar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dmitry B. Goldgof  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9729904  Bowyer, Kevin W.  University of South Florida    CISE Research
              Instrumentation: Acquisition of a Compute Server for Image Analysis Research
              that Emphasizes Empirical Performance Characterization    This research
              instrumentation grant contributes to the purchase of a compute   server for the
              lab research network at USF with four 250 Mhz UltraSparc   Processors, 1GB main
              memory, 35 GB of formatted disk pace, and a tape drive,   which will enable the
              following projects:- Automated Performance Evaluation of Edge Detectors,-
              Nonrigid Motion and Structure Recovery from 2D Views,  - Performance Evaluation
              of Perceptual Organization Modules, and - Automatic Tumor Volume Extraction
              from Brain MRI. This project deals with four image analysis tasks:  performance
              analysis of edge detector algorithms, algorithms for analysis of non-rigid
              motion in image sequences, the development and analysis of perceptual grouping
              algorithms, and the development of clustering-based algorithms for the
              segmentation of magnetic resonance images. These tasks are all computationally
              expensive. In addition, the studied empirical characterization of the
              performance of the algorithms is emphasized.  This style of research presents
              enormous computational demands, and it is not feasible to conduct this style of
              research with the typical workstation that an individual user would have on
              their desk. To make it practical to carry out this research, USL will acquire a
              compute server that will provide much greater computational power. This compute
              server will be shared among the research projects. Each of the projects is
              innovative and will lead to high-quality publications. In addition, the data
              sets and empirical methods that are created in these projects will have
              substantial impact on future research.
