Title       : Genetic Determination of Neuronal Anatomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9729649

Award Number: 9729649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291363             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall W. Phillis rphillis@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9729649  PHILLIS       Dr. Phillis's research focuses on the role  of the "motor
              protein" dynein in neuronal development and the  establishment of the mature
              anatomy of neuronal axons.  Although  dynein is well known to be involved in
              the movement of  intracellular components along microtubules, Dr. Phillis's 
              analysis of the gene for cytoplasmic dynein light chain, Cdlc1, in  the
              fruitfly Drosophila has suggested a role for this molecule in  shaping the
              growing tips of axons.  This research encompasses  three projects, each
              designed to investigate specific aspects of  the cytoplasmic dynein light chain
              with respect to axon anatomy.  The first project involves the analysis of when
              Cdlc1 mutations  affect axon projections during development.  Using a set of 
              genetic markers, Dr. Phillis and his colleagues will label  specific sensory
              neurons and their axons as they undergo  pathfinding in the central nervous
              system during development.  They will then characterize the development of
              these axons in  Cdlc1 mutants, and compare them with observations of wild type 
              development.  This analysis will help determine the timing of  onset of axon
              defects caused by Cdlc1 mutations.  In addition, Dr.  Phillis's group will
              create a mutant form of Cdlc1 that can be  activated by temperature shifts. 
              With this inducible gene, it  will be possible to determine the specific time
              in development  when Cdlc1 function is required for the establishment of proper
               neuronal anatomy.  In a second project, Dr. Phillis's group will  characterize
              the effects of Cdlc1 mutations on neurons grown in  primary cell culture, using
              a microtubule labeling system that  allows the analysis of microtubule dynamics
              in live cells.  These  experiments will resolve the effects that Cdlc1
              mutations have on  the growth dynamics of individual neurons, and on the
              dynamic  changes in cytoskeletal architecture that underlie the growth of  axon
              projections.  Finally, Dr. Phillis's group will perform a  genetic screen for
              mutations that either enh ance or suppress the  effects of Cdlc1 mutations on
              axonal growth.  Subsequent genetic  and molecular characterization of genes
              identified in this  analysis will provide a detailed understanding of a series
              of  genes that function with Cdlc1 in neural development.
