Title       : Packing, Local Order, and Dynamic Processes in Glassy Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9729734

Award Number: 9729734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob Schaefer schaefer@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Yaris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9729734  Schaefer    This project involves the combination of solid-state,
              magic-angle  spinning, dipolar-recoupling NMR experiments, with generalized 
              Langevin dynamics simulations, for the characterization of the  chain motion of
              a new generation of engineering polymers. The  polymers are based on
              polycarbonate-like structures that have  enhanced mechanical or optical
              properties. The NMR is used to  measure interchain distances that act as
              constraints on the  molecular dynamics simulations. This combination of
              experiment  and theory should lead to a better understanding of the  connection
              between microscopic chain motion and macroscopic  polymer properties. The
              specific systems whose chain dynamics  will be investigated are: (i)
              polycarbonates with specifically  fluorinated phenyl rings; (ii) high-Tg
              polycarbonate-polyester  block copolymers; (iii) non-linear hyperbranched
              polycarbonates;  and (iv) polycarbonates with main and side-chain cyclohexyl 
              rings.  %%%   The polymers that will be characterized by solid-state NMR and 
              molecular dynamics simulations in this proposal are of current  interest to
              industry. A tough, cheap replacement for  polycarbonate that has a lower
              birefringence to enable more  information to be packed on compact disks is a
              commercial goal  for a number of industries.. The ability to combine theory and
               experiment in fundamental work on problems that also are of great  practical
              interest guarantees an efficient transfer to the  American materials industry
              of the basic polymer science and  technology developed at Washington University
              under NSF  sponsorship.  ***
