Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Laboratory for Data Management and Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1997  
File        : a9729818

Award Number: 9729818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91048              (Estimated)
Investigator: William I. Grosky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ishwar K. Sethi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Conrad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Farshad Fotouhi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony T. Chronopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CISE Research Instrumentation: Laboratory for Data Management and Modeling   
              9729814  Grosky, William I.  Wayne State University    This research
              instrumentation grant contributes to the purchase of several workstations and a
              50 GB RAID subsystem, to be interconnected via 100Mbps Ethernet to establish a
              Data Management and Modeling Laboratory. The instrumentation will enable the
              following projects:- Distributed Numerical Computations on Networks of
              Workstations,- Simulation System for Studying Biochemical Information
              Processing, - Virtual Reality Interfaces to Databases,  - Multi-Resolution
              Indexing of Spatio-Temporal Patterns of Features for Image and Video Database
              Retrieval, and- Compressed Video Processing for multimedia, supporting efforts
              directed to interdisciplinary research on topics involving multimedia data
              management, computational modeling, and distributed computing.    The first
              project explores issues related to node allocation, data partitioning, load
              balancing, and disk I/O balancing for scientific computations. The second
              project applies to empirical modeling of complex biochemical systems, metabolic
              engineering, and emulation of chemical and molecular computing devices. The
              third project focuses on applications of VRML interfaces to databases. The
              fourth project is directed to the efficient database access of images and video
              segments having particular semantics. The long-term goal of the fifth project
              serves to build a capability for automatic real-time annotation of images and
              videos for content-based searching and retrieval in large image and video
              databases.
