Title       : A Transnational Database on Household Income
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9729762

Award Number: 9729762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Smeeding TMSMEED@MAXWELL.SYR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a transnational study of household income.  The Luxembourg Income Study
              (LIS) database project consists of comparable microdata on the composition of
              households and the structure of their incomes for 27 industrialized economies
              as of July 1997. It has also added labor force survey data for 14 nations under
              another subtitle, the Luxembourg Employment Study (LES). Over the past ten
              years, the LIS project has demonstrated its feasibility and usefulness as an
              internationally sponsored and researcher-lead database infrastructure project. 
              It provides the means for researchers to make accurate cross-national
              comparisons of economic status for several nations on a simultaneous basis,
              addressing such questions as whether inequality is currently increasing in the
              most advanced, industrial nations.  In particular, it is used extensively to
              compare levels of relative and absolute poverty across countries and over time.
                   This award provides core support for the Luxembourg Income Study for a
              period of three years.  During that time there will be several improvements in
              database management (more sophisticated electronic access system, direct
              availability of some data to qualified users, better on-line documentation,
              fourth wave of data for the mid-1990s, new surveys of the labor force); in
              research (inequality, poverty, and gender studies); in training (annual LIS
              workshops in the United States, in Europe and elsewhere); in setting new
              international standards for income distribution statistics; in developing
              purchasing power parities for income distribution studies; and in providing US
              users with more direct access to the other nations' surveys.     The Luxembourg
              Income Study contributes to cross-national comparative research in economics,
              sociology, and the social sciences more generally.  It strengthens graduate
              education and training in these fields, and achieves advances in database
              management.  The research made possible by the LIS directly addresses central
              themes of the Human Capital Init iative, such as overcoming poverty and
              deprivation, fostering successful families, reducing disadvantage in a diverse
              society, educating for the future, and employing a productive workforce. 
              Moreover, it is a prototype for scientific facilities in the social sciences
              including interdisciplinary, cross-national cooperative ventures that
              strengthen the data infrastructure and promote research that is liable to have
              important public policy implications.
