Title       : Formation of Self-Organized Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1999       
File        : a9729320

Award Number: 9729320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Holly Arrow harrow@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Orbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The process by which voluntary groups form is basic to human collaborative
              activity. The creation of new businesses, the emergence of political interest
              groups, the development of collaborative research projects, and the formation
              of less desirable groups such as youth gangs all involve decisions by
              individuals who are not yet members (`Will I join with this person or that
              one?`) and decisions by others who are already members (`Will we admit this
              person or that one to our group?`). Individuals can make wise or foolish,
              profitable or unprofitable decisions about the groups they form or join. This
              research project uses a new laboratory paradigm, social poker, to study the
              sequence of individual and collective choices that result in group formation.
              In regular poker, individuals draw cards (resources), discard some and add
              others, and compete against one another to build the strongest hand. In social
              poker, each individual has too few cards to form a hand, so players must join
              with others and pool their resources to create a poker hand. Poker hands earn
              group payoffs, and members decide amongst themselves how to divide up the
              money. Thus, individuals must assess how much alternative potential groups will
              earn and how the earnings will be distributed. They must also weigh the risk of
              being left out entirely if groups form without them. Nascent groups seeking
              additional members must consider what resources potential members will bring to
              the group, what they will demand in return, and the likelihood that a member
              will join their group and not another. The planned series of experiments
              manipulates (1) whether or not groups compete against one another (relative
              payoffs) or against the environment (fixed payoffs); (2) the number of players
              in the game; (3) the amount of information players have about one another's
              cards; (4) whether agreements are binding or not; and (5) whether the game is
              played once or in an iterated sequence. The data will be analyzed at three
              levels: individual, group, and society.  Questions to be addressed in the
              analyes include: What individual strategies make the most effective use of
              resources to form or gain entry into groups?  What accounts for differences
              among groups in their ability to attract members who have valuable resources?
              And given a particular distribution of resources, what determines whether the
              stream of individual and collective decisions results in an optimal
              configuration of groups, which generates maximum wealth for the population?    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
