Title       : Carbon Retention in a Colored Ocean (CARIACO): Physical andBiological Processes
               of Nutrient Import and Carbon Removal in the Cariaco Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2000     
File        : a9729284

Award Number: 9729284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $491721             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank E. Muller-Karger carib@marine.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  In this project, researchers from the University of South  Florida will join
              with colleagues at the State University of  New York at Stony Brook and the
              University of South Carolina  to study the relationship between near surface 
              biogeochemical processes affecting the fluxed of carbon and  nitrogen and the
              downward flux of particulates in the  Cariaco Basin, an anoxic embayment on the
              coast of  Venezuela.  The Basin is famous for its relatively  undisturbed
              varved sediments which many sedimentologists,  geochemists, and
              paleoceanographers regard as a potentially  valuable proxy archive for past
              oceanographic conditions of  the CaribbeanSea and Atlantic Ocean.  the USF
              group will  concentrate on collection, modeling, and interpretation of 
              hydrographic and core geochemical data (carbon, nitrogen,  phytoplankton
              composition) of the water column and relating  observations to events in the
              greater Caribbean basin.  The  SUNY investigators will study the chemical
              transformations  of organic matter as it sinks from surface waters to depth  in
              the Basin.  And the South Carolina group will study  particle sedimentation
              through the use of sediment traps and  analysis of seabed sediment cores.  It
              is anticipated that  these studies will help establish a linkage between the 
              Cariaco sediment archive and regional oceanographic  processes over time,
              hopefully allowing researchers to  predict future
              paleoclimatic/paleoceanographic events by  referring to the record left in
              Cariaco sediments.
