Title       : Dissertation Research: Household and Community Organizationof a Formative Period
               Bolivian Settlement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1998  
File        : a9729278

Award Number: 9729278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc P. Bermann bermarc+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Marc Bermann, MS Courtney Rose will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct surface survey and excavation at
              the archaeological site of La Barca which is located in the La Joya region of
              highland Bolivia. The site dates to the Wankarani period (1500 BC - Ad 400) and
              consists of a mound approximately 6 meters high and 90 meters in diameter.
              Architectural structures and features dating from the final phase of occupation
              appear undisturbed and remain visible on the surface of the site. Thus they can
              be exposed without deep excavation.  The culture history of  highland Bolivia
              reflects a process which occurred in many parts of the world. During the
              Archaic period people lived in small groups and subsisted by hunting and
              gathering. In Wankarani times a more settled village way of life, based on
              agriculture and llama pastoralism developed. MS Rose wishes to understand the
              nature of the social process which accompanied this subsistence change. Hunters
              and gathers are egalitarian. They share food, do not horde within the family
              and exhibit a communal mode of organization. On the basis of archaeological
              work in the Andean region, it appears that greater variability characterized
              the succeeding agriculturists and pastoralists. Settlement organization and the
              distribution of material remains indicate that some cultures maintained this
              communal mode while in others a family and lineage based system appeared. Under
              this individual social units stored food and engaged in relatively little
              sharing beyond the family. Archaeologists have looked for a deeper pattern to
              explain this variability and have focused on differences in the distribution,
              variability and predictability in food resources. MS Rose will address this
              question in the highland Bolivian environment. She will conduct a surface
              survey of  La Barca and on this basis select units for broad scale excavation.
              She will reconstruct the village plan, map storage facilities to determine if
              these occur in communal or family contexts and examine the distribution of
              material remains. On these bases social and economic reconstruction should be
              possible.  This research is important because it will shed new light on the
              social processes which accompanied the Neolithic Revolution and the development
              of a settled village way of life. It will provide important data for a
              relatively unknown period in the Andes and it will assist in training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
