Title       : Natural Variations in Silicon Isotopes in Seawater Silicic Acid and Marine
               Diatoms: A New Tool for Studying the Marine Silica Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a9729996

Award Number: 9729996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380564             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Brzezinski brzezins@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. DeNiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9729996  Brzezinski    In this project, researcher will test the utility of an 
              entirely new tracer for chemical oceanography.  Analytical  tools for measuring
              silicon isotope natural abundance in  biogenic silica from diatoms and
              dissolved silicic acid from  seawater have been developed and have been used to
               demonstrate for the first time silicon isotope fractionation  by marine
              diatoms during opal biomineralization.  The extent  of fractionation is
              constant among species, and does not  vary measurably with temperature,
              suggesting a single  fractionation factor can be used to describe variations in
               silicon isotopic ratios due to diatom growth in the sea.         We propose to
              obtain data sets I) to assess rigorously  the role of biological fractionation
              in controlling the  distribution of silicon isotopes in the sea and ii) to 
              evaluate silicon isotope natural abundance as a measure of  silica production
              in the surface ocean. The first goal will  achieved by analyzing samples of
              dissolved and particulate  silica gathered from a number of ocean basins. 
              Additional  samples will be obtained to define the isotopic signature of  the
              Si entering the sea through deep-sea hydrothermal vents  and rivers.  The
              resulting data will be combined with  numerical modeling to test the hypothesis
              that the interplay  among biological fractionation, the biological pump and 
              global thermohaline circulation governs the distribution of  Si isotopes in the
              sea.  The response of the isotopic  composition of dissolved and particulate
              silica production  in the surface water will be examined by comparing time 
              series of silica exported to depth.  The samples from  surface waters and
              sediment traps for the proposed  comparisons have been, or will be, collected
              through  existing research efforts allowing us to propose an  extensive study
              at low cost.  Success will provide a  powerful new tool for examining diatom
              activity in the  modern ocean and the ability to use variations in Si  isotopes
              in sediment cores to examine  changes in silica  production on geologic time
              scales.
