Title       : Modulating Cerebral Asymmetries for Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9729009

Award Number: 9729009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine Chiarello christine.chiarello@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The cortex of the human brain is subdivided into two halves, the left and right
              hemispheres, which process information in characteristically different ways. 
              Although it is acknowledged that nearly all mental activities require some
              contribution from each cerebral hemisphere, understanding when and how each
              system participates in a variety of cognitive tasks remains a significant
              scientific challenge.  The long-term goal of this research is to determine the
              precise contributions of the left and right hemispheres when people comprehend
              words.  The experiments will test the hypothesis that the relative
              participation of each hemisphere in word recognition is determined by the
              linguistic context in which a word is experienced, rather than by intrinsic
              characteristics of the word itself.  Words will be presented in the left or
              right visual fields, thereby selectively stimulating the right or left
              hemisphere.  Two important word properties will be investigated: grammatical
              class (noun vs verb) and concreteness of meaning (concrete vs abstract).  It is
              predicted that the right cerebral hemisphere will make a greater contribution
              to recognizing nouns and concrete words in the context of verbs or abstract
              words, than in more homogeneous contexts.  Such findings would suggest that
              cerebral asymmetries for word recognition vary dynamically in concert with
              variation in the stimulus environment, rather than reflecting static (and hence
              unmodifiable) processing differences.  This research will indicate the extent
              to which context modulates the brain systems used to recognize words, thereby
              enhancing our understanding of the neural bases for language comprehension.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
