Title       : The School-Home Science Connection: SHSC, Using TV-based Internet Technology to
               link School Science Projects to Home Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9729764

Award Number: 9729764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elliot M. Soloway soloway@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9729764  Soloway    This SGER project will design, implement, and assess
              learning environments in which parents/guardians and children use TV-based
              Internet (i.e., the Web-TV commercial service) to engage in home science
              activities linked to science classroom curricula. For example, in the context
              of better understanding the biological basis of asthma (a major health problem
              in low socioeconomic status, urban communities), parents/guardians and their
              children can collect data twice daily on the child's lung capacity.  They can
              then use the TV/Internet link to share this data with classmates, to receive
              analyses of this information on a longitudinal basis, to relate outcomes to
              current environmental conditions such as pollution, and to better comprehend
              theories about biology in the school curriculum. This study has three goals: 1)
              understanding how to create activities that encourage parents/guardians and
              their children to engage in serious scientific activities at home, 2)
              understanding how to better link specific school-based science curriculum units
              to home-based science activities, and 3) understanding how TV-based Internet
              technology can be used to support scientific inquiry activities by
              parents/guardians and children in home settings.    As a pilot activity, the
              investigator is already working with four homes in which children have asthma,
              providing Web-TV service and prototype versions of learning materials.  The
              proposed study would scale this initial effort into a one-year project linking
              a 7th grade classroom in an urban middle school to the homes of all children in
              that class.  The project will develop and study four learning activities will
              be developed and studied, deriving design implications for researchers doing
              similar studies. The project will aid in understanding how consumer and
              entertainment technology can increase children's motivation and performance in
              science classes.  This type of study is of great value for researchers in
              informal science education and in school-home  linkages, as well as those
              concerned with improving the science knowledge of parents.  ***
