Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: A Multiprocessor Platform for Cross-Disciplinary
               Research in Parallel Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1997  
File        : a9729990

Award Number: 9729990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71261              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. Teller pteller@cs.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann Q. Gates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Cooke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9729990  Teller, Patricia J.  The University of Texas at El Paso    CISE
              Research Instrumentation: A Multiprocessor Platform for Cross-Disciplinary
              Research in Parallel Systems    This research instrumentation enables the
              following research projects:- Dynamic and Adaptive Multiprocessor Resource
              Management, - Run-Time Monitoring of Parallel Programs, and- A Parallel
              Implementation of SequenceL Programs.    To support the aforementioned
              projects, the Department of Computer Science at the University of Texas at El
              Paso (UTEP) will purchase additional processors and memory, a star router to
              interconnect them, a DLT autochanger, a spare hot-swappable hard drive, and
              software to upgrade their SGI/Cray Origin 2000.    The upgraded multiprocessor
              system provides a platform that builds upon funded-research efforts and creates
              new cross-disciplinary research opportunities in the area of parallel systems. 
              The system supports research in computer and information science and
              engineering, in particular, research in: end-to-end performance modeling of
              large, heterogeneous, adaptive parallel/distributed computer/communication
              systems; dynamic and adaptive multiprocessor resource management; run-time
              monitoring of sequential and parallel programs; and very high-level parallel
              programming languages for data mining applications.  This research is
              significant because it addresses important performance issues with respect to
              the design of future parallel architectures, in particular, the   memory
              hierarchy of these systems; the feasibility of run-time monitoring of the
              integrity of software; and the effectiveness of mining large databases.    The
              research requires, and the system provides, the ability to: characterize
              process resource demands, measure application performance, acquire parameters
              for multiprocessor system modeling, validate multiprocessor simulations, and
              perform parallel discrete event simulation. With these methods, it is possible
              to evaluate the performance of dynamic and adaptive multiprocessor  resource
              management policies; various implementations of integrity-constraint
              monitoring, in particular, concurrent processes; and very high-level
              programming constructs.
