Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Infrastructure to Support Accurate Performance
               Measurements of Multithreaded Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1998  
File        : a9729889

Award Number: 9729889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Cohen cohen@ece.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krishna M. Kavi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Earl Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9729889  Cohen, William E.  Kavi, Krishna  The University of Alabama at
              Huntsville     CISE Research Instrumentation:  Infrastructure to Support
              Accurate Performance Measurements of Multithreaded Programs    This research
              instrumentation enables the following research projects:     -
              Pre-Load/Post-Store (PL/PS) architecture,  - Fine-grained scheduling of
              multithreaded applications, and   - Performance evaluation of the Java
              language.    To support the aforementioned projects, the University of Alabama
              at Huntsville (UAH) will purchase a  4-processor SMP system and data logging
              hardware (NIST MultiKron II instrumentation board) which will provide an
              environment for experimental research in Computer and Information Science and
              Engineering.  The system's low-overhead hardware/software instrumentation
              enables accurate performance measurements of multithreaded software and
              multithreaded architectures without resorting to slow, often intrusive,
              software simulation techniques.  Research topics supported by this
              instrumentation include the evaluation of the Pre-Load/Post-Store (PL/PS)
              architecture, the comparison of adaptive and static fine-grained task
              scheduling techniques, and the examination of runtime performance of
              multithreaded Java programs. The PL/PS architecture breaks each task in a
              program into three phases: load, compute, and store.  Separating the phases of
              each task allows greater flexiblity in scheduling the code and provides a means
              of hiding memory and communication latencies.  Detailed simulators and compiler
              optimizations are being developed for the architecture. The fine-grained
              scheduling examines the overhead introduced on contemporary hardware/software
              environments by the various scheduling techniques applied to suites of
              real-world problems.  The Java performance evaluation   investigates the
              viability of Java as a programming language for high-performance computing and
              identifies features in the languages that limit performance.  A better
              understanding of these topics will lead  to techniques to improve the
              performance of multithreaded programs and architectures.
