Title       : RUI: Temporal Variability of Iron Speciation in Rain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9729425

Award Number: 9729425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Kieber kieberr@uncwil.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan D. Willey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9188,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The specific objective of this research is to determine the speciation of iron
              in various types of rain events. Speciation is the precise chemical form of the
              iron in rain, including free and complexed ferrous and ferric iron. This
              information is crucial to the understanding of several important chemical
              processes in the atmosphere which depend on the concentration and speciation of
              iron, as well as the impacts of rainwater iron on aquatic ecosystems. Any
              change in iron speciation in rain may alter the rate of marine primary
              productivity, because speciation affects the bioavailability of iron as a
              nutrient, as well as the residence time for iron in seawater. Marine primary
              productivity plays a significant role in carbon removal from the atmosphere,
              and hence impacts global warming.
Preliminary data indicate that approximately
              half of the iron in rain passes through a fine filter (nominally dissolved),
              with the remaining fraction in the larger particulate phase. Data from a June
              thunderstorm in Wilmington, NC, suggest that part of the dissolved iron
              occurred as an organic complex. Data from an early summer rain suggest that
              photochemical reduction of iron proceeds as the day progresses, and changes are
              large enough and rapid enough to be observed in rainwater.
The presence of
              organically bound iron in rain, and of large variations in Fe(II)
              concentration, indicate that iron speciation is highly variable in rain. This
              research will assess how the relative abundance of iron species vary both
              temporally with time of day, season and storm history, and as a function of
              concentrations of ligands capable of complexation. Ligands to be investigated
              include oxalate, formate, sulfate, amino acids, and soil humics. This will be
              accomplished by careful sampling, analysis and laboratory experiments. The
              variability of Fe(II) in rain suggests that controlled photochemical
              experiments will give a useful indication of the potential for generation of
              Fe(II) in rain, which concentration analyses alone cannot provide.
The
              sampling site in Wilmington, NC, a coastal location, is ideal for this study
              because continental and maritime storms bring rain with a wide range in
              rainwater composition. A twelve year record of rainwater composition exists for
              this site; and supporting rain data essential for a study of iron speciation
              (pH, hydrogen peroxide, organic acids, amino acids, aldehydes, nitrite and
              inorganic anions) are currently being collected by the same laboratory.
This
              project is supported under the Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI)
              program and will involve, among other participants, undergraduate and Master's
              students.

