Title       : Acquisition of a Multi-User Scanning Laser Confocal for Science and Engineering
               Research at Hopkins University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9729358

Award Number: 9729358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denis Wirtz wirtz@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scot C. Kuo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor G. Corces  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Edidin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                It is proposed to purchase a scanning laser confocal microscope with 
              two-photon capabilities to measure the 3D conformation of living  cells,
              tissues, macromolecular assemblies, and novel materials. With  this new
              microscope, one can (i) slice clean, thin optical sections  out of thick
              fluorescent specimens and light scattering materials,  (ii) view specimen
              planes parallel to the line of sight, (iii)  penetrate deep into
              light-scattering tissues, living cells, complex  fluids, and complex materials,
              and (iv) gain 3-D views at very high  resolution. This new microscope will
              compliment the experimental  techniques currently used by Hopkins faculty,
              active in research  projects in biomedical engineering, chemical engineering,
              materials  science and biology. This proposal details four projects where the 
              new SLCM will have a dramatic impact. These projects include: (1)  the
              development of a high resolution particle-tracking instrument  coupled to the
              new confocal microscope to probe the in vitro and in  vivo mechanical
              properties of biopolymers; (2) studying the lateral  organization of membrane
              proteins in epithelial cells emphasizing  the packaging of
              glycosylphos-phatidylinositol-anchored proteins,  GPI-proteins, for targeted
              delivery to the apical surface of  morphologically polarized cells; (3)
              studying the molecular  mechanisms by which chromatin insulators affect
              enhancer-promoter  interactions; in particular, studying the gypsy insulator, a
               sequence located in the 5' transcribed untranslated region of the  gypsy
              retrotransposon of Drosophila; (4) monitoring the process of  transfecting
              cells and micro-organelles translocations with high  spatial and time
              resolution. One of the primary educational  objectives for acquiring a confocal
              microscope is to train Hopkins  scientists and engineers to use one of the most
              versatile and  promising tools of investigation in the life and materials
              sciences.  Of course, such a powerful instrument cannot be used properly and to
               its full potential with out proper training. Therefore, two of the Co-  PIS
              will be teaching a new course entitled "Practical Confocal  Microscopy" to be
              offered during the January intersession to  advanced graduate students in
              science and engineering who are  interested in learning how to use the confocal
              microscope in their  graduate research.
