Title       : CISE Instrumentation: Acquisition of High-Performance SMPs and a High-Speed
               Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1997  
File        : a9729828

Award Number: 9729828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vipin Chaudhary vipin@eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chengzhong Xu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Loren J. Schwiebert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9729828  Chaudhary, Vipin  Wayne State University    CISE Research
              Instrumentation: High Performance Computing on an ATM-Connected  Cluster of
              Symmetric Multiprocessors    This research instrumentation grant serves to
              support the purchase of one Sun Enterprise 4000 (with 6 processors), two Sun
              Enterprises 3000 (4 processors each), and a  12-port Switch with 8 ATM
              interfaces which will enable the following projects:- Development of an
              Automatic Parallelization Environment (APE) for Scientific Engineering Programs
              in a Cluster of SMPs,- Real Time Optimization of #D Conformal Radiation Therapy
              Treatment Planning, - Parallel Techniques for 3D Cone Beam Tomography, and-
              Measurement of Resource Requirements for ATM ABR Connections.  The first
              project integrates compile-time and run-time parallelization techniques
              focusing on loops with non-linear subscripts on a cluster of SMPs. An
              implementation of APE will reduce the execution time for various scientific and
              engineering applications. The second project serves radiation therapy where
              current computer assisted optimization techniques are too slow or too expensive
              to be adopted in  clinical practice.  Genetic algorithms will be used to
              optimize the dosage. A real-time cost effective implementation on a cluster of
              multiprocessors will make the planning process applicable in clinical practice.
               The third project encounters the bottleneck in parallel implementation of 3D
              Cone Beam Tomography technique on ethernet in the low bandwidth of the network.
               Using the  virtual connectivity provided by ATM, the multiphase broadcast can
              be efficiently implemented.  Results from this implementation will apply to
              other problems like volumetric imaging applications and finite element analysis
              of 3D structures. The last project utilizes profile data from various
              applications to enable sources to request just the necessary bandwidth and
              facilitate fair allocation of bandwidth. It  will permit a better utilization
              of the network resources and improve the application perf ormance.
