Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of lls1, An Inhibitor of Cell Death in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9729608

Award Number: 9729608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gurmukh S. Johal agrogj@showme.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane Janick-Buckner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9232,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Johal  9729608  The focus of this research is to elucidate the function of a
              novel gene from maize that appears to act as a suppressor of cell death in
              plants. This gene, designated llsl (lethal leaf spot) is identified by a
              recessive mutation and characterized by the initiation of necrotic lesions that
              expand to kill leaves. Since llsl spots visually resemble lesions incited by
              race 1 of Cochliobolus carbonum on susceptible maize, this mutation has been
              placed in the general class of mutations called disease lesion mimics. Plants
              with these genetic defects appear to undergo aberrant cell death, resulting in
              the formation of spontaneous lesions that sometimes resemble known diseases of
              maize.  The genetic and phenotypic behavior of llsl predicts that the normal
              function of this gene is to prevent the spread of cell death, which may be
              triggered by any stimulus, including a pathogen infection, physical wounding or
              a genetic lesion. Once a cell dies on an llsl plant, it initiates a chain
              reaction of cell death, leading to the formation of a continually expanding (in
              a radial fashion) zone of dying cells that eventually consumes the entire leaf
              tissue. Interestingly, the expression of llsl lesions is developmentally
              programmed, cell autonomous, and light-dependent. It appears that llsl lesions
              only initiate and propagate in photosynthetically active tissues.  In order to
              understand the nature of the llsl gene, it has been cloned from maize following
              tagging with Mutator. Sequence analysis of Llsl reveals that it encodes a novel
              protein highly conserved between monocots and dicots. It is present in a single
              copy in both maize and Arabidopsis. Phenotypic comparison along with mapping
              data of the Arabidopsis homolog predict it to be the acdl (accelerated cell
              death) gene. This hypothesis is strengthened by the demonstration that at least
              two EMS-induced acdl alleles have undergone single base-pair mutations in
              conserved residues of the llsl homolog. In this proposal, a multi-faceted
              approach employing  genetic, histological and molecular biology tools, will be
              used to unveil the function of Llsl in planta. The experimental plan will take
              advantage of two excellent plant model systems - maize and Arabidopsis. 
              Specific goals are to determine:  * how llsl is regulated during both normal
              and pathological situations;  * where its site of action is, both at the
              cellular and intracellular levels;   * what its target/substrate is in the
              cell; and  * what its relationship is to the acdl mutant of Arabidopsis7     
              It is highly likely that the results obtained from this study will provide a
              unique and important insight into the mechanisms of regulation of cell death in
              plants. In addition to contributing to basic research, these studies may
              eventually permit the conception of rational new approaches for the
              biotechnological manipulation of cell death in agriculture. Some obvious areas
              are plant protection, transformation, stress resistance, propagation and male
              sterility.
