Title       : RUI: Mapping Attractor Fields in Face and Object Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9729030

Award Number: 9729030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Tanaka tanaka@cs.oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A familiar face, such as the face of a colleague or relative, is easily
              recognized despite changes in expression, viewing angle, and age.  Face
              recognition processes are robust in the sense that a face memory can be
              triggered by a broad spectrum of perceptual stimuli.  The many-to-one mapping
              of face stimuli to a single face memory may be described as a face
              representation's `attractor field.`  According to this approach, a given face
              memory will be activated by any perceptual stimuli falling within the boundary
              of its attractor field.  In this project the attractor field concept is
              investigated by probing the boundaries that separate competing face memories in
              recognition.  Boundary testing is performed using an image technique known as
              morphing in which two face images are spatially averaged to produce a morphed
              face image.  An attractor field boundary is defined as the point at which
              identification of the morphed image switches from one competing face memory to
              the other.   The goal of the research is to understand how attractor fields
              might function in face and object recognition processes.  This problem is
              approached first by determining the factors that influence the size of face
              memory's attractor field, and second by investigating how learning and
              experience might modify the properties of an attractor field.  While the
              experiments are aimed at providing an account of attractor fields in face
              recognition, the proposal also addresses the role that attractor fields might
              play in general object recognition processes by examining their function in the
              recognition of non-face objects (i.e., cars, birds, dot patterns). Finally, the
              proposal investigates the computational principles of attractor field
              recognition in a series of neural network simulations.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
