Title       : SGER: Submembrane Cytoskeleton in Bacillus Subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9729204

Award Number: 9729204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77902              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander A. Neyfakh neyfakh@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9729204  Neyfakh     This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER).     
               It has long been known that bacterial membranes are organized, in that certain
              regions of these membranes have different protein compositions than other
              regions.  This organization is what makes possible the orderly cell division of
              bacteria, as well as placement of organelles such as flagella at specific
              predictable places on the bacteria.  The mechanism by which bacteria "know"
              where to place flagella, or where to divide, is unknown.  The non-uniform
              spatial distribution of many proteins in the bacterial membrane has sometimes
              been explained by the existence of a hypothetical submembrane structure,
              perhaps analogous to the cytoskeletal system of higher organisms, but to date
              there is no real evidence for such a structure.  This exploratory project is
              directed toward testing the possibility that two newly discovered proteins,
              IbmA and IbmB, form such a structure in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis.
              Genetic inactivation of either of these proteins has pleiotropic effects on the
              bacterium, impairing sporulation and cell division, reducing bacterial
              resistance to lysis, and altering morphology.  IbmA and B are relatively small,
              alpha-helical polypeptides (149 and 143 residues, respectively) with a strong
              tendency to exist in a coiled-coil conformation; such coiled-coils are
              frequently found in cytoskeletal proteins of higher organisms.  Studies using
              the "yeast two-hybrid system" indicate that IbmA and IbmB each interact with
              themselves in vivo and even more strongly with each other.  Also, IbmA
              interacts with a number of B. subtilis proteins that are either known or very
              likely to be associated with the inner side of the bacterial membrane.   These
              intriguing preliminary findings suggest that IbmA and B are plausible
              candidates for components of a bacterial cytoskeletal structure.  However,
              before initiating detailed analyses of such a putative structure, it is
              necessary to determine whether such a structure actually  exists.  The goals of
              this Small Grant for Exploratory Research project are to express IbmA and B in
              Escherichia coli, purify the proteins, obtain specific antibodies, and use the
              antibodies to determine subcellular localization of the IbmA and B proteins in
              intact B. subtilis cells and in subcellular fractions.  Experiments will also
              be done to determine whether IbmA-IbmB complexes can be formed in vitro from
              the purified proteins.  The results of this exploratory work will determine
              whether or not IbmA and B are plausible candidates for components of bacterial
              cytoskeletal structure, and if so will form the basis for a full-scale
              investigation of these proteins and their function in the bacteria.
