Title       : Genetic Analysis of Cellular Signaling in Chlamydomonas Flagellar Regeneration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9729610

Award Number: 9729610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura R. Keller lkeller@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9729610  Keller          Cells use intracellular messengers to coordinate their
              responses to environmental cues.  Certain environmental stimuli cause the
              unicellular biflagellate green alga Chlamydomonas to rapidly activate a set of
              coordinated responses that include excision of its flagella, transient
              upregulation of a set of around 200 genes encoding flagellar protein subunits,
              and initiation of the outgrowth of a new pair of flagella.  Although
              independent, each of these responses depends on the second messenger Ca.  In
              this research a genetic approach will be used to identify components of the
              signaling pathway leading to flagellar shedding.  Mutants that fail to shed
              their flagella in response to stimulation will be isolated.  These mutants will
              then be characterized by genetic, molecular and cell biological approaches to
              determine the number and order of steps in the signaling pathway leading to
              flagellar shedding.  The proposed experiments will yield insight into cellular
              signaling in the Chlamydomonas flagellar regeneration system, and serve as a
              model for several fundamental processes in biology including the integration of
              signal transduction pathways, the coordinate induction of a large set of genes
              and the de novo assembly of complex cell organelles.      The green algae
              Chlamydomonas responds to some environmental stimuli by shedding its flagella,
              expressing genes for flagellar proteins, and growing a new pair of flagella. 
              The research here will use a genetic approach to identify components of the
              signaling path that leads to flagellar shedding.  This system serves as a model
              for many fundamental cellular processes including cellular integration of
              signal transduction pathways, coordinate induction of genes and the formation
              of complex cell organelles.    ***
