Title       : Polymers of Mixed-Valence Ruthenium Azine Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a9729819

Award Number: 9729819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Euler weuler@chm.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. William B. Euler of the Department of Chemistry, University of Rhode  
              Island, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic  
              Chemistry Program to study polymers of mixed-valence ruthenium azine  
              complexes.  This project involves the synthesis and characterization of   new
              ruthenium-polyazine based polymers in order to determine the role of   the
              metal in the electronic and charge-transfer properties of the   polymers. 
              Systems selected will incorporate the ruthenium center as part   of the
              conjugated electron-transfer pathway.  The charge-transfer   properties of the
              polymers will be modified by changing the length of the   oligoazine bridge
              portion of the polymer ligand and thus the distance   between ruthenium sites. 
              A theoretical model predicts that as the metal   sites become further apart,
              the coupling between metals will increase, up   to the limit of the conjugation
              length of the oligoazine.  Binuclear   ruthenium-oligoazine-ruthenium compounds
              will also be prepared and   studied as models for understanding this unusual
              predicted property of   the polymers.  All of the new materials will be studied
              by infrared,   nuclear magnetic resonance, and
              ultraviolet-visible-near-infrared   spectroscopies, cyclic voltammetry, and
              variable temperature electrical   conductivity measurements.  In this project
              the use of metal compounds appended to electrical   conducting polymers is
              expected to modify the polymer properties,   allowing for the creation of new
              nonlinear optical materials, catalysts,   and nanostructured materials.  The
              polymers to be studied will also help   in the fundamental understanding of the
              transfer of electrons through   proteins, an important problem in biological
              chemistry.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
