Title       : Tailored Solvents for Pollution Source Reduction in Phamaceutical & Fine
               Chemical Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1997 
File        : a9729404

Award Number: 9729404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Alan Hatton tahatton@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
              CTS-9729404  Hatton, T.A.  MIT    Abstract    It is proposed to develop a new
              class of solvents that have solvation properties similar to those of solvents
              used conventionally in pharmaceutical and fine chemical processing but for
              which the potential for loss by environmentally-unfavorable air emissions or in
              aqueous discharge streams is minimized.  A complete characterization of the new
              solvent is to be undertaken, and their role in minimizing the potential for
              pollution, and in reducing the number of solvent exchanges and unit operations
              required for specific processes will be evaluated.  The economic and
              environmental impact assessment will include al aspects of the solvent usage,
              including its synthesis and any wastes that may be generated thereby.    These
              new solvents will be obtained by suitable derivatization of the solvent
              tetrahydrofuran (THF) to be replaced to render it significantly less volatile
              or water soluble, and thus less inclined to enter the environment; the active
              solvent moiety will also be 'immobilized' by attachment to flexible polymers,
              which are then dissolved in a more benign continuous phase.  These new solvents
              will be tested as reaction media for a broad range of model reaction systems,
              including a series of reactions that are important in the production of the HIV
              protease inhibitor Crixivan  Detailed spectroscopic characterization as well as
              bulk thermodynamic properties will be used to rationalize the kinetics results
              in terms of steric and electronic effects introduced by the solvent
              modification.  Process systems modeling will be carried out to quantify the
              economic and environmental impact of processes using these solvents, and
              compared with conventional systems.    A new range of solvents will be
              developed and characterized in terms of their solvation, thermodynamic and
              transport properties, and tested for their efficacy as reaction media using a
              range of different model reactions.  Guidelines will be established for product
              recovery and solvent regeneration,  and process systems models will be
              developed for optimization of reaction/separation sequences in pharmaceutical
              and fine chemical syntheses.  A life cycle analysis of these new solvents from
              synthesis through to use in processing, including solvent regeneration, will be
              made to delineate their useful application parameters.
