Title       : Chemosensory Mechanisms Regulating Predation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a9729980

Award Number: 9729980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269748             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Zimmer z@biology.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Browne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1650,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Predation is a major biotic force regulating prey populations, as well as
              exerting strong effects on community structure.  Evidence suggests that the
              sense of smell mediates predatory search in many terrestrial and aquatic
              animals.  Past investigations have not, however, been designed to link either
              the degree of successful olfactory-mediated search or guidance mechanisms with
              the production of chemical attractant by prey or the hydraulic environment in
              which predatory activities naturally take place.  Using the predator - prey
              interaction between blue crabs (Callinectes sapidus) and hard clams (Mercenaria
              mercenaria), this project will investigate the olfactory basis for predation. 
              Results from assays of crab predatory search behavior will guide chemical
              fractionation and isolation of peptide attractants being released by intact
              live clams.  Water collected from the excurrent siphons of actively pumping
              clams will be characterized by partitioning into different molecular weight
              classes and by using selective enzyme degradation to probe peptide structures. 
              As attractants are isolated and identified, pure compounds will be bioassayed
              for potency (dose-response) and for potential mixture interactions.  In this
              manner, the natural ligands will be discovered and made available for
              discriminating between the roles of antennules and legs in chemosensation that
              mediates crab predatory search behavior.  The rates of water exchange and
              attractant flux will then be measured for clams, and a biomechanical and
              chemical model of a clam releasing attractants will be engineered.  Crab
              ability to find clam patches will be tested under controlled hydrodynamic
              conditions in a large (10-m long) flume, simulating flow in the natural
              habitat.  As a final test, selected experiments will be repeated in the field
              by using live clams and models as attractant sources to free-ranging crabs. 
              This project will thus provide the most rigorous test to date of olfaction as a
              regulatory factor in predator-prey interactions.  It will yield new attractant
              structures for use in cellular and molecular studies on basic chemosensory
              processes, while it will provide a critical link between the olfactory sense of
              predators and prey vulnerability to predation.  Finally, it could open
              significant avenues for future research to explore the mechanisms through which
              prey might defend themselves by adopting risk-sensitive metabolic strategies in
              which attractant production stops when nearby predator are detected.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
