Title       : The Role of Acoustic Behavioral Changes in Speciation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9729325

Award Number: 9729325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerry L. Shaw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Shaw   9729325     Communication signals often change quickly and can be the
              first to distinguish closely related species in animals.  This study examines
              the historical relationships of populations of Laupala cerasina, a Hawaiian
              cricket species that shows variation in male singing behavior and female
              acoustic attraction, two important communication signals.  Acoustic behaviors
              such as these mediate reproductive coordination between males and females in
              crickets.  It is hypothesized that these changes in acoustic signals are a
              prerequisite to the formation of new species.  Prior investigations have
              suggested that different geographic populations of L. cerasina differ
              significantly in male song and in female acoustic preference but nonetheless
              share a similar acoustic rank in their respective communities and are members
              of the same species.  Preliminary data also suggests that these different
              geographic populations can interbreed.  These observations lead to the
              prediction that the different geographic populations of L. cerasina are closely
              related.  However, from previous work with mtDNA sequences, L. cerasina
              populations appear to be relatively distantly related.  DNA sequences from
              additional genes will allow this contradiction to be resolved.  The goal of
              this project is to test the hypothesis that populations of L. cerasina are
              closely related as predicted by the taxonomy, and that changing acoustic
              signals indicate that new species are in the process of forming.  To address
              this question, nuclear DNA sequences will be collected from one gene from each
              of 10 populations of L. cerasina and several closely related species.  This
              will ascertain whether the different geographic populations of L. cerasina
              exhibiting a similar acoustic rank in their respective communities represent
              products of a common history or a striking example of similarity by other
              processes.    A better understanding of the striking diversity of form,
              behavior and function in the biological world is vital for projecting  the
              importance of that diversity in stable ecosystems, conservation efforts and
              human welfare.  Tremendous strides have been made toward an understanding of
              developmental and behavioral diversity in animals and plants.   But how does
              the process begin?  We know relatively little about how and why new species
              arise.  The efficacy of communication signaling in animal courtship is a
              prerequisite to the continued flow of genes within and between populations. 
              The hypothesis that changes in communication signals occur rapidly is gaining
              support;  such changes may provide the early catalyst for the remarkable
              diversification that follows.  Recovering a system where communication signals
              are actively changing is rare, perhaps because this process occurs so rapidly. 
              Establishing the historical relationships among the component populations that
              differ in communication signals (such as Laupala cerasina) is a critical first
              step.
