Title       : SGER: Preliminary Studies of Larval Transport using Small Moorings in Coastal
               Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9729396

Award Number: 9729396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49976              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Menge mengeb@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This SGER award aims to determine the efficacy of small moorings anchored in
              the nearshore (just beyond the surf zone) of central Oregon for determining
              patterns of larval abundance and transport in relation to onshore patterns of
              recruitment and community structure. It is essential to obtain proof that
              moorings will work, and will provide information that can bear critically on
              the issue of nearshore larval transport. In agreement with the community of
              ocean scientists (as reflected in GLOBEC and CoOP mission statements) Dr. Menge
              contends that the determination of the link between pelagic and benthic
              environments through the nearshore region, heretofore a `black box,` is one of
              the most important problems facing biological oceanographers and marine
              ecologists. Determining abundances of zooplankton has long been hampered by
              extreme spatial and temporal variation due to plankton patchiness. The use of
              larval traps, which integrate over long times will provide larval estimates
              which more accurately reflect patterns of larval delivery to benthic
              communities. This study will employ inexpensive moorings, anchored in 12   15 m
              of water between 0.5 and 1 km offshore, and will simultaneously sample larval
              abundances, currents, water temperature, settlement onshore, and temperature
              onshore. The measurements on the moorings will be taken near the surface and
              near the bottom to quantify possible stratification of larvae and physical
              conditions in the water column, which may relate to patterns of
              onshore/offshore transport during upwelling and relaxation. For comparison with
              more traditional oceanographic measurements, chlorophyll a, physical
              conditions, and zooplankton abundance will be sampled using standard methods
              (Niskin bottles, CTD, plankton nets) each time the moorings are monitored.
              Satellite imagery will be used to examine the larger scale context in which our
              smaller scale sampling will take place.  This work will test if these moorings
              will prove to be a powerful and inexpensive tool in studying nearshore
              ecological and oceanographic processes, particularly in relation to larval
              transport.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
