Title       : Dynamic Light Scattering, Calorimeter and Fluorometer for Structure/Function
               Studies of Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1998  
File        : a9729644

Award Number: 9729644
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148545             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard J. Banaszak len_b@dcmir.med.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David D. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Six major and four minor users at the University of  Minnesota are requesting
              instrumentation needed to study the  structure and function of enzymes, muscle
              proteins,  apolipoproteins, bacterial toxins, and metalloproteins.  These
              instruments will be used to provide a vital linkage of  thermodynamic and
              dynamic properties to ongoing structural  analyses.  The investigators are
              studying biological  function through mutagenesis and protein design, using the
               shared facilities of a recently established Structural  Biology Core
              Laboratory at the University of Minnesota.  A dynamic light scattering
              instrument will be employed by  all of the users to analyze the aggregation
              state of  proteins that are being designed and produced.  Understanding the
              oligomeric state of a protein or protein  complex is essential to NMR studies,
              to the preparation of  crystals for X-ray diffraction, and to a variety of 
              spectroscopic analyses.    A titration calorimeter will be used by three major
              and  three minor users to determine the energetics of protein  ligand binding,
              which is often required for the functional  characterization of mutant or
              covalently modified proteins  in structural studies.    A multifrequency phase
              fluorometer will be used by three  major and three minor users to analyze
              protein dynamics,  structure, and protein-protein interactions.  This 
              particular emphasis will be placed on the use of mutagenesis  to engineer
              labeling sites for fluorescent probes in  proteins, providing site-specific
              structural and dynamic  information to complement x-ray and NMR structural
              studies.
