Title       : Adaptive Data Republication in Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9729495

Award Number: 9729495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31525              (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantinos Kalpakis kalpakis@cs.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The University of Illinois at Chicago and the University of Maryland at
              Baltimore County collaborate on this project motivated by the tremendous growth
              of the Internet and the World-Wide-Web (WWW). Adaptive replication is an
              approach for improving performance, response time, and access cost in
              distributed database systems in general, and Internet/WWW in particular.
              Adaptive replication is a generalization of the principle of caching. In
              adaptive replication the number of copies of an object, the location of these
              copies, and which updates are propagated to each copy, change dynamically
              depending on a given cost function. The project establishes the fundamental
              principles of adaptive replication in distributed database systems, and it
              develops, implements and analyzes a system for adaptive replication of objects.
              The system consists of a set of algorithms to be used for various cost
              functions. For the analysis the investigators are building a simulation testbed
              in which the user defines the network, selects a replication algorithm, selects
              a cost model, and an access pattern at each computer. The system enables
              comparison among the various adaptive and static replication algorithms. The
              project will improve the understanding, cost, and performance of distributed
              systems and distributed databases, and it can lead to a more efficient Internet
              and World-Wide-Web.
