Title       : Portable Flow-Through Amperometric Immunosensor Device for Fast Field
               Immunoanalysis of Rodent Viruses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a9729523

Award Number: 9729523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ebtisam S. Wilkins wilkins@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Gosz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terry L. Yates  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of the proposed research is to develop a  prototype of a
              sensor device based on immuno-interactions or  rapid, automated, quantitative
              determination of viral  infections in small mammals.  As a result of this 
              development several functioning immunoassay devices will be  tested in
              environmental biology field studies of Hantavirus  (Sin Nombre Virus) infection
              in mice populations in the  wild.  The work initially will be focused on the 
              optimization of an immunosensor for fast (10-20) min.  determination of virus
              and will be extended towards the  development of an semi-automated portable
              immunoassay system  to be used in field stations or other remote sites.    The
              proposed immunosensor utilizes highly dispersed carbon  material.  The
              conductivity of carbon materials permits its  use as electrode materials for
              electrochemical detection and  at the same time as carrier for the
              immuno-chemicals.  The  immunosensors proposed will be developed using
              disposable  flow electrodes and offer a means to conduct fast ELISA  (Enzyme
              Labeled Immunosorbent Assay) with an electrochemical  detection.  The proposed
              research will result in prototype  portable immunoassay system consisting of
              miniaturized,  automated and electronically controlled and self-contained 
              hand-held devices to be used in environmental biology  studies.    A
              combination of descriptive and analytic studies of  environmental
              characteristics associated with rodent  Hantavirus prevalence will be used as
              the initial test of  the immunoassay system.  These analyses require fast and 
              reliable instrumentation suitable for operation in field  conditions or in a
              remote setting.  The immunosensors can  also be used for rapid analyses in
              conventional conditions  of biological, physiological and analytical practices.
