Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Equipment for Diverse Computer Architecture
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1997  
File        : a9729839

Award Number: 9729839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Augustus K. Uht uht@ele.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Qing Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Tufts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jien-Chung Lo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9729839  Uht, Augustus K.  University of Rhode Island    Research
              Instrumentation: Equipment for Diverse Computer Architecture Research    This
              research instrumentation grant enables three distinct research projects:      
              - Realizing Instruction Level Parallelism in the 10's - A New Spectrum of
              Hierarchical Storage Architectures  for High Performance Disk I/Os -
              Ultra-Dependable and High-Performance Distributed Computing while seeking to
              improve computer performance in many dimensions: uni- or micro-processors, I/O
              (Input/Output) systems, and multiple-computer systems.  Further, the
              reliability of multiple-computer systems is to be enhanced. These objectives
              are to be achieved by using the new instrumentation equipment (multiprocessor
              and multiple-disk RAID storage system) in several different ways.    First, the
              Levo research prototype uniprocessor is to be designed and simulated on the new
              multiprocessor. The latter will serve to verify Levo's implementation and
              measure its performance, as well as to allow Levo's construction, establishing
              that uniprocessors can be designed to execute an order-of-magnitude more
              instructions per cycle than current uniprocessors.    Second, since I/O
              constraints can limit overall performance, the novel Disk Caching Disk (DCD)
              I/O system is to be realized on the new multiprocessor and RAID equipment,
              demonstrating factors of 2 to orders-of-magnitude performance improvements of
              the DCD architecture.    Lastly, the Active Nodal Task Seeking (ANTS)
              distributed computing system achieves high performance and ultra-dependability
              in a coarse-grain environment. The new ANTS kernel is to be realized on the new
              multiprocessor, showing that the same can be achieved on fine-grain
              applications.
