Title       : Sexual Differeniation of Glia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9729643

Award Number: 9729643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250119             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. McCarthy mmccarth@umaryland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9729643  McCarthy    Throughout the mammalian lifespan, the central nervous
              system is a target organ for the actions of steroid hormones.  This is most
              clearly illustrated in the developing brain where exposure to gonadal steroid
              hormones permanently change its structure and function.  Indeed, differences in
              behavior between males and females result from differential exposure to
              androgens and estrogens during a sensitive period of development.  The
              hypothalamus is one of the critical brain regions where steroids modulate
              neuronal activity.  While most of the research is directed towards
              understanding the mechanisms by which steroids hormones interact with neurons,
              the brain is also packed with non-neuronal glial cells.  Recently, it has
              become clear that glial cells modulate neural development and activity, and can
              undergo remodeling in response to fluctuation in gonadal steroid levels.  Dr.
              McCarthy has reported that there are enormous changes in the morphology of glia
              in the hypothalamus after exposure to testosterone during the first few days
              after birth.  She will now determine the significance of these morphological
              changes by further characterizing the steroid modulation of neonatal glia in
              regards to steroid sensitivity, specificity, and site of action.  Moreover, Dr.
              McCarthy will use state of the art microscopy to analyze the mechanism of
              neuronal-glial communication with sexual dimorphic regions within the
              hypothalamus.  These studies will determine how changes in the shape of glial
              cells impact on that of the nearby neurons and alters brain development. 
              Understanding how gonadal steroids influence the developing brain helps us to
              understand the etiology of neurological disorders that effect males and females
              differently as well as serving as an excellent model for examining the complex
              process of normal brain development and neural plasticity.  The results will
              also help us elucidate how the basic structure of the brain is related to
              behavior.
