Title       : Mechanism of the B6 Enzyme, O-Acetylserine Sulfhydrylase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9729609

Award Number: 9729609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Cook pcook@chemdept.chem.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9729609  Cook  The objective of this research is a determination of the 
              mechanism of O-acetylserine sulfhydrylase (OASS-A), a pyridoxal  phosphate
              (PLP) dependent enzyme .  The kinetic and chemical  mechanisms of OASS-A have
              been determined, and the three  dimensional structure of the enzyme has been
              solved.  A number of  questions still remain concerning the mechanism.  The
              slow steps  in the first half of the reaction have been identified, but 
              virtually nothing is known concerning the second half of the  reaction.  In
              this project, the reaction mechanism will be probed  using presteady state and
              steady state kinetic techniques.  Kinetic isotope effects will be used to
              obtain information on the  second half of the reaction. The stereochemistry of
              the  elimination of acetic acid and the addition of H2S, and whether a 
              quinonoid intermediate exists along the reaction pathway will  also be
              examined.  Oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis will be  used to identify the
              enzyme residue that interacts with the  acetyl side chain of OAS, groups that
              interact with the cofactor,  and residue(s) involved in binding the
              alpha-carboxyl of OAS. The  long term goal remains an elucidation of the
              mechanism of the  multienzyme complex cysteine synthetase, composed of serine 
              transacetylase and OASS.  A complete description of the  mechanisms of the
              component enzymes alone and in complex will be  determined.  The present
              project, however, focuses on the study  of OASS-A.    A study of the mechanism
              catalyzed by OASS-A should significantly  increase our understanding of PLP
              enzymes in general, and those  that catalyze beta-replacement reactions. 
              Isotope effects is a  technique that allows one to look at the structure of the
               activated complex (transition state) as reactant is converted to  product, and
              the types of bonds formed and broken during the OASS  reaction and the
              differences in chemistry compared to other PLP  enzymes make OASS-A of
              interest.  A knowledge of transition state  structure provides a basis f or
              bactericides for PLP-dependent  enzymes catalyzing beta-replacement reactions. 
              The OASS-A  reaction provides potential for the production of a number of 
              novel beta-substituted amino acids.
