Title       : Urban Approaches Open Forum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9729780

Award Number: 9729780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Ross BROSS@American.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    CMS 97-29780    "Urban Approaches Open Forum"    Dr. Bernard Ross,
              American University        This award is made to the Department of Public 
              Administration at American University to develop, implement  and manage an
              "Urban Initiative - Urban Approaches (UA) Open  Forum."      The Open Forum
              will convene both researchers and a wider  spectrum of urban partners - those
              who educate, implement,  manage, regulate, and support the people and systems
              which  contribute to the quality of urban life.  The invitees will  include
              representatives from federal, state and municipal  agencies, public and private
              sector service providers,  professional organizations and research institutes,
              and  political and community leaders.  The Open Forum will focus  on current
              and planned approaches to urban system's  management,, identification of
              opportunities for research  connections, knowledge mining from existing data
              resources,  development of a set of research needs, which will evolve  into a
              long-term UA vision for the 21st century.      The goal of the Open Forum is to
              achieve a different form of  integration - a vertical integration among the
              interests of  researchers and the needs of those who look to the  researchers
              for answers to their problems.  It is  anticipated that the Open Forum will
              include a dialogue with  concentration on current and planned approaches for 
              integrated research and education on the urban environment  and providing
              vision and recommendations for future  research.  Thus, the Open Forum will
              enhance the design of  efforts to build upon, support, and complement the
              efforts  of UA stakeholders.      Among UA-related research topics scheduled
              for discussion  are urban sprawl and sustainability; urban brownfields;  urban
              infrastructure; regional governance and urban  politics; "urban" as a spatial
              unit of analysis; urban  education and public-private partnerships.  The
              challenge of  the Open Forum is to provide an open environment in which 
              researchers and practitioners feel at  ease discussing  research needs which
              transcend disciplines and sectors.  The  emphasis will be on how the
              practitioners can inform the  research process, and how some of the nation's
              best scholars  can respond to a cogent statement of perceived needs as 
              identified by a cross-section of practitioners.        ***
