Title       : A Rapid and Inexpensive Whole-Genome Mapping Method for Arabidopsis Using Single
               Nucleotide Amplified Polymorphisms (SNAPS), Co-Dominant Ecotype-Specific
               PCR-based Markers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9729599

Award Number: 9729599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $467900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick M. Ausubel ausubel@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ausubel   9729599  Experiments are described which are designed to develop and
              map 350 PCR-based DNA mapping markers for Arabidopsis thaliana. Each marker
              will correspond to a mapped single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) from the
              Columbia and Landsberg erecta ecotypes. These SNPs will be detected using
              specially designed allele-specific PCR primers that will generate allele
              specific patterns (i.e., detectable amplification product only from one
              ecotype) that can be rapidly and reliably scored by a variety of analytical
              methods. The acronym SNAP has been coined to designate single nucleotide
              amplified polymorphism's. The proposed experiments involve the synthesis of 350
              sets of SNAP primers (each consisting of two primer pairs, one for each
              ecotype), each of which preferentially amplifies a single, mapped DNA sequence
              from Columbia or Landsberg erecta DNA. Using these co-dominant SNAPs, it will
              be possible to map any Arabidopsis gene with only a few hours of labor to an
              accuracy of approximately 2cM, using DNA isolated from a single leaf, harvested
              from a limited number of F2 (Columbia X Landsberg erecta) progeny. The specific
              aims are: 1) To use 350 previously identified sequences that contain single
              nucleotide polymorphism's between the Columbia and Landsberg erecta ecotypes of
              Arabidopsis to generate SNAP primers that will preferentially amplify either
              the Columbia or the Landsberg erect allele 2)To map the SNAP markers generated
              using DNA from 96 recombinant inbred lines from a Columbia X Landsberg erecta
              cross 3) To develop methods that will allow many genes to be mapped in an
              efficient manner using SNAPs. This will include the re-design of the reverse
              primers to adjust the sizes of the products to allow amplification of several
              markers in the same amplification reaction. The usefulness of SNAP markers for
              detecting polymorphisms in DNA pooled from several individual F2 mutants will
              also be investigated. )4 To test the feasibility of adapting  SNAP mapping to
              automation using DNA micro array  analysis by modeling a DNA microarray using a
              traditional dot blot hybridization procedure.    The proposed approach will be
              the fastest, simplest and potentially the least expensive of all the
              whole-genome mapping methods developed to date. The sequences of the primers,
              as they are designed and mapped, will be provided to the Arabidopsis community.
              Additionally, agreements with a commercial firm will be arranged to synthesize
              sets of primers as inexpensive "mapping kits".
