Title       : Bioremediation Ecology: Fundamental Relationships Between Bioavailability
               Gradients and Diversity of Contaminant-Degrading Microorganisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1997 
File        : a9729857

Award Number: 9729857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Ward umbdw@gemini.oscs.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Inskeep  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9729857  Ward    Most naturally occurring microorganisms have never been
              cultivated, probably because culture media poorly reflect the
              microenvironmental conditions in which microorganisms live in nature. 
              Molecular biology approaches are however, beginning to reveal principals of the
              ecology  of the dominant members of microbial communities, which are leading to
              their cultivation.  We have begun a program of "bioremediation ecology" to
              evaluate whether fundamental principles of chemical behavior and microbial
              ecology lead to a more predictive knowledge of how to manage contaminant
              spills.  We have shown that unique contaminant-degrading microorganisms can be
              cultivated in media which simulates the low-bioavailability microenvironments
              resulting from contaminant sorption to soil organism matter.  Here, we will
              examine their fitness relative to contaminant-degrading microorganisms
              cultivated in unrealistic medium environments.  Spills occur as mixtures, yet
              most contaminant-degrading microogranisms are cultivated on purifies
              contaminants.  We will examine whether increasing complexity of contaminant
              mixtures, and their interactions with realistic organic-matter
              microenvironments, increases niche diversity, thereby increasing the diversity
              of specialized contaminants-degrading microorganisms need for effective in situ
              bioremediation.  Such results have the potential to change the way we think
              about the microbial ecology of bioremediation, by identifying the most-fit
              microbial populations and understanding their specializations a basis for their
              successful manipulation.
