Title       : CISE Research Instrumentaion: Acquisition of a Mobile Robot Scanning System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1999  
File        : a9729844

Award Number: 9729844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86077              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Allen allen@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Kender  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shree K. Nayar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Feiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9729844  Allen, Peter  Columbia University    CISE Research Instrumentation:
              Acquisition of a Mobile Robot Scanning System    This research instrumentation
              grant contributes to the purchase of a mobile robot scanning system, comprised
              of a an outdoor, autonomous robot vehicle with a large payload and an on-board
              centimeter resolution Global Positioning System for accurate location of the
              vehicle. The instrumentation will enable the following projects:- Automatic 3-D
              Site Modeling,- Automated Visual Navigation,- Integration of Physical and
              Virtual Views, and- Optimal Representation and Verbal Description of Large
              Scale Objects and Path.    The mobile scanning equipment acquired will
              contribute to develop highly accurate 3-D site models that encompass geometric
              and photometric properties of the scene.  There are 4 aspects to this research
              which require a mobile base robot, an accurate GPS location system, and 2-D and
              3-D imaging sensors. First, the models will be built by using the mobile base
              to acquire images and a new range scan mesh extrusion algorithm will create
              volumetric models. Sensor planning algorithms will also be developed to
              determine regions where the robot can navigate to complete a partially built
              model by further sensing.  Second, the robot will be equipped with
              omnidirectional cameras which can be used for structure-from-motion scene
              recovery, and model registration research. Third, the system will be used for
              research on change detection and model evolution on existing models of the
              environment. The GPS system can provide ground truth for the accuracy of these
              algorithms, and allow interaction with an existing low-precision human-mounted
              system for tracking.  Fourth, the system will be used as a "guide" through an
              environment.  It can take navigational and environmental   queries in
              verbal/gestural form, and present its findings about the objects   of interest
              in the scene in natural language.
