Title       : Technician Support: Supervisor of Computer Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9729976

Award Number: 9729976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Park jeffrey.park@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Lees  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jay J. Ague  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Danny M. Rye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark T. Brandon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald B. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio C. Lasaga  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Neil M. Ribe  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9729976  Lees      This grant provides three years of partial support for a
              computer  technician to supervise and administer the growing computer 
              facilities in the Department of Geology and Geophysics (G&G) at  Yale
              University. The matching funds for this grant, awarded by  the Instrument and
              Facilities (IF) Program of the NSF Division of  Earth Sciences,  will be at a
              level of 50% from Yale University.  The computer technician will be responsible
              for maintaining  hardware compatibility, monitoring user disk use, backing up
              hard  disks, creating new accounts and supervising charges where  appropriate,
              purchasing and installing miscellaneous expendable  supplies (printer paper,
              ink, toner, cables), and introducing  students and staff to the basics of Unix
              and other operating  systems.  An important task for the administrator will be
              the  security of the Yale G&G computer systems.  He/she will be  responsible
              for monitoring outside entry into our systems,  updating passwords for users
              and for root access, and removing  unneeded internet-access ports to the
              systems.  The administrator  will also assist in acquiring and, in some cases
              developing, new  graphics and computational software to be used for research
              and  education.  Technical support will immediately benefit a large  group of
              productive and NSF funded researchers in the geosciences  for computational
              studies in tectonics, theoretical mineral  physics and chemical kinetics,
              seismic tomography, mantle  dynamics and lower atmospheric dynamics.  ***
