Title       : Factors Regulating Programmed Cell Death in an Insect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9729581

Award Number: 9729581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Booker rb28@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9729581  BOOKER      During development of an organism, more cells  are formed
              than are needed for the final body plan.  This excess  cell formation is
              particularly noteworthy in the nervous system,  where individual cells have
              unique roles.  Programmed cell death  (PCD) plays a central role in the
              elimination of excess cells and  in sculpting developing systems.  The goal of
              this project is to  improve our understanding of the cellular mechanisms
              underlying  PCD, using the central nervous system of the moth Manduca sexta as 
              a model system.  Programmed cell death is a common feature of  Manduca's
              postembryonic development.  During the larval stage,  thousands of
              adult-specific neurons are added to the ganglia of  the central nervous system,
              and throughout this period of cell  addition, cell death is also observed.  In
              addition, the  transition between the larval and adult stages is characterized
              by  the death of obsolete larval muscles and neurons that are not  required by
              the adult.  Previous research has shown that the  pattern of cell death
              observed in Manduca depends on such things  as the cell's lineage, segmental
              identity, and time of birth.  This complex pattern of cell death most likely
              results from  differences in the mechanisms underlying PCD in different cells. 
              Dr. Booker will carry out a series of experiments that are  designed to
              investigate these mechanisms.  A series of endocrine  manipulations will be
              used to determine whether the steroid  hormone ecdysone plays a role in
              regulating the neuronal PCD  observed in the larval stage, and after the onset
              of  metamorphosis.  During postembryonic development, the level of  cell death
              is higher in the abdominal compared to the thoracic  ganglia.  To learn more
              about the role of segmental identity in  the regulation of PCD, a moth homeotic
              mutant, in which one  thoracic segment is duplicated, will be examined to
              determine if  its pattern of cell death is altered.   A biochemical 
              characterization of PCD within the nervous system will be  done  using a series
              of specific inhibitors of the ubiquitin-dependent  proteolytic pathway, because
              preliminary evidence suggests that  this pathway plays a key role in PCD in the
              moth.  Dr. Booker's  group has found that application of potent inhibitors of
              the  ubiquitin-dependent pathway can selectively block the PCD of  muscles in
              the developing moth.  This finding will allow them to  directly test which cell
              types, at which developmental stages,  utilize this mechanism of PCD.  The
              results obtained from this  series of experiments will improve our
              understanding of the  biochemical mechanisms involved in PCD, and how PCD can 
              selectively occur in different cell types at different times.
