Title       : SGER: Innovative Design and Fabrication of High Performance and Low Cost Optical
               Fiber Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9729213

Award Number: 9729213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Q. Feng mfeng@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
               This exploratory research project investigates an innovative idea on design and
              fabrication techniques for low-cost and high-performance novel fiber sensors. 
              The proposed approach represents a major breakthrough over the traditional
              optical fiber sensors currently available but not widely used in practices due
              to their lack of robustness, low reliability and high cost.  Major research
              tasks in this project will include (1) development of fabrication techniques;
              (2) development of a prototype optical fiber displacement and accelerometer,
              together with their central signal processing units; (3)  experimental
              investigation on sensor performance; (4) study multiplexing techniques and
              develop a prototype multipoint sensor network; and (5) improvement of existing
              designs.  The sensor heads may also be embedded into materials, typically in
              advanced composites, to monitor their properties and behavior not only during
              processes but also over their service life.   This is an emerging research area
              in both mechanical and civil engineering.  The  project demonstrates a
              preliminary work on untested and novel ideas.   In addition, the project
              involves in a multi-disciplinary work in the areas of materials processing,
              mechanical, and civil structure.  With the attractive combination of high
              performance and low cost, the sensors can have unlimited applications in
              monitoring health conditions of various material and structure systems ranging
              from mechanical, aerospace, to civil  infrastructure systems. The research
              findings could significantly contribute to the development of a new generation
              of material and structural systems equipped with smart sensing capability to
              ensure system integrity, minimize maintenance cost and maintain material and
              structural longevity.
