Title       : Support for a Geological Society of America's Penrose Conference Entitled
               "Linking Spatial and Temporal Scales in Paleoecology and Ecology," May 1998,
               Annapolis, Maryland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1997   
File        : a9729032

Award Number: 9729032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew S. Cohen acohen@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9729032  Cohen    This proposal provides a rationale for partial funding from
              the National Science Foundation in support of a Penrose conference entitled
              "Linking spatial and temporal scales in paleoecology and ecology".  The Penrose
              conference series is the primary research conference series of the Geological
              Society of America (GSA).  Because of its interdisciplinary nature, this
              conference is being cosponsored by the Ecological Society of America (ESA) and
              the Paleontological Society (PS).  Here we provide a rationale for NSF funding,
              which will be used to cover travel and conference costs for key U.S. and
              international speakers, and to allow for increased graduate student
              participation.  The idea for holding this meeting arose out of long-standing
              discussions among the conveners concerning the need to increase communication
              between paleoecologists and ecologists.  Long standing splits in departmental
              affiliation (geology vs. organismal biology), professional society affiliation
              and training have hampered communication channels between the two disciplines. 
              However the need for such an informational exchange and synthesis has become
              greater than ever as a result of cross-cutting societal problems such as
              impending global climate change and loss of biodiversity that will depend on
              information input from both fields.  Through the use of brief formal
              introductory talks, followed by extensive periods for poster sessions, panel
              discussions and open workshops we hope to achieve a synthesis of how the two
              disciplines can interact more effectively in the future.    We have two goals
              for the conference support funding we request from NSF.  First, we want to
              insure that outstanding scientists who share our goals of interdisciplinary
              synthesis are well represented at the conference.  Second, we want to promote
              this goal in the upcoming generation of graduate students in ecology and
              paleoecology, by providing them with cross disciplinary contacts early in their
              careers and breaking down traditional cross -disciplinary barriers that often
              make this leap more difficult later in one's career.
