Title       : Maternal Influences on Hormonal Activity and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a9729595

Award Number: 9729595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Hennessy michael.hennessy@wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              97-29595  Hennessy    It is well established in humans that adaptive
              physiological functioning and health are influenced by the social environment. 
              This effect is perhaps most apparent in the mother-infant relationships. 
              Infants that are involuntarily separated from their mothers may suffer severe
              physiological and behavioral consequences.  Most of what we know concerning the
              physiological effects has derived from studies using nonhuman primates.  These
              effects include increases in sympathetic activity, changes in neurotransmitter
              levels, and increased activity of the pituitary-adrenal system, a
              neuroendocrine system associated with stress.  In contrast, the presence of the
              mother in threatening environment can reduce stress-associated neuroendocrine
              responses of the infant.  It has been assumed that the mother's capacity to
              reduce stress responses somehow generalizes or transfer to other social
              partners as the individual matures.  This issue, however, has received little
              study and is poorly understood.  One reason is that for many years, it was only
              possible to study such questions in primates, and possibly humans.  In his
              previous NSF support, Dr. Hennessy developed a rodent model in which the
              responses to maternal separation is similar to those of primates and this
              offers many practical advantages.  In the present series of studies, he will
              used this rodent model system to examine the effect of the mother's presence on
              neuroendocrine stress responsible in juvenile and adult offspring.  Dr.
              Hennessy will involve undergraduates into his research program directed towards
              determining if, and at what age, other social partners attain the capacity to
              moderate stress-responsiveness.  The results from these studies will provide
              fundamental information regarding the development of social influences on
              stress-related neuroendocrine activity.
