Title       : An Isotopic Approach for Determining the Industrial Fraction of the Total Methyl
               Bromide Source to the Atmosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a9729110

Award Number: 9729110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215438             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen H. Goldstein ahg@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9729110  Goldstein     Methyl bromide (CH3Br) is a trace gas that constitutes
              the largest source of bromine atoms to the stratosphere.  While the role of
              bromine in stratospheric ozone loss has been well documented, the current
              understanding of methyl bromide sources suffers from major uncertainties. 
              Unlike chlorofluorocarbons, methyl bromide is released by both industrial and
              non-industrial processes.  The industrial source is dominated by agricultural
              fumigation while the largest non-industrial sources appear to be biological
              production in the oceans and inorganic production during biomass burning.  The
              magnitude of the industrial source is known to within 50%, but the magnitudes
              of the non-industrial sources are highly uncertain. The industrial source
              fraction of methyl bromide is thus highly uncertain.  A mass balance method
              based on carbon isotopes for determining the industrial source fraction will be
              developed in this project.  Preliminary work has shown the isotopic signature
              of industrially produced methyl bromide to be very different from that expected
              for non-industrial sources of methyl bromide, which are likely to reflect the
              signature of their carbon source.  Isotopic fractionations associated with the
              main sink mechanisms (OH oxidation, ocean degradation, and soil degradation)
              are likely to be small, because of the high molecular mass of methyl bromide. 
              If these predictions are verified, it will be possible to exploit the large
              difference in source signatures to determine the industrial fraction of the
              total methyl bromide source to approximately 10%.  New sampling protocols will
              be developed to preconcentrate methyl bromide, which occurs at very low (10
              pptv) concentrations in the atmosphere. Gas Chromatography - Isotope Ratio Mass
              Spectrometry (GC-IRMS) will be used to measure the carbon isotope ratio of
              atmospheric methyl bromide. In the course of this project, the isotopic
              fractionation associated with the major sources (oceans, biomass burning,
              industrial) and sinks (OH oxi dation, ocean, and soil degradation) will be
              determined in collaboration with other research groups. If the assumptions on
              source and sink signatures can be verified, measurements of ambient air samples
              can be undertaken. If successful, these measurements will provide powerful new
              constraints on the methyl bromide budget, which are independent of the methods
              used to date.
