Title       : Global Change Research in the Americas: Round 3 of the IAI Initial Science
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a9729981

Award Number: 9729981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1878984            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerhard Breulmann gerhard@dir.iai.int  (Principal Investigator current)
              Armando Rabuffetti  (Principal Investigator former)
              Brad Wilcox  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Global Change Research
	      c/o INPE, Av.dos Astronautas
	      Brazil, BR      /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research  (IAI) was created
              by the Agreement Establishing the Inter  American Institute for Global Change
              Research, done at  Montevideo on May 13, 1992 (`the IAI Agreement`). The IAI 
              was created to coordinate and promote scientific research  related to global
              change in the Americas.  The Institute has  an evolving `Scientific Agenda`
              identifying particular areas  for research.  The US has played a leading role
              in the  creation of the IAI and has been an active participant in  the IAI
              since its creation.       The Principal Investigator proposes to carry out a
              plan  of research according to a Science Agenda that has been  defined by the
              scientific community of the Americas in a  series of meetings held over the
              last five years, and agreed  upon by the member States.  The Scientific Agenda
              is  complementary to the research priorities of the US Global  Change Research
              Program, and the results from this research  will be available to the US
              scientific community.      The IAI will make awards under the third round of
              the  Initial Science Program (ISP) to teams of research  institutions based in
              IAI member States. The IAI will  evaluate submitted proposals in terms of
              technical merit  using a peer-review system. Additionally, several workshop 
              activities to coordinate on-going and planned efforts with  other USG agencies
              (NASA, NOAA) and other international  global change research efforts will be
              supported, as well as  a summer scholarship program for two to three students
              per  summer.      The IAI receives additional support for the ISP from  the
              other Parties to the Agreement Establishing the IAI:  Argentina, Brazil,
              Canada, Costa Rica, Chile, Cuba, Mexico,  Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and
              Venezuela.  This  additional support takes the form of in-kind contributions 
              pledged directly to the IAI (20 full scholarships from the  Government of
              Brazil; 7 full scholarships from the  Government of Mexico; 2 full scholarships
              from the  Government of Canada), or in the form of pledges made at the  time of
              proposal submission in the form of investigator  salaries, ship-time, computer
              time, logistical support, etc.        The Inter-American Institute for Global
              Change  Research (IAI) was created by the Agreement Establishing the 
              Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research, done at  Montevideo on May
              13, 1992 (`the IAI Agreement`). The IAI  was created to coordinate and promote
              scientific research  related to global change in the Americas.  The Institute
              has  an evolving `Scientific Agenda` identifying particular areas  for
              research.  The US has played a leading role in the  creation of the IAI and has
              been an active participant in  the IAI since its creation.       The Principal
              Investigator proposes to carry out a plan  of research according to a Science
              Agenda that has been  defined by the scientific community of the Americas in a 
              series of meetings held over the last five years, and agreed  upon by the
              member States.  The Scientific Agenda is  complementary to the research
              priorities of the US Global  Change Research Program, and the results from this
              research  will be available to the US scientific community.      The IAI will
              make awards under the third round of the  Initial Science Program (ISP) to
              teams of research  institutions based in IAI member States. The IAI will 
              evaluate submitted proposals in terms of technical merit  using a peer-review
              system. Additionally, several workshop  activities to coordinate on-going and
              planned efforts with  other USG agencies (NASA, NOAA) and other international 
              global change research efforts will be supported, as well as  a summer
              scholarship program for two to three students per  summer.      The IAI
              receives additional support for the ISP from  the other Parties to the
              Agreement Establishing the IAI:  Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Chile,
              Cuba, Mexico,  Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.  This 
              additional support takes the form of in-kind contributions  pledged directly to
              the IAI (20 full scholarships from the  Government of Brazil; 7 full
              scholarships from the  Government of Mexico; 2 full scholarships from the 
              Government of Canada), or in the form of pledges made at the  time of proposal
              submission in the form of investigator  salaries, ship-time, computer time,
              logistical support, etc.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
