Title       : Dryline Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2000   
File        : a9729631

Award Number: 9729631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Bannon bannon@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9729631  Bannon        The dryline is the surface boundary between two distinct
              air masses that  frequently inhabit the south central United States in Spring
              and early Summer.  To  the east of the line lies a relatively shallow cool
              moist maritime air mass and to the  west a deeper warm dry continental air
              mass.  This mesoscale phenomenon is  significant because it is often linked to
              the occurrence of severe weather (damaging  winds, hail and tornadoes). 
              Thunderstorms tend to develop along and to the east of  the dryline. The
              dryline often migrates several hundred kilometers to the east during  the day
              and then retrogrades westward during the night. This diurnal evolution of the 
              dryline helps make the forecasting of severe weather a major challenge.       
              The purpose of this research is to model the diurnal evolution in structure and
               position of the dryline.  The fundamental approach is to treat the dryline as
              the  western edge of a shallow layer maritime air mass.  The dynamics of this
              air mass  will first be studied using a simplified numerical model know as the
              shallow water  model.  The sensitivity of the model dryline to mass, momentum,
              and thermal  forcings will be ascertained and compared with existing theories. 
              A slab mixed-  layer model of the air mass will then be developed to more
              accurately represent the  major thermodynamic processes.  Refinements of the
              modeling effort include two  dimensional studies and an extension to multiple
              air masses.  This theoretical  approach of using models of intermediate
              complexity between analytic theory and  sophisticated mesoscale numerical
              models should be able to capture the essential  physics and provide insight
              into the dynamics of the dryline.  The results of the  research should provide
              a better understanding of the dryline and help the  forecasting of severe
              weather.  ***
