Title       : Research Experiences for Biology Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a9729391

Award Number: 9729391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia K. Freitag                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395772             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven B. Oppenheimer steven.oppenheimer@csun.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  913308309    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9729391  Oppenheimer    Forty-grade 5-12 life science and integrated science
              teachers per year for three years will be engaged in six-week summer
              experiences in the laboratories of working research scientists.  It is planned
              that the research experiences will be translated into classroom instructional
              practices as recommended by the National Research Council's National Science
              Education Standards.  TO this end an educator in the teacher preparation will
              assist teachers in bridging these two areas with the specific aim of improving
              science teaching and instruction.  The six-week research experiences will also
              include four enrichment activities on translation into best classroom
              instruction, teacher assessment of student work, bioethics, and recombinant DNA
              technology.  Two seminars will prepare the scientist mentors for their work
              with the teachers prior to the start of each summer program.  The scientists
              will make continued research experiences available during the academic year for
              teachers interested in continuing their research projects.  Extensive outreach
              efforts will target teachers from schools with 50-95% underrepresented. 
              Letters from principals have been received that pledge funds for supplies to
              implement student research projects in the classes of project teachers.  Nobel
              Laureate Francis Crick will work with the teachers motivating them to excel in
              the program.  A student research symposium will be held on or about June 1 of
              each year for students of the project teachers to present their research. 
              Students will also publish their research in the Journal of Student Research
              Abstracts and teachers will publish their work with their mentor scientists and
              present their work at meetings of professional societies.  The journal will be
              supported entirely by CSU, Northridge.  Curriculum expert, Dr. Norman Herr will
              assist all teachers in the transfer of their research experiences into a
              classroom research curriculum.  Classroom expert, Dr. Hakansson from UCLA and
              research expert Dr. Epel  from Stanford will direct evaluation.  Evaluation
              will include careful examination of teacher and student products, laboratory
              and classroom visitation and extensive use of case study modality.  The project
              will be institutionalized from day one of the program through a biology
              department course (Biology 699) that will permanently provide teachers with
              research experiences in the laboratories of research scientists at CSU,
              Northridge.  This project is intended to serve as a national model for the
              effective transfer of research experiences of teachers into best classroom
              student research training practices in the proper use of the scientific method
              and extensive peer review at every step of the research project.  The project
              is to also serve as a model for institutionalizing teacher research experiences
              through university courses.
