Title       : Support to Verify the Computer Database of the Herpetological Collections of The
               Field Museum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9729040

Award Number: 9729040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold K. Voris voris@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Resetar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                With over 265,000 specimens representing 6,239  species, the collection of the
              Division of  Amphibians and Reptiles at the Field Museum is one  of the five
              largest herpetological collections in  the United States.  By every measure the
              collection  is world class and heavily used.    Even greater usage is expected
              as the Division's  massive online herpetological database is improved.  Within
              the database, however, are some long-  standing problems which are now critical
              to resolve  in order to maximize its accuracy and usefulness to  both current
              users as well as the expanded  community expected to utilize online access. 
              Failure to correct these problems will have  deleterious effects as the errors
              in the database  are unnecessarily propagated in research, and in  professional
              and lay publications.    Since 1993 an attempt has been made to edit  portions
              of the database in response to incoming  requests for information or specimens.
               However  this labor-intensive process is incompatible with  the high levels of
              normal collection activities  which occupy virtually all available staff time. 
              This piecemeal approach has resulted in  unacceptable delays in responding to
              some requests,  and it has taken time from other essential  collection curation
              tasks, thereby creating other  problems.  Furthermore, such an approach is 
              impossible to implement with open access to online  users. Only a comprehensive
              approach to resolving  the current problems in the collections and the 
              database can assure that online users will have  complete,correct, current
              information about the  collection.    In order to verify, edit, and inventory
              the  collection database this two-phase project will  implement:    1) A
              careful, complete verification of the  agreement between the locality data in
              the database  records, the original collector/donor-supplied  records, and the
              original catalogs, followed by the  correction of any discrepancies.    2) A
              comprehensive collection inventory to assure  the matching of the contents  of
              containers, their  labels or inventory lists, and the information in  the
              database; and, to assure agreement information  in  the database records and on
              data tags attached to  the specimens.
