Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Large-Scale Data Visualization and Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9729878

Award Number: 9729878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew O. Ward matt@cs.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria I. Cruz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elke A. Rundensteiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CISE Research Instrumentation: Large-Scale Data Visualization and Management   
              9729878  Ward, Matthew O.  Worcester Polytechnic Institute    This research
              instrumentation grant contributes to the purchase of several low-end and one
              high-end graphics workstations, a high -end file server, several licenses, and
              a database Web-application server which will enable the following projects:-
              Hierarchical Visualization of Large Databases,- MultiMedia Visual Information
              Seeking (MMVIS) Technology for Temporal and Spatial Applications,  - Virtual
              Document Generation and Visualizations Multimedia Repositories, and   -
              Real-Time Visualization of Fire Simulation Databases. supporting efforts
              exploring aspects related to the storage, processing, and visualization of
              large multimedia data sets.  The projects will address:- Extension of current
              methods for visualizing multivariate data to support hierarchical views of very
              large data sets, with emphasis on interactive focusing and drill-down using
              N-dimensional brushes.- Incorporation of a visual direct-manipulation language
              for temporal and spatial query specification, and dynamic spatio-temporal
              visualizations of results, to make effective use of video and other multimedia
              resources.- Selection of needed information from distributed sources including
              the Web, and the presentation style that is meaningful to a particular
              application. The DelaunayMM project allows users to specify virtual documents
              through this  selection.- Development of a database for building-specific fire
              simulations to help predict the path of actual fires, with sensor-driven
              queries and visualization of matching fire futures guiding fire suppression
              efforts.    The computational resources made possible by this grant are
              essential for supporting the storage and analysis of the large-scale multimedia
              data sets   and for achieving the  necessary level of interactivity required by
              the visualization front-ends of all four projects.
