Title       : Studies on the Chemistry of Platinum Group Element Complexes Relating to
               Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1998  
File        : a9729311

Award Number: 9729311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Eisenberg rse7@chem.chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, which is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and  
              Organometallic Chemistry program, Dr. Richard Eisenberg of the University   of
              Rochester will continue his studies on the chemistry of platinum group  
              element complexes relating to homogeneous catalysis and bond activation.   
              Part one of the project is a continuation of mechanistic studies   involving
              applications of parahydrogen induced polarization (PHIP) to new  
              organometallic systems.  This method can permit the detection of new   hydride
              intermediates and may help elucidate the mechanism of hydrogen   addition.  The
              activation of hydrogen by oxidative addition to a variety   of metal centers
              will be investigated,  including  rhodium and iridium   complexes capable of 
              intramolecular C-H and C-C activation and   tantalocene hydrides.  The addition
              of hydrogen to metal-nonmetal   multiple bonds contained in alkylidene,
              alkylidyne, imido and sulfido   complexes will also be studied in an effort to
              provide proof for a   concerted 4-center addition.  Catalytic reactions that
              will be   investigated by PHIP include asymmetric hydrogenation and  
              hydroformylation.  Part two of the project focuses on the bond activation   and
              catalytic reactions of organometallic systems that exhibit   electrophilic or
              radical character.  Cationic diphosphine complexes of   Ir(III) and complexes
              with specifically designed tetradentate ligands   will be synthesized.  These
              complexes will have two adjacent labile sites   for substrate binding,
              activation, and coupling.   Related electrophilic   complexes of Pt and Pd with
              new diimine and diamine ligands will also be   studied.  These and related
              complexes will be screened for reactivity in   reactions that include H/D
              exchange, isomerizations, C-H bond activation,   and olefin polymerizataion. 
              Bond activation by odd electron complexes   will be studied with new d7 Rh(II)
              and Ir(II) Schiff base complexes that   contain tetradentate N and S donor
              ligands.   The metalloradical   reactions that will be studied most extensively
              are those involving C-H   activation of methane, toluene, alkanes, and zylenes,
              and radical driven   polymerizations.    A program of research on the chemistry
              of platinum group element   compounds relating to homogeneous catalysis and
              bond activation will be   conducted.  Platinum group element complexes include
              the most widely used   catalysts in industry today, and developments in the
              past decade,   particularly with regard to asymmetric catalysis and
              polymerization   catalysis, suggest that this role will increase in the future.
               This   program will advance our understanding of the fundamental
              transformations   that take place at the metal and will help in the design of
              new important   catalysts for the chemical and pharmaceutical industry.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
