Title       : Long Distance Reflexives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  2001   
File        : a9729519

Award Number: 9729519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291686             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Cole pcole@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C.T. James Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gabriella Hermon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9232,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                            This grant
              supports the continuation of collaborative, cross  linguistic research on long
              distance reflexives. Long distance  reflexives are reflexive forms which can
              take antecedents outside  of their local domain (governing category). For
              instance, in the  example below from Mandarin the reflexive can refer to either
              the  subject of the complement clause or of the matrix clause:           
              Zhangsan renwei Mali piping ziji      Zhangsan thinks Mary criticized self     
              'Zhangsan thinks that Mary criticized him/herself.'            The focus of
              this project is on determining empirically the  conditions under which a
              reflexive can be long distance and the  properties that correlate with the
              occurrence of long distance  reflexives. A second goal is to develop a theory
              that will predict  when a reflexive will be long distance and will have these 
              properties.          The project involves collaboration among three PIs and 
              three cooperating colleagues at universities in Singapore and  Malaysia. A
              major, new focus of research will be on determining  which of the conditions on
              long distance reflexives are  grammatical in nature and which derive from
              principles of  discourse such as logophoricity. The PIs will also examine
              whether  the interaction between grammar and discourse is the same in all 
              languages or whether languages exhibit different mixtures of  grammatical and
              discourse conditions.
