Title       : Applied Mathematical Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1998        
File        : a9729842

Award Number: 9729842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236134             (Estimated)
Investigator: Olvi Mangasarian olvi@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is driven by recent applications of mathematical  programming to
              machine learning, data mining, medical diagnosis  and prognosis and include the
              following problems:    FEATURE SELECTION: This is the problem of discriminating
              between  two finite sets in n-dimensional feature space by a separating  plane
              that utilizes as few of the features as possible. A step  function that appears
              in the objective of a linearly-constrained  mathematical programming
              reformulation is approximated by a  concave exponential on the nonnegative real
              line.  This leads to  a very fast iterative linear-programming-based algorithm
              that  terminates in a finite number of steps. Extensions to minimum-  support
              solutions of linear systems and complementarity problems  and neural networks
              with minimal number of hidden units will be  investigated.    CLUSTERING: The
              clustering problem of determining k centers in n-  space such that the sum of
              distances of each of m given points to  its nearest center is minimized.  A
              1-norm distance is used in  order to formulate the problem as that of
              minimizing a piecewise-  linear concave function on a polyhedral set. A finite
              successive  linear approximation algorithm terminates very quickly at a 
              stationary point which, for breast cancer medical databases, is  extremely
              useful as a mining tool for distinct  survival curves. Extensions to clustering
              around other geometric  entities such as planes or convex sets, clustering with
              feature  selection and applications to knowledge discovery in medical 
              databases will be pursued.    ROBUST REPRESENTATION: Relations within a
              database will be  modeled in a manner that remains valid when the database
              changes  moderately.  A simple linear model shows that if a sufficiently  small
              error is PURPOSELY TOLERATED in constructing the model,  then for a broad class
              of perturbations the model will be a more  accurate than one obtained by a
              conventional zero error  tolerance.  The effect of feature selection within
              tolerant  training, as well its  use to improve generalization in neural 
              networks will be studied.
