Title       : SGER: Survey of Employment, Income, and Attitudes in Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9729225

Award Number: 9729225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37084              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore P. Gerber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of the social consequences of economic reforms in Russia.  The
              systemic transformations of state socialist economies have no peacetime
              parallel in their scope and impact on the populations involved.  The rapid
              transitions from state socialism pose critical theoretical issues for
              sociologists: How do labor markets respond to institutional change directed by
              state policy makers?  How does market transition in former state socialist
              societies alter patterns of socio-economic stratification?  What factors shape
              economic and political attitudes in the context of rapid institutional change? 
              To answer these questions this project will study Russia, state socialism's
              birthplace and paradigmatic incarnation.     To address the important
              theoretical issues, this research will collect the following data (and usual
              demographic indicators) combined in one survey: 1) employment histories since
              1987, to trace job shift and labor force participation patterns since the onset
              of economic reforms; 2) social origins and background characteristics from the
              pre-reform era, including respondents' and parents' involvement in the
              Communist Party of the Soviet Union, to determine how one's standing in the
              previous social order shapes life chances in the new institutional context; 3)
              longitudinal data on current employment, household structure, and material
              standing, to illuminate what shapes individual-level success and failure as
              institutional change proceeds; and 4) longitudinal data on economic and
              political attitudes, to reveal the dynamic interplay of attitudes, employment,
              and income, and to assess the reliability of attitude measures in Russia.  The
              Survey of Employment, Income, and Attitudes in Russia (SEIAR) will provide the
              first wave of what will eventually be a panel study of employment, income and
              attitude dynamics.     SEIAR will be fielded in two stages, one in November
              1997, one in January 1998.  A supplemental battery of 35 questions will be
              added to the bi-monthly "Omnibus" surveys con ducted by the All-Russian Center
              for Public Opinion and Market Research (VCIOM). Since the Omnibus surveys
              already contain some of the necessary information, 35 items will suffice to
              provide the full content described above.  The two data sets will be pooled
              (anticipated N=4800).  Moreover, to determine the feasibility of an eventual
              panel survey, respondents will be asked if they are willing to be
              re-interviewed and the appropriate records will be kept.     The unique timing
              and content of the survey will permit qualitative leaps in our knowledge
              regarding employment, stratification, and attitudes in Russia.  In particular,
              the data will facilitate studies of how the Russian labor market has evolved
              over the course of the reform period, what shapes material success and failure
              in the post-Soviet era, how status in the Soviet period influences post-Soviet
              material situation, and what determines Russians' economic views.  The data
              will be especially useful should a panel study eventuate from this initial
              round.  However, the initial round will yield important insights by itself, and
              it is necessary in order to determine whether a longitudinal study on these
              topics is viable.
