Title       : Flume Studies of the Effects of Reproductive Mode, Larval Concentration and
               Hydrodynamics on Larval Settlement Rate of Infaunal Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a9729972

Award Number: 9729972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319642             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria R. Starczak   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl A. Zimmer  (Principal Investigator former)
              Wade R. McGillis  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The objective of this laboratory flume study is to quantify settlement rate as
              a function of larval availability for species of benthic invertebrates that
              vary in reproductive mode (i.e., with planktotrophic or lecithotrophic larvae)
              and taxonomic affinity (polychaetes and bivalves). Larval availability, here
              defined as the supply of larvae to the bed, is a product of a larval
              concentration and a velocity term. Thus, experiments are designed specifically
              to test the relative influence of these two factors on settlement rate. Three
              hypotheses will be tested. Hl: Settlement rate varies as a function of
              reproductive mode; lower settlement rates and higher settlement variability are
              associated with planktotrophic as compared with lecithotrophic larvae. H2:
              Settlement rate increases with increasing planktonic larval concentration until
              it reaches an asymptotic value, at which point the bed is saturated. H3: Larval
              flux to the bed can be described as an eddy diffusion process, where the key
              hydrodynamic parameter is the boundary shear velocity. In the course of testing
              these hypotheses, this study will also determine (1) the relationship between
              bulk concentration of larvae in the flow and flux of larvae to the bed, (2) if
              larval settlement is directly proportional to larval availability, and (3) the
              probability of settlement (i.e., of a larva remaining on the bed once
              deposited). A long term goal of this research is the prediction of settlement
              rate in the field from data on larval availability and flow, and thus
              experiments will be conducted so that a general, quantitative expression can be
              developed to predict settlement from larval flux to the bed.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
