Title       : The Uruk Collapse and the Uruk Expansion: Excavations at Tilbes Hoyuk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1999   
File        : a9729816

Award Number: 9729816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62812              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell S. Rothman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Widener Univ Main Campus
	      14th and Chestnut
	      Chester, PA  19013    215/499-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Mitchell Rothman will conduct two
              seasons of archaeological investigation at the site of Tibles Hoyuk which is
              located on the Euphrates River in Turkey. With the  construction of the
              Euphrates River dam, this site and many others which document the rise of state
              level societies in the Near East will soon be lost to scientific research. The
              site and associated cemetery date to the Late Copper and Early Bronze ages,
              during the fourth millennium BC and both precede and succeed the  period of
              Uruk expansion. Together with adjacent sites coincident with the Uruk, Tibles
              Hoyuk spans a crucial period in Near Eastern prehistory. The Uruk state which
              was located in southern Mesopotamia is the first of the great regional empires
              and thus represents an important stage in the development of complex societies.
              Archaeologists wish to understand how empires, which brought divergent peoples
              together in a single political structure, functioned and how they were
              maintained given the difficulties in communication and transportation which
              characterized technologically simple societies. The Euphrates area in Turkey
              represents a hinterland at the Uruk's northernmost fringes and thus offers an
              interesting perspective to examine questions of control and independence.
              Anthropologists have proposed a number of models which range from conquest and
              complete dependence to more complex forms of mutually dependent economic
              interaction. Because Dr. Rothman has a sequence which precedes, coincides with
              and then succeeds the Uruk expansion into the region, he has a valuable context
              in which to examine the question.  In contrast to larger urban centers, Tibles
              Hoyuk is a village site typical of those in which most people lived. Through
              broad horizontal excavations and the analysis of ceramics and other material
              remains, as well as associated flora and fauna, it will be possible to
              reconstruct both the economic and subsistence organization of the site and also
              gain insight into social organization. On these bases, the relative degree of
              economic and political independence, and how these changed over time, can be
              gauged.   This research is important because it will provide new insight into
              the emergence of state level societies. It will serve an important salvage
              function and provide data of interest to many archaeologists.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
