Title       : Cognition East and West: Attention Categorization, and Reasoning for East Asians
               and European Americans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9729103

Award Number: 9729103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Nisbett nisbett@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project will investigate the contention of scholars in many fields that
              East Asians and people who are products of European culture reason differently.
               East Asians are held to reason holistically, attending to the `field` or
              context in which objects are embedded and attributing causality to interactions
              between the object (person, animal, or thing) and the field.  Also, there is no
              tradition of formal logic in East Asia; instead there is a preference for
              `dialectical` reasoning in which opposing facts or points of view are resolved.
               Europeans are held to be analytic, attempting to discern properties of the
              object and attributing causality to such properties. Formal logic plays a role
              in reasoning and is used to create general laws about the behavior of objects
              based on their category memberships.    Preliminary research provides some
              support for these hypotheses. For example, Americans tend to explain the
              behavior of people by referring exclusively to personality traits, whereas East
              Asians understand the same behavior in terms of the social context.  East
              Asians are less likely to use categories in making inductive inferences, for
              example, to spontaneously think of `mammals` when asked to generalize from one
              animal to another.  East Asians more accurately detect covariation among
              arbitrary stimulus events in the environment, such as those presented in
              different locations on a computer screen. Asian students like dialectic
              proverbs, that is, those involving a contradiction, and prefer dialectic to
              linear arguments.    This project will build on the preliminary findings by
              examining 1) the tendency to classify objects using categories based on formal
              rules vs. memory for similar objects; 2) the ability to detect relationships
              among features of an object vs. ability to detect covariation among events in
              the field; 3) the degree to which attention is paid to the object vs. the
              field; 4) the degree to which causal attribution for events is to the object
              vs. to the field; and 5) the ability to learn and use abstract rules for
              reasoning. Participants will be Americans studied in the U.S., and Chinese
              studied in the U. S. and China.  Additional work will study the social factors
              which presumably underlie the cultural differences: the prediction is that
              attention to the social field with be associated with holistic reasoning style
              within both cultural groups.    Results are expected to raise serious questions
              about the universality of cognitive processes commonly regarded as basic and to
              suggest that psychologists may not have correctly identified the `fault lines`
              of cognition. For example, the importance of categories and formal inductive
              and deductive rules may be less great than generally presumed. The results can
              also be expected to suggest that there may be different styles of learning that
              should be taken into consideration when teaching members of different groups;
              and to provide evidence that cultural diversity of work groups has advantages
              for problem-solving. Finally, the results are relevant to understanding
              interaction between Asians and Americans in business and government contexts:
              The two groups are likely to have different and potentially conflicting
              understandings of the motives underlying behavior.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
