Title       : Computerization of the Vascular Plant Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a9729016

Award Number: 9729016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160631             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret R. Bolick mbolick1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda L. Rader  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This project is a computerization effort that will capture  data for $140,000
              of the 200,000 vascular plant specimens in  the C.E. Bessey Herbarium
              (herbarium acronym: NEB) of the  University of Nebraska State Museum (UNSM). In
              detail, this  project will comprise data capture and barcoding of the  vascular
              plant specimens from the United States and Canada,  beginning with the 13
              angiosperm families that are most  numerous in this collection and in the
              northern Great Plains  and continuing until all of the North American vascular 
              plants are entered.  The herbarium project will also provide  a model for all
              the collections of the UNSM as the Museum  strives to convert its records to an
              interoperable database  that will be central to research, collection
              management,  service, exhibits, and education.    The database will conform to
              current standards for the  discipline and follow future developments available
              from the  IUBS Commission of Taxonomic Databases (TDWG) and the US 
              Organization for Biodiversity Information through their  respective web sites.
              This effort, which is fully  coordinated with those at the R. L. McGregor
              Herbarium  (herbarium acronym: KANU) of the University of Kansas  Natural
              History Museum (KUNHM), will result in a plant  database for the central and
              northern Great Plains that is  both regionally and historically complete. The
              NEB database  will follow the KANU protocol in using the botany module of  Zoe,
              a museum-specific and flexible data model developed by  Julian Humphries in
              Microsoft's relational database Access.    Computerization of data for the
              remaining vascular plant  specimens (60,000 sheets), the non-vascular plant
              specimens  (80,000 packets), and the paleobotanical specimens (10,000 
              fossils)will be the focus of efforts after the completion of  this project. 
              The other long-term goals of this proposed  project are (1)georeferencing the
              collection records for  compatibility with GIS databases;(2) insuring 
              interoperability with other units of the UNSM and oth er  natural history
              collections,  especially KUNHM; and (3) developing a parallel taxon-based 
              database to facilitate educational and public use of this  specimen-based
              database.  Because these long term goals are  best accomplished with regional
              efforts, the procedures to  be followed and the database structure are based on
              those of  the KANU Collections Information Management System (CIMS) so  that it
              will be easier for both institutions to coordinate  future developments to
              optimize the research, educational,  and outreach uses of each museum's
              database.
