Title       : Social Reasoning About Group Inclusion and Exclusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9729739

Award Number: 9729739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Stangor Stangor@psyc.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Melanie Killen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to investigate how children, adolescents, and
              adults make judgments about including or excluding people from activities on
              the basis of their group membership. As an example: Is it legitimate for an
              all-girl ballet club to exclude a boy who wants to join? In general, the
              research is designed to investigate how social knowledge, including social
              stereotypes, develops across childhood and into adulthood, as well as to study
              how and when this knowledge is brought to bear upon judgments in children and
              adults. This is a collaborative project designed to link a well-developed
              literature on social and moral reasoning from developmental psychology with
              conceptions of stereotypes and intergroup relations as developed by social
              psychologists. The research is based on the assumption that social stereotypes
              play a much broader role in how people think about group relations than has
              usually been considered by social psychologists. It is proposed that
              stereotypes may serve to justify social actions, in addition to influencing
              judgments about and behavior toward individuals. In the research, individuals
              will be asked to judge hypothetical scenarios in which one person excludes
              another person from an activity which is known to invoke stereotypes. It is
              expected that when principles of fairness, equity, and rights are brought to
              bear on such judgments, the decisions and behaviors will be non-exclusionary,
              and consistently so across a variety of situations. When social-conventional
              reasoning, including beliefs about group functioning and social stereotypes, is
              used as a basis of decision-making, decisions are expected to be exclusionary,
              group-specific, and highly contingent upon the current social context. It is
              anticipated that the findings of this research will provide valuable
              information for teachers, educators, social workers, and school psychologists
              who are confronted with intergroup tension in interactions among children,
              adolescents, and adults in a multitude of settings.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
