Title       : The Physics of Plasma-Induced Charging Damage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1998 
File        : a9729968

Award Number: 9729968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantinos P. Giapis giapis@cheme.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xue-Yu Qian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9729968
Giapis
Patterned surfaces are frequently exposed to plasmas as in
              plasma characterization through minuscule sampling orifices or in applications
              ranging from etching, deposition, and ashing in microelectronics, to selective
              surface functionalization.  Frequently, the patterns consist of dissimilar
              materials (insulating masks, conductive metal or polysilicon, gate and field
              oxide), which charge up as a result of the directionality difference between
              ions and electrons at the plasma-sheath exit.  Plasma-induced charging may
              cause ion deflection with undesirable consequences; for example, mask charging
              leads to sidewall profile irregularities when etching high aspect ratio
              features.  

In this proposal, we seek to reveal the fundamental physics of
              plasma-induced charging 
through a combined experimental and theoretical
              approach focused on dense sub-micron 
patterns of insulators and conductors
              similar to those encountered during plasma etching.  
Large-scale Monte Carlo
              simulation will combine sheath dynamics,  microstructure 
charging,
              electrostatics, reactions, scattering, electron tunneling through t n
              insulators, and 
surface currents to shed light into a variety of conflicting
              reports on the influence of 
plasma parameters on charging damage.  In
              particular, we seek to understand the nature of 
the so called "electron
              shading" damage, which causes catastrophic electron tunneling 
currents
              through the gate oxide in polysilicon-on-insulator structures. Significant
              modeling 
effort on pattern-dependent charging effects will be expanded to
              include tunneling effects 
and surface currents and will be used to
              predict:

a)	The influence of electron temperature, rf bias, and rf frequency
              on charging damage.
b)	Aspect-ratio-dependent charging effects.  Is there a
              correlation between microloading and electron                  
              shadowing?
c)	Mask thickness effects.  How will the use of thinner hard
              (oxide) masks impact charging                 damage?
d)	Feature- and
              wafer-scale effects.  Does charging of a particular feature affect damage in   
                                neighboring trenches?
e)            Pulsed-plasma effects. 
              Why do pulsed plasmas reduce both forms of charging damage? 
f)            
              New device-layout rules for eliminating charging damage.

The simulation
              results will be validated by extensive etching experiments in a high density
              plasma produced in a helical resonator

