Title       : AMP: A Study of the Facilitators and Barriers to the Participation of Science
               among African-Americans Attending HBCU's and Majority Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9729401

Award Number: 9729401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna R. Sterling dsterlin@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred L. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0HRD-9729401  Sterling    It is the intent of this research project to
              investigate the  facilitators and barriers to the participation of
              African-Americans  in science.  This study will not only attempt to determine
              to what  extent do these factors affect African-American science majors in 
              college, but it will also attempt to identify any existing  differences among
              these factors for African-Americans attending  Historically Black Colleges and
              Universities (HBCUs) as compared to  those attending majority institutions. 
              The population sample  selected for this investigation consists of
              African-American  science majors participating in the Alliance for Minority 
              Participation (AMP) program funded by the National Science  Foundation.   
              Existing data, such as information complied in the Alliance for  Minority
              Participation Monitoring and Reporting Systems (AMP-MARS)  and databases
              created by the National Center for Education  Statistics (NCES), will be
              analyzed to determine the existance of  any documented facilitators and
              barriers to science participation.   Additional questionnaires and surveys will
              be created,  disseminated, and collected in order of answer more specific 
              questions that were not addressed and in the respective databases.   Personal
              interviews with students, faculty, and administrators will  also serve as a
              form of a research dissertation, defended and  completed by one of the
              principal investigators of this project.    As facilitating characteristics and
              barriers to the participation  of African-Americans in science are identified,
              this information  could be used in the preparation and planning of student
              programs.   The identification of effective program characteristics could also 
              lead to changes in the structure and implementation of existing AMP  programs,
              or any other program that seeks to increase diversity in  the scientific
              workforce.  This research investigation has the  potential to add new insights
              to the knowledge-base related to the  increased participation of und
              errepresented minorities in the  scientific and technological workforce.  This
              project will attempt  to identify many of these factors in the form of
              facilitators and  barriers and will also attempt to compare these factors for 
              African-Americans students attending HBCU's against those attending  majority
              institutions.
