Title       : Women and Migration in the Central Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9729824

Award Number: 9729824
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144390             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha W. Rees mrees@agnesscott.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Agnes Scott College
	      
	      Decatur, GA  30030    404/373-2571

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This project asks how women in the central valley of Oaxaca, Mexico manage
              their households while a male member migrates. This region of Mexico has one of
              the highest migration rates in the country. The project, involving an
              anthropologist from Agnes Scott College in Atlanta and her Mexican colleague
              from the University of Guadalajara, will study the nature of the families,
              households, and resources women in migrant households deal with. The
              researchers will describe the women's households of origin and ascription,
              compare households with migrants to those of non-migrating siblings, and
              describe the economic behavior of women in migrant households. The project will
              test hypotheses about the impact of wages on migration: that men migrate alone
              because their migrant wages are insufficient to support their families at their
              destinations; that men are able to migrate because female labor finances the
              trip and supports the household in the meantime; and that local conditions in
              Mexico can explain variations in migrant sending rates over time.  The project
              will use a mix of methods, a survey of about 1,000 women in 20 communities (a
              10% sample of central valley communities); an extensive life history interview
              with five women from each community to determine kinship, lineage histories,
              household consumer-worker ratios, and more traditional ethnographic
              interviewing and participant observation.  This research is important because
              it will advance our understanding of the causes of Mexican migration to the US.
               By focusing on the role of women and of local conditions in the originating
              households the project will contribute valuable new knowledge to complement the
              existing surveys which focus on males.                                         
                       ?/¥Á? ?> ¥©Á ?Á?` ??Á??¢Á   Á??Á??_Á>¥/% ¥Á?©>???Á¢ ?Á????Á? Â?? ¥©Á
              ?>?Á¢¥?À/¥??> ?Â ????> ©`????Á¢                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
