Title       : Regulation and Assembly of a Type III Protein Secretion Apparatus in Pseudomonas
               syringae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9729524

Award Number: 9729524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Hutcheson sh53@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hutcheson  9729524  Type III protein secretion systems are required for the
              pathogenicity of many mammalian and plant pathogenic bacteria. This type of
              secretion system has been associated with the trans-location of proteins from
              bacteria into target cells of the host. We have previously shown that the
              hrp/hrmA gene cluster isolated from Pseudomonas syringae Pss61 encodes for the
              conserved components of a putative type III protein export apparatus (PEA) as
              well as an apparently dedicated regulatory system involving HrpL. Pathogenesis
              by P. syringae is thus likely to involve adhesion of the bacteria to plant
              cells, plant cell contact-dependent induction of hrp gene expression, assembly
              of a hrp-encoded type III PEA and translocation of virulence and host range
              determinants into target plant cells. The mechanisms for coordinating assembly
              of the PEA have only been partially characterized thus far. The overall goal of
              this project will be to elucidate the mechanisms controlling assembly of the
              hrp-encoded PEA and define the role of the PEA in the pathogenicity of P.
              syringae strains. In the proposed experiments we will: 1) complete the
              characterization of the HrpL-dependent regulatory system; 2) use a novel
              reporter gene system to dissect the secretion pathway for Avr products; and 3)
              employ a genetic screen to identify the genetic determinants regulated by
              HrpL-linked regulatory system.  Plants have the capability to recognize and
              respond to invading pathogens to protect themselves and thereby minimize
              disease. This involves recognition of pathogen signals by the cells of the
              plant.  The hrp genes of Pseudomonas syringae have been shown to function in
              the recognition process and the products of these bacterial genes are predicted
              to form an apparatus that injects proteins into plants cells.  These injected
              proteins are the stimulus to which the plant cells respond.  These experiments
              will use a genetic approach to investigate early steps in the recognition
              process.  Elucidation of the regulation a nd function of the hrp-encoded
              secretion apparatus will influence current research in molecular plant-microbe
              interactions by providing insights into: 1) molecules and regulatory pathways
              controlling disease resistance in plants; 2 innate mechanisms controlling
              pathogenicity of bacteria in plants; 3) new strategies for breeding stable crop
              resistance against a broad array of pathogens by targeting specific attributes
              of the pathogen; and 4) evolution of protein secretion systems functioning in
              the pathogenicity of mammalian and plant pathogens.
