Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Isotopic Composition of Equus Tooth Enamel and Its
               Relationship to Diet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1997 
File        : a9729940

Award Number: 9729940
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchel P. McClaran grama@ccit.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9729940  McClaran    The C and O isotope composition of structural carbonate
              (and phosphate) in the tooth enamel of fossil Equids has become widely used in
              Cenozoic paleoenvironmental studies in south Asia, Africa, and North America. 
              Yet, with respect to modern horse (Equus), there is insufficient knowledge of
              (1) what portion of the surrounding ecosystem the horses utilize for their
              diet, (2) the relationship of the isotopic composition of dietary intake to the
              isotopic composition of body water and dissolved CO2 in blood, and (3) the
              inter-and intra-tooth isotopic variability in a given individual.  A better
              understanding of these uncertainties is important to decipher the environmental
              significance of the C and O isotope composition of enamel.    We propose to
              conduct a two pronged study to answer these questions through: (1) controlled
              dietary studies on experimental horses at the UC Davis School of Veterinary
              Medicine and (2) a two year study of two feral horse herds in which we (a)
              isotopically characterize the surrounding ecosystem, (b) monitor the monthly
              plant species composition, and isotopic composition, of the horse diet, (c)
              monitor the O isotope composition of body water, (d) examine intra-tooth
              isotopic variability in selected individuals, and (e) examine intra-tooth
              morphological and isotopic variations.    One impetus for this research is the
              observations reported in the animal science and paleontological literature (as
              well asrecent findings by isotope chemists) that Equus teeth form over a
              significant period of an individual's life.  While the exact chronology is
              somewhat uncertain, we believe that teeth may potentially record both annual
              and seasonal variations in the isotopic record of the past than previously
              recognized.  Equally important, potential isotopic variations within an
              individual caused by physiology, rather than dietary intake, must be recognized
              for adequate interpretation of this isotopic proxy.    This research builds on
              pioneering studies of the relationshi p between environmental water and the O
              isotope composition of enamel phosphate, and on recent studies of in-tooth
              isotopic variability in fossil and modern organisms.  Our purpose here is to
              consolidate this existing knowledge into a cohesive experimental design that
              will adequately answer the questions that remain about Equus tooth enamel and
              its relevance as an isotopic proxy for environmental conditions.    This
              collaborative research will combine isotopic expertise (Ronald Amundson, UC
              Berkeley), expertise in horse physiology and surgery (John Pascoe, UC Davis),
              and experience in feral horse diet and habitat (Martin Vavra, Oregon State
              University and Mitchel McClaran, University of Arizona) into an integrated
              project that will thoroughly investigate the questions addressed by the
              proposal.
