Title       : SGER: High-Resolution Isotope Paleotemperature Record and Implications for
               Quaternary Climate Changes in the Caribbean, Based on Speleothems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1997 
File        : a9729262

Award Number: 9729262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16695              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keddy Yemane kyemane@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9729262  Yemane    Quaternary Caribbean climates are predominantly derived from
              data collected from environments.  Based on micropaleontological data CLIMAP
              concluded that the tropical ocean belt during the Quaternary had sea surface
              temperatures (SST) similar to or slightly warmer than the present, and that
              there was no warming between the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and the Holocene.
              (18O values of planktonic foraminifera infer small (<3(C) temperature changes
              whereas, those on corals suggest that early Holocene SST for the tropical ocean
              dropped by as much as 6.5(C than the present.  Another study on rare gasses
              dissolved in ice age ground water suggest that LGM temperatures were 5(C colder
              than today's surface continental temperatures.  Similarly, COHMAP numerical
              models based on general circulation patterns suggest a cooler tropical ocean
              where the average annual temperature may have been as low as 7-9(C cooler
              during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), but steadily increased to the present.  
               Although post-glacial anomalies show that tropical climate is sensitive to
              subtle changes in climate forcing mechanisms, the tropics are generally
              presumed to have buffered the effects of recent climate changes.  Since SST's
              may not accurately reflect terrestrial climates, it is necessary to obtain
              independent paleoclimatic data from terrestrial environments.  Continental
              datasets, such as from speleothems in Puerto Rico, can be used to evaluate the
              published climatic retrodictions and numerical climate models for the
              Caribbean, as well as perhaps assist in predicting future climate trends. 
              Speleothems form by the precipitation of CaCO3 as vadose seepage waters enter a
              cave and lose CO2 to the cave atmosphere.  Assuming that calcite deposition had
              occurred under conditions of oxygen isotope equilibrium, (18O measurements of
              the cave calcite would reflect surface paleotemperatures.     The proposed
              study aims to establish a paleotemperature proxy record from Puerto Rico, which
              will broaden the database fo r Quaternary climate changes in the tropics. 
              Thickness of carbonate growth layers will be measured to determine the rate of
              growth.  Cathodoluminescent, UV-fluorescence, and XRD studies on individual
              growth layers will be used to evaluate recrystallisation, carbonate alteration,
              and organic matter input.  Concentration of trace and ultra-trace elements in
              the speleothem samples will be measured by ICP-AES.  Absolute
              chronostratigraphy will be established on strategically selected samples by
              230Th/234U series method using high-precision thermal ionization mass
              spectrometer.  (18O and (13C ratios will be measured on samples collected along
              the axis of the speleothem on a high-precision automated mass spectrometer. 
              The resulting paleotemperature record will be compared to published data, as
              well as will be used to constrain the climatic and hydrologic processes on
              continental masses in the Caribbean Sea.
