Title       : Languages of the Vietnam-China Borderlands II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9729043

Award Number: 9729043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97103              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerold A. Edmondson jerry@ling.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth J. Gregerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project continues the preparation of a linguistic  database of the
              languages of the minority peoples living in the  Vietnam-China Borderlands,
              with special reference to phonological  and lexical features of groups who have
              migrated from China into  Vietnam.        This project is significant because
              it addresses historical  and migratory questions about the arrival of the Tai
              and Kadai,  Hmong-Mien, and Tibeto-Burman groups in northern Vietnam (Haut 
              Tonkin). Brethren of these peoples were to become the nation  states of
              Thailand, Laos, and Burma (Myanmar). Northern Vietnam  has served for centuries
              as a first station on a grand  Volkerwanderung of many ethnic groups from their
              original  homelands in South China to sites further south; indeed 25 out of  30
              of northern Vietnam's minority groups are also found in China.  The Thai end of
              this chain has been studied in some depth by Thai  and foreign scholars over
              the course of the last 35 years. To a  lesser degree, the Chinese end has been
              investigated by many  since 1982. The middle portion, however, "the Vietnam 
              connection", has remained linguistically poorly known up to now.       The data
              gathering process of the project will involve  making high quality tape and DAT
              recordings with microphones,  performing computerized speech analysis with the
              CECIL  software-hardware package, and studying voice quality (phonation  type)
              by means of the Rothenburg Mask.        The end product of this study will be:
              (a) a CD-ROM with  digital audio files of all recorded lexical data readable by
              both  DOS and Mac platforms, (b) a website at http:\\ling.uta.edu\  where all
              this audio data, transcribed forms in MS Excel format,  and analyses can be
              downloaded from any location worldwide, and  (c) a third volume in the series
              of books Comparative Kadai to  complement the first two volumes on Tai and
              Kam-Sui languages.
