Title       : Lexical Representation and Sentence Comprehension: A Multidisciplinary
               Conference, New Brunswick, NJ, March 19-21 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1998   
File        : a9729514

Award Number: 9729514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16072              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne Stevenson suzanne@ruccs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paola Merlo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A special conference session entitled "Lexical Representation and Sentence
              Comprehension: A  Multidisciplinary Perspective," will be held in conjunction
              with the 11th Annual CUNY Conference on  Human Sentence Processing, March
              19-21, 1998. Lexical influences on processing are currently a major focus  of
              attention in psycholinguistic studies of sentence comprehension; however, much
              of the work remains  isolated from the vast amount of scientific activity on
              the topic of the lexicon in other subdisciplines.  This is an opportune time to
              bring together researchers from these different perspectives to exchange ideas 
              and information that can help to inform each others' work. For the special
              session, the organizers have  invited four speakers from linguistics, computer
              science, and philosophy who have made significant  contributions to recent
              research on the lexicon in their fields, concerning the structure of lexical 
              information and the computation of probabilistic models over lexical features.
              In addition, three  discussants from the mainstream sentence processing
              community will play a key role in the session, by  elaborating on those aspects
              of the invited talks that are of particular relevance to theories of human 
              sentence processing. The proposed special session, along with a panel
              discussion and a set of talks and  posters selected from submitted abstracts on
              the topic, will provide a unique and timely multidisciplinary  exchange between
              the relevant areas of research. The CUNY conference is particularly well-suited
              to host the  special session because of its multidisciplinary nature,
              attracting psychologists, linguists, and computer  scientists who investigate
              all aspects of the human sentence processing mechanism. In order to continue 
              the dialogue on lexical representation among the various fields, the organizers
              plan to publish an edited  volume containing the papers from the special
              session.
