Title       : Pyrite: A Crucial Mineral and Surface for Microbial Life in Extreme Hydrothermal
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1997 
File        : a9729784

Award Number: 9729784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189151             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna-Louise Reysenbach   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1075,4444,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9714302  Luther                           PROJECT SUMMARY      Organisms that
              thrive in high temperature  (hyperthermophiles) ecosystems such as at
              terrestrial and  deep-sea hydrothermal vents, have challenged our 
              understanding of the physical and biochemical constraints on  the upper
              temperature limits for life and stimulated new  theories on how life originated
              (e.g. Baross and Hoffman,  1985; Pace, 1991). These hyperthermophiles are the
              most  closely related to the universal ancestor for all life (from  small
              subunit rRNA and gene duplication data) which supports  the theory that life
              arose in highly reduced, high  temperature environments such as those
              encountered at  hydrothermal vent systems. Recently scientists  proposed a 
              mechanism for the synthesis of the first molecules for life  in which pyrite
              can be synthesized abiotically with hydrogen  as a product, laying the
              framework for the evolution of the  first metabolic cycles. The central
              hypothesis of this study  maintains that the abiotic synthesis of pyrite
              provides the  essential properties for sequestering the energy sources for 
              chemoautotrophic metabolism of the deepest lineages of life.  Drs. Luther and
              Reysenbach believe that under an extreme  chemical and physical environment
              microorganisms can utilize  the resources provided on the pyrite surfaces for
              sustained  metabolism. They also believe that these organisms will  closely
              represent early life forms that may have occupied  similar extreme habitats.
              Furthermore, since molecular  phylogenetic evidence exists that the deepest of
              these  thermophilic lineages inhabit iron and sulfidic-rich  environments at
              deep-sea hydrothermal vents, they are well-  positioned to test these
              assertions.    The objective of  this research are: 1. To  establish whether
              pyrite and the associated adsorbed trace  metals and simple inorganic molecules
              will mediate the  microbial community structure in high temperature aquatic 
              environments. 2. To determine whether pyrite synthesis can  be predicted, 
              through the simultaneous measurement of FeS  and hydrogen sulfide. This project
              clearly addresses most of  the primary mandates of the LExEn research program.
              In this  interdisciplinary study these collaborators will integrate  molecular
              genetic approaches with in situ geochemistry to  study the diversity, ecology,
              and evolutionary history of  the microorganisms thriving in extreme habitats
              where  intense redox and temperature gradients exist.
