Title       : Collaborative Research: The Determinants and Consequences of Midlife Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a9729993

Award Number: 9729993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65022              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl Elman Cheryl2@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Social science research has emphasized early educational attainment for later
              economic and occupational outcomes, virtually ignoring the trend toward
              increased re-entry into education and vocational training among midlife
              workers. This project addresses the questions of (1) who returns to education
              in midlife, (2) what is the scheduling and shape of the educational trajectory
              over the life course relative to co-occurring role schedules in other domains,
              and (3) how does mid-life educational re-entry influence later economic and
              occupational states. In modeling these three processes, several alternative
              theoretical perspectives in stratification research will be examined. Data will
              be from two linked waves of the National Survey of Families and Households
              (NSFH), a nationally-representative, longitudinal data set. These data contain
              information about past and current educational/vocational exits and entries,
              contemporaneous job exits and entries, spousal and household situations, and
              detailed individual characteristics. We also attach the 1980 Occupational
              Characteristics data set to assist in measuring industrial and occupational
              characteristics. The models will include indicators of skills important in
              present-day occupational structures, such as computer use, the substantive
              complexity of jobs, and human resource management. The models also specify
              industrial sectors of the economy, especially those undergoing growth and
              technological change. Finally, we propose to replicate key outcome models using
              a fourth data set, the Health and Retirement Survey, a study that targets a
              subset of the age group under study.
