Title       : Interaction of a Boundary Layer with a Point Vortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a9729190

Award Number: 9729190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth H. Lichter s-lichter@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT    Proposal Number:  CTS-9729190    Principal Investigator:  Lichter 
                  This is a grant to explore simple models of the interaction of a vortex
              monopole with a wall-bounded shear layer at high Reynolds number, Re.  While
              boundary layer theory treats layers which are thin compared to the distance to
              the vortex, the model proposed here considers the physically more realistic
              problem of a vortex which is in close proximity to, or within, the boundary
              layer.  This work utilizes analytical models and efficient vorticity based
              numerical methods which have been developed previously.    Many industrial
              processes rely on vortex enhanced mixing of mass, heat or momentum between
              boundary layers and the bulk flow.  In other types of processes, vortices
              degrade performance and so their presence is discouraged.  The active control
              of transition relies on detection of vortices and their characterization in
              terms of their disruptive yield.  In spite of the numerous applications, 
              fundamental questions remain on how vortices and boundary layers interact such
              as: the role of vortices in initiating disturbances, the extent that the
              thickening of a separating boundary layer alters the trajectory of the vortex,
              the accuracy and range of applicability of non-interacting boundary layer
              methods,  the trajectories of vortices when near boundaries or within boundary
              layers and  the role of vortices in entraining fluid into the boundary layer
              and in ejection of boundary layer vorticity.    Because of the complexities of
              the issues involved there is a need, then, to simplify the governing equations
              while identifying and retaining the dominant mechanisms by which a vortex
              interacts with a boundary layer.  The model considered  here avoids the
              singularity present in boundary layer models and can describe boundary layer
              evolution to long times.  The model is accurate at  high Re and so complements
              methods whose accuracy is limited to low or moderate Re.  Furthermore, it
              considers the compact disturbance produced  by a vortex and so is an adjunct to
              methods which consider boundary layer receptivity to wave-like disturbances.   
              1      1
