Title       : Spectroscopy and Reaction Dynamics of Activated Entrance Channel Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9729234

Award Number: 9729234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marsha I. Lester milester@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 0000,1309,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Marsha Lester of the University of Pennsylvania is supported by the  
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program in her ongoing studies to  
              characterize the intermolecular potential, inelastic scattering and   reaction
              dynamics of vibrationally activated entrance channel complexes   composed of a
              hydroxyl radical and a reactive molecular partner (carbon   monoxide, nitric
              oxide, water).  Infrared excitation will provide   sufficient energy to
              overcome the activation barrier to reaction while   intermolecular excitations
              will orient the reactants such that the   structure of the complex approximates
              that of the transition state.    Prof. Lester will use double resonance
              techniques to record the mid- and   near-IR spectra of the OH stretch as well
              as intermolecular bending   levels of the OH complexes.  Spectral measurements
              should yield   information on the potential energy surfaces in the entrance
              channel to   reaction for ground state and vibrationally excited reactants.   
              The hydroxyl radical plays a pivotal role in the chemistry of the lower  
              atmosphere.  It is known as the `atmosphere's detergent` because its  
              reactions prevent the accumulation of most trace gases in the atmosphere,  
              many of which would act as air pollutants and greenhouse gases.  For the  
              majority of hydrogen-containing molecules emitted into the troposphere,  
              reaction with the OH radical is their major, if not sole, chemical loss  
              process.  Thus, reaction with OH radicals leads to the removal of these  
              compounds from the atmosphere and limits their atmospheric   concentrations. 
              Much experimental work has already been performed to   evaluate the OH radical
              kinetics and reaction mechanisms under the   conditions encountered in the
              atmosphere.  In these studies, Prof. Lester   will use techniques developed in
              her laboratory to take a much closer   look at the reactions dynamics of OH
              radicals with molecular partners of   atmospheric relevance such as carbon
              monoxide, nitric oxide and water.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
