Title       : Surface Enrichment in Nanodroplet Aerosols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9729274

Award Number: 9729274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara E. Wyslouzil barbaraw@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Barbara Wyslouzil is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and  
              Computational Chemistry Program to continue her experimental research on  
              nucleation of aerosol particles.  The goal of the proposed work is to use  
              small angle neutron scattering (SANS) to look for structure in   multicomponent
              nanometer sized liquid droplets in an aerosol.   Wyslouzil   will be looking
              for surface enrichment in multicomponent droplets which   she anticipates have
              internal structures on the nanometer length scale.    She has already perfected
              a supersonic nozzle design that produces   aerosol droplets of uniform size and
              has tested the feasibility of using   SANS for performing depth profiling
              experiments.  During the next phase   of this research program, Wyslouzil plans
              to address three tasks: 1)   conduct experiments with binary nanodroplets to
              determine their   composition and structure; 2) improve her ability to conduct
              SANS   measurements from aerosols; and 3) refine the data analysis procedures  
              and modeling for interpreting the SANS experimental data.  Multicomponent,
              nanometer-sized aerosol particles are produced by   nucleation and condensation
              in many industrial and natural settings.    Fine refractory particles form in
              combustion and metallurgical processes   while sulfuric acid - water droplets
              are produced in stack gases,   volcanic plumes, and as a byproduct of
              photochemical reactions in the   atmosphere.  The surface composition of these
              particles can strongly   affect heterogeneous reactions, growth and evaporation
              kinetics, and the   accomodation of trace gaseous species.  Wyslouzil's
              research will   contribute to our basic understanding of such phenomena.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
