Title       : Control of Visual Attention: Role of Stimulus Significance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9729778

Award Number: 9729778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138635             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold E. Pashler hpashler@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Human beings are subjected to a vast barrage of sensory inputs.  Typically,
              however, we attend to only a tiny subset of these inputs; our awareness and
              later memory of sensory events is mostly confined to this subset.  While
              research has revealed something of how the brain's selection processes works,
              this knowledge is largely confined to artificial tasks in which people are
              explicitly instructed to attend to arbitrarily defined classes of stimuli.  The
              present studies will explore mechanisms and principles that govern the
              spontaneous allocation of visual attention in the absence of such specific task
              demands, or in some cases, even work in opposition to voluntary task goals.  
              One set of studies will examine the finding that visual inputs related to the
              contents of short-term memory automatically receive attentional priority, even
              when the individual attempts to prevent this.  Other studies will examine the
              commonly observed tendency for an individual's own name to draw his or her
              attention; the limitations and causes of this phenomenon will be explored.  A
              third set of studies will examine the effects of stimulus novelty, while the
              final set will examine the tendency of emotionally salient stimuli to draw
              attention. The time course of emotional effects on attention will be examined
              in much finer detail than previous work has allowed.  The overall results
              should provide a broader and more realistic picture of how visual attention is
              controlled, and help identify processes that affect human performance in a
              variety of real-world tasks.  Better understanding of these phenomena should
              prove useful in design of systems requiring rapid and accurate responses from
              people (e.g., airplane cockpits) and may have implications for eyewitness
              memory as well.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
