Title       : Enumerating the Risk of Reengineered Work Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1998     
File        : a9729886

Award Number: 9729886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45745              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura H. Lally ACSLHL@HOFSTRA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hofstra University
	      128 Hofstra University
	      Hempstead, NY  115501030    516/560-6820

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1041,9149,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Reengineering -- the radical redesign of work processes using information
              technology as an enabler -- creates new integrated processes.  These new
              integrated processes include: 1) combined `case manager` jobs, 2)
              interorganizational systems, and 3) flatter organizational structures. 
              Reengineering is being widely practiced, but with many reports of failures or
              undesired side effects.  The advocates of reengineering tend to focus on the
              political risks of bringing about radical organizational change and on the
              risks of creating expensive new processes which do not support an
              organization's strategic goals.  They do not, however, address the problem that
              the newly integrated processes themselves may be more risky to an
              organization's long term viability by both exposing it to new sources of
              vulnerability and by creating structures which will allow minor failures to
              propagate into major, disastrous ones.  Currently, reengineering studies have
              been limited to: 1) single case studies of `successes` and 2) surveys which
              report high failure rates and negative side effects, but do not specifically
              address the nature of the failures and negative side effects and how they arose
              from the reengineering effort.  This interdisciplinary analysis applies
              organizational theory concepts from Charles Perrow's Normal Accident Theory and
              the theory of High Reliability Organizations, and information technology
              concepts from software engineering, systems analysis and design, and the
              computer risk literature to three of the newly integrated processes advocated
              by reengineering: 1) combined jobs, 2) interorganizational systems, and 3)
              flatter organizational structures.  The results of the analysis indicate that
              many new types of risks may be arising and that there is reason for concern
              that the new processes may increase an organization's risk exposure.  The study
              will involve interviews in 30 organizations to determine the degree to which
              these newly integrated processes are being adopted by organizations, the degree
              to which risk factors identified in the analysis are emerging in the
              implementation of these processes, and the degree to which control factors to
              mitigate these risks are being applied.  The immediate goal of this study is to
              provide insights into the nature of reengineering risks as they emerge in the
              newly integrated processes.  The ultimate goal is the development of a
              methodological tool to minimize and control for the risks of newly integrated
              processes.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
