Title       : Aternate Approaches to interactive Decision Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2000     
File        : a9729330

Award Number: 9729330
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231147             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Rosenthal rosentha@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Project Abstract  Despite their widespread application, there are well known
              examples in which economic theory, decision theory, and game theory fail to
              describe human behavior realistically. Since these theories are used in public
              policy analysis, the prescriptions of such analyses can be questioned on this
              ground. This research program aims to further understanding of the conditions
              under which the standard theories fail and to develop new theories for use in
              such conditions.  The research is divided into four projects. The first of
              these is a collection of laboratory experiments concerning two person zero sum
              games.  This is the class of games for which the theory of games was initially
              invented, and for which it might be expected to match reality best. Past
              laboratory experiments on such games have indicated that there are senses in
              which the theory describes reality well and senses in which it does not. The
              experiments in this project are designed to further clarify of this issue with
              the eventual purpose of contributing toward a modified theory that fits reality
              better.  The second project is concerned with the further development of a
              novel theory in which economic actors are assumed to be involved in such a
              complicated world that they have no choice but to engage in either imitative or
              experimental modes of behavior. The analysis of an earlier prototype
              mathematical model produced long run patterns that were delicately balanced
              between stability and instability. Since it is important to know when an
              economic system is stable, in this project variations on the theoretical
              prototype are studied in order to see when the instabilities are robust and
              whether such model instabilities are related to instabilities in real
              economies. The work involves both mathematical analysis and computer
              simulations.  The third project is an attempt to merge the classical theory of
              games with the more recently developed evolutionary approach to game theory.
              The two approaches appear to describe reality well in different circumstances;
              the hope is that a hybrid theory might do better than the two theories
              separately.   Project four stays within the confines of classical game theory.
              It is an attempt to generalize and see what is behind a peculiar and poorly
              understood pattern of equilibrium behavior that has turned up in a diverse
              collection of applications: from models of auctions to models of labor market
              screening. In these models, individuals randomize their actions in order to
              keep them secret from opponents, but they do so in ways that are internally
              highly structured.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
