Title       : Cincinnati Connections to vBNS and INTERNET 2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9729502

Award Number: 9729502
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick H. Siff fred.siff@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Hitch  (Principal Investigator former)
              Mark D. Henderson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kirti N. Ghia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Beck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold W. Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Britton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1072,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award is made under the high performance connections portion of NCRI's
              Connections to the Internet" announcement, NSF 96-64.  It provides partial
              support for an OC-3 connection to the enhance and accommodate research needs
              for the University of Cincinnati by establishing a connection to the Very High
              Performance Backbone Network Service (vBNS) in through the Ohio Internet2
              GigaPop currently being developed by the Ohio Academic Resources Network
              (OARnet).  Project in this proposal include: scientific visualization of large
              scale molecular simulations, simulation of engineering systems involving fluid
              dynamics, simulation of turbofan-based propulsion systems, parallel-distributed
              computing, remote data access, CERC mechatronics distributed design system,
              parallel and distributed systems network, compiler optimizations for
              distributed clusters of workstations, data warehousing, and distance learning. 
              With this high performance network capability the University of Cincinnati will
              expand current research and collaboration with both academic institutions and
              federal laboratories.  On this project, collaborating institutions include:
              Ohio Supercomputing center, Ohio State University, University of
              California-Davis, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Oak-Ridge National
              Laboratory, Lawarence Livermore National Laboratory, Naval Research Laboratory,
              Miami University of Ohio, and Write State University.
