Title       : Time Course of Spoken Word Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9729095

Award Number: 9729095
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Tanenhaus mtan@bcs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard N. Aslin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the mechanisms by which people recognize spoken words in
              continuous speech is of central importance for theories of  how language is
              processed, how it develops, and how it is affected by  brain injury. An
              understanding of how people recognize words in continuous speech also provides
              valuable informative for researchers  developing speech recognition technology
              and human-computer  interaction systems.  It is well-established that during
              spoken word recognition listeners evaluate the unfolding input by activating a
              set of potential  lexical candidates which compete for recognition.   However,
              numerous questions remain about how the set of possibilities is established and
              how it is evaluated during real-time processing.  For example, little is known
              about  whether or not people are able to use fine-grained acoustic differences
              during initial word recognition.  Thus, it is not clear whether as the word
              `carpet` is heard in continuous speech, the word recognition system considers
              all words that begin with similar sequences of sounds, e.g., (car, card, etc.)
              or whether subtle differences in the length of vowels in one-syllable and
              polysyllabic words are used to restrict the set of alternatives. Questions like
              these have important implications for how we understand and model the word
              recognition system.  However, our ability to answer these questions has been
              limited because few of the experimental methods sensitive spoken word
              recognition can be used with continuous speech in natural tasks. This is an
              important limitation because natural speech often occurs in noisy conditions,
              there is considerable speaker variability, and linguistic units, such as the
              beginning and end of a word are not clearly marked in continuous speech.     
              The proposed research explores how candidate words are retrieved from memory
              and evaluated during continuous speech using: (a) experimental studies in
              English with digitized natural speech and synthesized speech; (b) computational
              modeling; and (c) experimental and computational explorations with artificial
              languages. The experiments measure eye-movements to objects in a circumscribed
              visual world, extending the methodology pioneered by the PI and his
              collaborators.  Participants will follow spoken instructions to pick up and
              move (with a mouse) line drawings of concrete objects on a computer monitor
              (e.g., `Pick up the candy. Now put it above the circle`.).  Preliminary studies
              have established that: (a) the pattern and timing of eye-movements are
              remarkably sensitive to the uptake of information, allowing for a detailed
              mapping of the nature of the candidate set and how it changes over time during
              continuous speech; and (b) there is a simple quantitative mapping from
              hypothesized underlying speech recognition processes to the probability of
              making an eye-movement to a target object, allowing for precise testing of
              different theories of word recognition. Moreover, the basic task, either with
              pictures or real objects, can be naturally extended for use with infants, young
              children, and neurologically-impaired populations.  The project should result
              in both methodological advances and in a body of empirical data important for
              scientists studying normal and impaired language processing, as well as for
              scientists developing speech recognition systems.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
