Title       : Preparation of an Arctic Bibliography Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1999    
File        : a9729319

Award Number: 9729319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles E. Myers                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152034             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon N. Tahirkheli snt@agiweb.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha Andrews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Geological Inst
	      4220 King Street
	      Alexandria, VA  223021507    703/379-2480

NSF Program : 5240      INFORMAT & ADVIS SVC(ARCTIC RE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT      The Arctic Bibliography is comprehensive guide to the literature
              of the Arctic region from the earliest writings through 1975.  The Bibliography
              includes publications on the history, languages, peoples, archaeology,
              anthropology, industry, settlements, exploration expeditions, geology, mining
              and minerals, paleontology, climate, and geography of the region.  Among the
              publications cited are original sources, the chronicles, diaries and accounts
              of the people who lived there.  All the sources were seen by the compilers of
              the Bibliography and  it includes abstracts and the names of the libraries
              where the documents can be consulted.  In short, the Bibliography is an
              important tool for Arctic research.    Presently, sets of the Arctic
              Bibliography can be consulted in only a few libraries, and it is in danger of
              being forgotten in current research.  This project is to produce an electronic
              version of the Arctic Bibliography.  By this means, the contents of the
              Bibliography will be preserved intact, and can be incorporated into CDs
              containing other data on the Arctic, and also be made searchable over the
              Internet.  Permanent access to the Bibliography will be assured.    The
              database would be available in a simplified version of the UNISIST Reference
              Manual format, a tag-data format without headers, which is well-suited to
              processing on today's microcomputers.  It would also be available in the MARC
              format, which is the format used in the majority of the online library catalogs
              in the United States, and widely used in other countries.    As is common with
              conversions of a print bibliography to a database, the resulting file would be
              easier to use and afford more access points than the print original.  All words
              in the abstracts and titles would be searchable in the database.  Depending on
              the search software involved, all words anywhere in the data could be made
              searchable, and searching using statistical methods to determine relevancy
              could be employed.
