Title       : Conference on Mechanisms of Cognitive Development: Behavioral and Neural
               Perspectives, Pittsburgh, PA, October 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9729061

Award Number: 9729061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31765              (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. McClelland mcclelland+@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Siegler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This grant will support a conference to bring together researchers from a
              variety of backgrounds to consider how children's thinking evolves during
              development, with a particular focus on the role of experience in causing
              change.  This is a fundamental topic related both to the processes by which
              children learn and those that make children ready and able to learn from
              experience.  Both behavioral and neural approaches to these issues will be
              considered.  The behavioral approaches will include research on the
              'microgenesis' of cognitive change---that is, research that considers
              development as it occurs over relatively short periods of time (e.g., several
              hour-long sessions) in specific task situations such as solving arithmetic
              problems.  Research on cognitive change over longer time scales (months and
              years) will also be considered, as will research that uses computational
              modeling and dynamical systems approaches to processes by which change in
              thinking ability occur. Neural approaches will include the study of the way in
              which neuronal responses, and the connections among neurons, change in response
              to experience, particularly as these changes are expressed during the actual
              process of acquiring new thinking skills in children and adults.  Other neural
              approaches include studies of the possible basis of the emergence of cognitive
              abilities through the progressive maturation of various brain structures, and
              studies of the effects of experience on the organization of and internal
              representations in various brain regions.  The conference will also consider
              developmental anomalies such as autism and attention deficit disorder as
              windows on normal function.  The following questions will be examined in the
              course of the workshop: 1) Why do cognitive abilities emerge when they do
              during development?  2) What are the sources of developmental and individual
              differences, and of developmental anomalies in learning?  3) What happens in
              the brain when people learn?  4) How can experiences be ordered and timed so as
              to optimize learning?    The answers to these questions have strong
              implications for how we educate children and remediate deficits that impede
              development of thinking abilities.  These implications will be drawn out in
              discussions among the participants.  The proceedings of the symposium will be
              published as a volume in the Carnegie Symposium series.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
