Title       : Deviance Among Team Personnel in Space and Analog Polar Field Environments: The
               Effects of Size and Heterogeneity of Crew and Mission Duration on Behavior and
               Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1999    
File        : a9729957

Award Number: 9729957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn Dudley-Rowley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick D. Nolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : OPS-Alaska
	      2664 Montana Road
	      Fairbanks, AK  99709    803/732-3604

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a study of deviant behavior in space missions and polar expeditions.  It
              will examine the effects of independent variables such as heterogeneity of crew
              and mission duration on behavior and performance, within the context of
              structural and ecological sociology. A key purpose is to generate baseline data
              about dysfunctional acts in extreme environments in order to construct
              applicable theory for living and working in remote and isolated places. The
              study examines the key social structural variables thought to correspond with
              deviance in extreme environments and a substantial sample of space and polar
              groups.     After full operationalization of what is meant by a deviant act in
              an extreme environment, multiple coders will extract deviant acts from
              approximately 100 space and polar field expeditions. Once occurrences of
              deviant acts and related data have been extracted from mission and expedition
              records, ANCOVA with nested terms will be employed to examine numbers of
              deviant acts against their crew sizes, heterogeneity, and mission duration in
              each mission and expedition. Data will be input according to the separate
              quarters of a mission and expedition regardless of the mission/expedition
              length. This methodology seeks to examine how crew size, heterogeneity, and
              mission duration structure deviance in extreme environments. In particular, it
              will test the hypothesis of increased deviance around or after the midway point
              of extreme environment expeditions. The methodology also allows a comparison of
              these points by space and by polar field milieu if narrative sources permit.   
              This study tests the scope of general theories of human behavior by applying
              them to life in extreme environments.  The results of this pioneering study
              will generate new insights and stimulate further research in a substantive area
              where little systematic research has been done previously.  The findings will
              also guide future planning for long duration space missions.
