Title       : National Bioethics Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1999   
File        : a9729323

Award Number: 9729323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106445             (Estimated)
Investigator: Courtney S. Campbell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
Program Ref : 7419,7915,9123,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students in the life sciences face a variety of important ethical issues about
              professional practice and the societal impacts of their science. The students'
              mentors, science faculty members, generally desire to be resources for them
              but, unfortunately, there is little institutional training, support, or reward
              for faculty who lead ethics discussions. The National Bioethics Institute (NBI)
              addresses this problem by expanding on a very successful effort that is lending
              critical assistance to life science faculty members. The project takes to a new
              national level, a regional effort that since 1991 has continuously sponsored
              workshops designed to integrate ethics into science courses and labs. A team of
              ethicists and life scientists plans each summer Institute.  The training occurs
              over 40+ hours in a week of pedagogical sessions on how to teach ethics to
              science students, and lecture/discussion sessions on moral theory, ethics and
              science, ethics and religion, and public policy. During the week, each
              participant constructs a case study, role-playing exercise, or other
              pedagogical resource. After the Institute, on-campus participants continue to
              meet once a semester for three years, forming a critical mass of scientists at
              each campus formally engaged in ongoing discussion of ethical issues.  Reunions
              for all participants occur for several years following the training program.
              This project will train 60 life scientists from across the U.S.: 30 at Oregon
              State University (OSU) in 1998, and 30 at Iowa State University (ISU) in 1999.
              These scientists will join approximately 250 `graduates` of prior and
              concurrent Bioethics Institutes held at ISU, the University of Illinois,
              Michigan State University, Purdue University, and North Carolina State
              University. The combined Institutes will train more than 300 scientists by the
              year 2000, forming a significant biological curricular reform movement in
              contemporary higher education.  The NBI will be held once at OSU (the Western
              site) in May 1998 and once at ISU (the Midwestern site) in May 1999. North
              Carolina State University is preparing to join these two institutions as the
              Eastern site of future Bioethics Institutes. NCSU will be hosting Institutes in
              1998 and 1999 funded by a grant from the National Agricultural Biotechnology
              Council (NABC). The NBI will also partner with an historically African American
              institution, Tuskegee University (TU) and a strong majority Hispanic American
              institution, Florida International University (FIU). Teams consisting of one
              philosopher and one life scientist from each institution will attend the OSU or
              NCSU Institutes. They will also supply names of life scientists who are
              potential Institute applicants from historically Hispanic and African American
              institutions, and explore with their administrators the possibility of making
              TU and FIU sites of future Bioethics Institutes.  Assuming successful
              completion of this two year project, OSU, ISU, and NCSU will be positioned to
              host a permanent National Bioethics Institute, designed to rotate annually
              among the three schools. The present project provides essential experience at
              OSU and starts a national Institute at ISU (where previous Institutes have been
              open only to ISU faculty). The amount requested from NSF is heavily leveraged
              by funds from OSU, ISU, NCSU, the NABC, and universities sending participants. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
