Title       : Learning and Inference with Schemas and Analogies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9729023

Award Number: 9729023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Hummel jhummel@lifesci.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith J. Holyoak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project will extend and test a theory and computer model of human
              reasoning.  People routinely reason using schemas, knowledge structures that
              describe general situations, events, rules, or relationships.  For example, a
              Restaurant schema might specify the kinds of events that take place in
              restaurants, and the relationships between the actors in those events (e.g.,
              chefs, waiters, customers); a Family Relation schema might specify the kinds of
              relationships that define various family members, such as sisters, brothers,
              parents, and uncles.  A schema is both general, in that it refers to many
              specific situations, and highly structured, in that it specifies the
              relationships between objects, events, or even between other relationships. 
              Psychologists and computer scientists have long recognized the utility of
              schemas as a basis for reasoning: If one can recognize an object or situation
              as an instance of a general schema, then one can use the schema to reason about
              that object or situation.    Although the generality and structured nature of
              schemas make them extremely useful, these features also make schemas very
              difficult to model.  Traditional symbolic approaches to computer modeling are
              good at representing structured information, but they have difficulty in
              flexibly matching specific instances to general facts; by contrast,
              connectionist models are good at flexibly matching instances to general
              categories, but they have great difficulty representing structured information
              (such as rules and relationships).  We have recently developed a theory of
              human schema-based learning and reasoning, and implemented this theory as a
              working computer model.  The model, called LISA (Learning and Inference with
              Schemas and Analogies), combines the flexibility of a connectionist
              architecture with the capacity to represent and learn relational structures. 
              The resulting system can (a) learn general schemas from specific examples, (b)
              match new instances to learned schemas, and (c) use the schemas to make
              inductive inferences about the new examples.    LISA makes several novel
              predictions about human learning and reasoning.  Part of the NSF-supported
              research will be a series of experiments to test these predictions. Another
              part of the research will extend the LISA model to account for aspects of human
              story and event comprehension (e.g., If someone tells us `There are four plates
              per tray,` how do we know that this means each tray will hold, or contain, four
              plates?), and aspects of spatial reasoning (e.g., If we are told that Bill is
              taller than Charles and Abe is taller than Bill, how do we figure out that Abe
              is taller than Charles?).  Importantly, the extended LISA model will account
              for these seemingly different capacities (as well as other capacities, such as
              reasoning by analogy) in terms of the same basic mechanisms as it uses to
              account for our ability to reason using schemas.  The knowledge gained from the
              project will contribute to the development of methods for enhancing human
              learning and reasoning abilities, and also to the development of artificially
              intelligent systems.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
