Title       : De Novo Design of Helical Electron Transfer Metalloproteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9729124

Award Number: 9729124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George McLendon glm@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr. McLendon is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and   Organometallic
              Chemistry Program to perform experimental studies of   electron transfer in
              metalloproteins.  McLendon has proposed to use   three-helix peptide bundles to
              probe structural relationships in   long-range electron coupling in proteins. 
              Having demonstrated a   synthetic methodology that allows systematic protein
              structural   variations, rigidly linked acceptor/donor moieties may be
              introduced at   known distances.  This advancement in the art will allow the
              examination   of distance dependence upon electron transfer along a helix.  A
              second   aspect of the proposal involves derivatization of hydrogen bonding
              sites   on the helix.  In the absence of significant perturbations to helix  
              structure or stability, the proposed modification will help determine the  
              role of hydrogen bonding pathways in electronic coupling.  Additionally,  
              electron transfer through side chains and the effect of aromatic residues   on
              the rate of electron transfer will be investigated.  Understanding electron
              transfer in metalloproteins has been limited by   the ability of chemists to
              control protein structure, particularly access   to redox mediating functional
              groups.  By coupling established   measurement techniques with systematic
              protein structural variation   methods, roadblocks to the full elucidation of
              this phenomenon may be   overcome.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
