Title       : Relationship Among Demographic, Social and Genetic Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9729586

Award Number: 9729586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne Altmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Nontechnical Abstract        Long term studies of primates in their natural
              environment  are especially valuable.  This project studies the 
              interdependencies among behavior,    ecology (especially life history and
              population size) , and  genetic structure of natural groups.  The empirical
              research  focuses on several generations of individually identified  baboons,
              Papio cynocephalus, that are monitored throughout  their lifetimes in the
              Amboseli region of East Africa.  This  project will perfect the development of
              determining the  genetic identity of individuals using DNA that is derived 
              from feces as well as from blood.  This will permit genetic  sampling with a
              minimum of disturbance to the animals.  Combining knowledge of genetic identity
              and known  maternity  will be used to determine genetic relatedness structure 
              within and between groups and to test theories of the  relationship between
              social interactions and kinship in a  variable environment. Data on social
              dominance and  affiliative relationships, demography, and general female 
              reproductive condition are obtained observationally.  Differences in fitness
              components will be estimated and the  consequences of dominance status will be
              evaluated at  conception, gestation, several stages of post-natal  survival,
              and mating using the genetic, behavioral, and  reproductive data.      Genetic
              and social partitioning of the population arises  both from male dispersal and
              fissioning of social groups  into new, independent units. Genetic, social, and
              ecological  (including demographic) causes and consequences of dispersal  and
              fissioning are uniquely amenable to analysis in this  study and provide
              insights relevant both to evolution and to  conservation of fragmented
              populations.  Therefore, this  long term research promises to provide
              information that will  be applicable to a wide variety of organisms over a
              range of  situations.
