Title       : AAAS Workshops on Electronic Publishing in Science-Intellectual Property
               Protections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9729953

Award Number: 9729953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112828             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Frankel Mfrankel@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Frankel                              This project contributes to the NSF
              Knowledge and Distributed Intelligence research area, being directed at
              deepening our understanding of the ethical, legal, and social implications of
              Knowledge Networking. This series of workshops will examine the intellectual
              property issues associated with electronic publishing in science. Electronic
              journals in science, engineering and medicine have grown dramatically in recent
              years. However, for the most part these publications are merely electronic
              reproductions of their print counterparts; they have been slow to adopt the
              novel features that online production makes possible. There are a variety of
              reasons for this, but whether or not electronic publications are to reach their
              full potential and be fully embraced by the scientific community will
              ultimately depend on establishing a clear and stable legal framework.  The
              advent of electronic publishing poses a number of intellectual property issues
              for science, even in light of recent national and global efforts to bring
              copyright law into the information age. For example, to what extent can the
              notion of science as a `public good` be understood and valued in the increasing
              commercialization of the electronic market place? What should be the features
              of a legal framework that assures the protection of property interests yet
              encourages open communication and innovation? How will acceptable fair use
              exceptions be implemented in the context of electronic publishing? What is the
              `work` to be protected in dynamic/ interactive work? What changes in
              intellectual property law, if any, are needed to protect the creators and
              distributors of scientific databases? To what extent can technological
              innovations supplement or function as useful alternatives to new laws for
              protecting the reproduction and distribution rights of authors and       
              publishers?  These and related questions will be the focus of this proposal for
              a two-year project involving two workshops linked by a series of working group
              meetings consisting of key stakeholder groups in the sciences, electronic
              publishing, and intellectual property law. Recommendations for establishing a
              legal framework for U.S. copyright law as applied to electronic publishing in
              science are expected to be generated by the project and will be widely
              disseminated via print and electronic media. To ensure as much as possible
              their consideration  by stakeholders and their impact on law and public policy,
              AAAS will sponsor briefings for scientific societies, associations, and
              publishers, and the press as well as Congress and appropriate federal agencies.
              The project is co-sponsored by two AAAS standing committees: the Committee on
              Scientific Freedom and Responsibility and the National Conference of Lawyers
              and Scientists, a joint committee with the American Bar Association. An
              advisory committee, drawing on the most knowledgeable members of both
              committees on issues related to electronic publishing and intellectual property
              law, has been formed to guide the project.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
