Title       : High-Nuclearity Metal Carbonyl Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1998      
File        : a9729555

Award Number: 9729555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence F. Dahl dahl@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Lawrence F. Dahl of the Department of Chemistry, University of   Wisconsin
              at Madison, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and   Organometallic
              Program of the Chemistry Division to continue his studies   on high-nuclearity
              metal carbonyl clusters.  The main thrust of this   project is the synthesis,
              X-ray structural characterization, and   structure-bonding analysis of new
              high-nuclearity (10 or more metal   atoms) homo- and hetero-metallic carbonyl
              clusters.  The synthesis of a   series of palladium-carbonyl-phosphine clusters
              will be optimized and   extended to include clusters with different phosphine
              ligands.  This   series, including a cluster with 59 Pd atoms, will be studied
              by proton   NMR to determine if hydrido-like H atoms are present.  New Pd-Ni
              clusters   will be synthesized in sufficient amounts to permit
              physical/chemical   characterization.  These clusters will be reacted with
              phosphine ligands   to determine the ligand effect on metal segregation since
              previous   clusters of this type have shown a surprising degree of metal order.
               A   novel carbonyl-phosphine-hydrido cluster with 28 Pd and 12 Pt atoms will  
              be further studied by NMR and hydrogen-deuterium exchange, and   synthetically
              extended by incorporation of additional Pt and Ni atoms.    The preparation of
              a series of Ni-Pd(or Pt)-Rh(or Ir) carbonyl-hydrido   clusters with
              unprecedented metal frameworks will be attempted.  The   challenging
              characterization of these unusual clusters will be   accomplished by the
              combination of X-ray crystallography (CCD area   detector), electrospray
              ionization Fourier-transform ion cyclotron   resonance mass spectrometry, X-ray
              fluorescence, magnetic susceptibility,   and NMR measurements.   Theoretical
              studies on several clusters including   a 18-atom Ni-Au cluster will be carried
              out using density functional   methods that include relativistic effects in
              order to determine the   nature of the Ni-Au bonds and to compare the results
              to those of previous   calculations using the Fenske-Hall MO model.  Finally,
              synthetic methods   will be improved and optimized to prepare larger amounts of
              recently   discovered 38-metal Au-Pd-Ni and  35-metal Cu-Ni clusters for  
              physical-chemical studies.  This project will add fundamental knowledge about
              bonds between metal   atoms, especially ones between different metal types. 
              The large discreet   metal clusters also can serve as models for metal
              particles and surfaces   and contribute fundamentally to our understanding of
              surface science,   metal-particle physics, and heterogeneous catalysis.  The
              multi-metal   palladium clusters have potential technological importance in the
              design   of new materials with useful catalytic, electronic, magnetic, optical,
                and hydrogen storage/isotope separation  properties.  This work also  
              advances state-of-the-art methods of chemical analysis by applying these  
              techniques to extraordinarily demanding problems.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
