Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Use of Groupware to Enhance Team Decisions and
               Achieve Organizational Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  2000  
File        : a9729843

Award Number: 9729843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39631              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gloria Mark gmark@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Wright  (Principal Investigator former)
              Mark Ackerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Kraemer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9729843  Wright, William F.  University of California - Irvine    CISE Research
              Instrumentation :Use of Groupware to Enhance Team Decisions and   Achieve
              Organizational Learning    This research instrumentation grant contributes to
              enable the following   projects:- Better Collaborative User of Information
              Using Groupware: Use of Considerable Information and Use of Multimedia
              Information,- When will Team Members Collaborate Effectively?: The Impact of
              Team Leadership and Team Cohesion on Collaborative Use of Groupware, and- Use
              of Groupware to Acquire Organizational Memory: Framing of Case Descriptions and
              Incentives for Teams to Contribute.    The most important asset of a
              professional organization is its people: more   specifically, their accumulated
              knowledge and potential insights. When these knowledge workers collaborate,
              they are achieving learning for themselves and their organization. Groupware
              (including Intranets) is used to facilitate their collaborative work. The
              proposed research addresses first how use of groupware will improve both the
              decision effectiveness and efficiency of collaboration by geographically
              distributed professionals and second under what conditions will teams make
              available their decisions and decision processes to permit an organization to
              acquire, manage and distribute their knowledge. Members of teams of knowledge
              workers will communicate, exchange information, and make decisions, in the
              to-be-established Groupware Laboratory for which the networking, workstation
              and videoconferencing instrumentation is needed. The instrumentation, to be
              installed in soundproof cubicles, will permit simulation and study of how
              professionals "interact" using only digital (and voice) interaction when they
              are geographically distributed. This use of a "digital communication"
              laboratory permits control of extraneous variables (e.g., access to unknown
              parties and information) and concentrates on discovery of new causal effects.
