Title       : The Gender Gap in Social and Political Attitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1998       
File        : a9729449

Award Number: 9729449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248108             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice H. Eagly eagly@mwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Differences between men's and women's social and political attitudes were widely
              discussed in the press during the 1996 presidential election campaign because
              of the so-called gender gap in presidential candidate preference. As many
              journalists maintained, these differences in presidential preference likely
              reflect more general attitudinal differences between the sexes. For example,
              women tend to be more favorable toward welfare and other `compassion` issues,
              whereas men tend to be more supportive of the use of force in a wide range of
              situations. To understand these and other attitudinal sex differences, this
              research will examine the structure of these attitudes. Specifically, men's and
              women's attitudes should be differently elaborated, with more extensive beliefs
              underlying those attitudes that are typical of one's sex. Also, the attitudes
              typical of people of each sex should be linked to broader ideologies and values
              that also tend to differ between women and men. This research will examine
              these ideologies and values as causes of the attitudinal gender gap and also
              consider other potential causes including personality differences between the
              sexes and the advantages that policies are thought to produce for oneself and
              one's gender group. These causal factors should reflect in turn the differing
              responsibilities of women and men in family and occupational roles. Finally,
              research will examine how people perceive the attitudinal gender gap and
              whether their beliefs about it are accurate. In its focus on attitudes, this
              research will investigate an aspect of gender that has been little explored by
              psychologists. The findings should help policy makers understand why women and
              men often differ in their policy preferences and sometimes in their preferences
              for candidates for political office.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
