Title       : The Great War and Modern Chemistry: The Chemists' War as A Technological System,
               1914-1920
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2002  
File        : a9729570

Award Number: 9729570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164709             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Johnson jeffrey.johnson@villanova.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy M. Mac Leod  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will compare the industrial, academic and governmental responses of
              the Allied and Central Powers during the First World War to unprecedented
              demands on their resources and technology in what became a total war.  Its
              focus will be upon the chemical industry, the mobilization of chemists, and the
              military role of chemistry during the war and into the early postwar era,
              considering some of the enduring consequences for the integration of science,
              technology and warfare.  The project will differ from previous analyses of
              chemical science and technology in the Great War by stressing the process as
              well as the product of chemical manufacture.  To analyze the infrastructure of
              technological innovation and production, the project will compare detailed case
              studies of three specific industrial locations in each major industrial nation
              (Britain, France, Germany and the United States) and the roles of specific
              companies, as well as the government agencies, university laboratories, and
              military inspection and procurement agencies with which they dealt.  The
              investigators will also employ a new approach in their project, applying the
              methodological framework of large-scale technological systems (interconnecting
              human and material resources, technical processes, and a culture of
              political-economic institutions), suitably modified to the unique exigencies of
              war.  By analyzing the function of the first modern, industrialized war in
              shaping a key technological system, the project will produce an integrated and
              comparative history that will serve as a model for future studies of the nexus
              of modern global military-industrial-scientific competition.  As such it should
              be of interest to policymakers as well as to historians.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
