Title       : Contracting with Externalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1999     
File        : a9729694

Award Number: 9729694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93068              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilya R. Segal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Project Abstract  In many economic situations, bilateral contracting imposes
              external effects on third parties. For example:  A shareholder tendering his
              shares to a corporate raider who is superior to the firm's incumbent management
              increasing the probability of takeover, thereby benefiting the firm's other
              shareholders.  A creditor exchanging debt for equity in a distressed firm
              reduces the probability of bankruptcy, thereby benefiting the firm's other
              creditors.  A buyer of a VCR increases the market for video rentals, thereby
              benefiting the owners of compatible VCRs.  A merger of competing firms
              increases the market price, thereby benefiting other firms in the market.  A
              private contributor to a public good benefits other consumers of the good.  A
              buyer signing an exclusive dealing contract reduces the potential for future
              competition in the market, thereby hurting other buyers.  A manufacturer
              selling his output to a retailer reduces the price in the downstream market,
              thus hurting competing retailers.  In all these instances, the contracting
              parties' failure to take external effects into account may give rise to
              socially inefficient outcomes.  This project develops a general model of
              contracting with externalities which unifies the examples listed above, and
              illuminates the general nature of arising inefficiencies. In particular, the
              dependence of the arising distortions depend on various assumptions, including
              the number of parties involved, the nature bargaining among them, their ability
              to make discriminatory offers, and the set of contracts available to them. This
              analysis has numerous implications for the optimal design of property rights
              and contracting procedures in environments with externalities. Applications
              include those from finance (bankruptcies and takeovers), industrial
              organization (vertical and horizontal contracting and mergers), and property
              law (the design of legal entitlements).                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
