Title       : PPD/Special Project: Sonification: Charting New Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9729148

Award Number: 9729148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth D. Mynatt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inter'l Community Auditory
	      423 Flood Avenue
	      San Francisco, CA  94112    415/812-4945

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9729148  The International Community on Audio Displays (ICAD) will be  holding
              its 1997 conference in Palo Alto, California, from     November 2-5, 1997. 
              ICAD is a forum for presenting research on the  use of sound to display data,
              monitor systems, and provide enhanced  user interfaces for computers and
              virtual reality systems.  The  first day of ICAD'97 will be made up of
              workshops.  The purpose of  the workshops is to provide an informal setting
              where a small  number of researchers (no more than 20) can have directed,
              in-depth  discussions on singular topics of interest to the ICAD community.  A
              workshop on "sonification" related to representing data through  audio has been
              of considerable interest to many researchers in  ICAD.  Past efforts have
              explored ways to listen to discern  components of infrared spectra samples,
              hear trends in seismic  data, support programming and debugging, analyze
              financial data as  well as applications in numerous domains including medicine,
               education and complex systems.  Of particular note is the use of  sonification
              in interfaces and applications for people with  disabilities -- visual
              impairments and learning and cognitive  disabilities.  Sonification can be used
              to complement or replace  visualizations.  As a complement, sonification helps
              to highlight  trends in data that are difficult to visualize and to offload the
               complexity of the visualization.  As a replacement, sonification is  useful in
               situations when hands-and-eyes are busy -- such as in a  medical operating
              room -- or when the users are temporarily or  permanently visually-impaired.
              This workshop will allow researchers  to assess the current state of
              sonification research and commercial  developments.  From this assessment, and
              sharing of experiences and  techniques, the participants can collectively form
              a research  agenda for future efforts.  The needed research agenda will be 
              useful to NSF and other organizations and agencies involved in  conducting or
              supporting basic research related to  sonification and  other audio displays.
