Title       : Defining the Hunter-Gatherer Antecedents in North China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1998   
File        : a9729929

Award Number: 9729929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77868              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Madsen dmadsen@state.ut.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Elston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Bettinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah Geological Survey
	      2363 South Foothill Drive
	      Salt Lake City, UT  841091403    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. David Madsen and his international
              team of collaborators will conduct archaeological research in the Pigeon
              Mountain basin region on the border of Inner Mongolia. On the basis of their
              past work in the area, the investigators have identified a series of sites
              which date to the Terminal Pleistocene and Holocene and thus span the end of
              the last glaciation and the periods of significant climatic change which
              followed it. The dried lake bed and marsh sequences in the currently desertic
              Pigeon Mountain region contain a readily available wealth of archaeological
              material as well as information on changing climate and environment. 
              Preliminary data suggest that during the Younger Dryas period,  hunting and
              gathering cultures significantly altered their material culture as well as
              subsistence strategy in response to extremely severe dry conditions. The
              researchers hypothesize that they broadened their resource base and
              concentrated on more efficient extraction and  processing of foodstuffs. To
              gather information to support these preliminary data the group will survey to
              locate additional Younger Dryas period sites and conduct extensive excavation
              at those known to contain such materials. Through an expanded sample of faunal
              remains, chipped and ground stone tools and ceramics they will gain additional
              insight into changes in adaptive strategy.  The transition from hunting and
              gathering to a subsistence mode dependent on domesticated plants and animals
              represents perhaps the most important change in human lifestyle over the last
              million years. It was this `Neolithic Revolution` which led to the rise of
              settled village life, complex stratified societies and nation states. This
              transition occurred at roughly the same time in many parts of the world and
              archaeologists wish to understand the reasons for this change. This process
              occurred, apparently independently in China and the work of Dr. Madsen and his
              colleagues should shed new light on it. The group postulates that it was the
              adaptations forced by the Younger Dryas climatic change which set the stage for
              the emergence of agriculture.  This research is important because it is
              addressed at a central anthropological question. It will provide data of
              interest to many scientists and will further cooperation between Chinese and
              American researchers.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
