Title       : Motion Segmentation in Human Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9729015

Award Number: 9729015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Bravo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Scenes composed of surfaces with similar colors and textures (for example,
              forest scenes) may appear as a continuous mass to a stationary observer.  Once
              the observer starts moving, however, the surfaces segregate from one another. 
              How does our visual system use motion to organize such scenes?  There is
              considerable evidence that observers use motion discontinuities to locate the
              boundaries between surfaces. But this approach can only cut the scene into
              patches. A partially occluded surface may appear as many disconnected patches
              in the image and to recover this surface, the visual system needs a way to
              group patches.  Recent evidence indicates that the visual system may group
              patches of motion by fitting the visual stimulus with a global motion pattern. 
              Motions that are consistent with the pattern are grouped and segregated from
              motions that are inconsistent with the pattern. The goal of this research is to
              characterize such global segmentation strategies.    One set of experiments
              examines whether the visual system treats motion patterns in much the same way
              that it treats static patterns. These experiments look for evidence that the
              visual system applies the Gestalt grouping rules of `good continuation` and
              `bilateral symmetry` to motion stimuli. A second set of experiments considers
              global motions not as simple 2D patterns, but rather as the result of imaging
              3D surfaces.  These experiments compare performance on patterns that have
              similar 2D image properties but very different 3D interpretations. And finally,
              since the vast majority of natural flow patterns evolve over time, a third set
              of experiments examines the segmentation of motion patterns that vary over time
              and space.    The building of a surface representation is thought to be the
              fundamental goal of mid-level vision. Thus to understand human vision it is
              essential to understand how the visual system organizes scenes with multiple
              surfaces. This research is important because it examines an unexplored and
              potentially powerful approach to this segmentation problem.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
