Title       : EPSCOR: Influence of Gender and Lactation on Calicum Signalling and Hormone
               Release in Pituitary Slices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9729535

Award Number: 9729535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74508              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome F. Fiekers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,9150,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fiekers  9729535    Lactation is a physiological process which occurs in
              mammalian females in preparation for nourishing their young.  Significant
              changes occur in the female anterior pituitary gland in preparation for
              lactation.  The cells in this gland direct and regulate the activity of the
              cells and tissues involved in the production and expression of milk by the
              mother.  Lactotrophs are one of the cell types in the pituitary gland and these
              cells synthesize and secrete prolactin, a hormone largely responsible for the
              development of the female organs in preparation for lactation.  Very little is
              understood about the changes which occur in these cells during lactation.  It
              is known, however, that secretory cells require an elevation of cytosolic
              calcium for secretion and that action potentials are important for providing
              the increases in cytosolic calcium required for stimulus-response coupling in
              neuroendocrine cells.  Dr. Fiekers is interested in determining the cellular
              mechanisms by which lactotrophs response to external stimuli.  He has developed
              an acute pituitary slice preparation which allows him to examine these
              neuroendocrine cells with their cell to cell associations intact and, in many
              cases, with the cells polarized to secrete into adjacent blood vessels.  Thus,
              Dr. Fiekers can study individual cells in their normal configuration within the
              gland thus retaining the cell to cell contacts and communication which occur
              between neighboring cells.  Using state-of-the-art patch clamp techniques
              combined with confocal laser scanning microscopy, he will examine the basic
              properties of stimulus-response coupling in single lactotrophs.  Dr. Fiekers
              will define the properties of the lactotrophs prior to and during lactation in
              female rats to better understand the nature of the fundamental changes which
              occur during this physiological process.  The results of this proposal will
              provide significant new information on the fundamental steps in the release of
              the hormone prolactin during lactati on.  In addition, he will be able to
              measure alterations in the structure of the anterior pituitary gland with
              respect to size, distribution and arrangement of lactotrophs in the gland which
              occur as a result of lactation.  These potential changes represent a
              transformation of the organization within the gland which occurs during the
              physiological state and may provide the basis for our future understanding of
              changes in cell structure and function which occur, for example, in pregnancy,
              cancer, and senescence.
