Title       : Gas Phase Ion Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9729146

Award Number: 9729146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $804048             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Bowers bowers@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Michael T. Bowers of   the
              University of California-Santa Barbara in his continuing studies of   sigma
              bond activation at transition metal centers.  Prof. Bowers will   investigate
              clustering of second row metals with dihydrogen, reactions of   first and
              second row metals with methane and other small alkanes, the   role of different
              ligands in tuning reactivity, and cluster assisted   sigma-bond activation.  In
              addition, he will focus on a new effort   studying macromolecular systems.  He
              will exploit gas phase H/D exchange   as a complementary method for
              conformational analysis of biologically   interesting systems; specifically, he
              will investigate polymer   conformation, folding dynamics and energetics as a
              function of repeat   number.  He also plans to study host/guest systems, in
              particular the   influence of solvation on host selectivity.  To support the
              biological   studies, Prof. Bowers will construct a bright electrospray based
              mass   spectrometer.    Gas phase ion chemistry and the related discipline of
              mass spectrometry   have made huge strides during the past decade, especially
              in the past   five years.  Much of this progress is due to technological
              breakthroughs   in detector design, ion sources and the availability of bigger,
              faster   and especially cheaper computers.  Further development of this
              powerful   analytical tool as applied to bond activation at metal centers will 
               improve understanding of the behavior of heterogeneous catalysts, used  
              extensively in many industrial processes.  Prof. Bower's present effort  
              focusing on macromolecular systems will provide structural information on  
              these larger species.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
