Title       : SGER: New Productions and Nitrogen Cycling in the Off-shoreRegions of the Black
               Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1997 
File        : a9729793

Award Number: 9729793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49974              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. McCarthy jmccarthy@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A. Project Summary         Many scientific papers have been written that detail
              environmental  changes in the Black Sea, and many speculate on the implications
              of  further potential anthropogenic changes 1) in various drainage basins that 
              provide freshwater to this sea, 2) along its coastal margins, and 3) in 
              extraction of its resources. While the ecological effects of industrial 
              activity and changing land and water use are most apparent in coastal  regions
              of the Black Sea, they are also evident off-shore. For example,  the observed
              trend of increasing nutrient concentrations and doublings of  both
              phytoplankton biomass and primary productivity throughout the central  region
              of the sea between the mid 1970s and early 1990s, have been  attributed to
              anthropogenic causes.       Perhaps the most dramatic basin-wide changes have
              been associated  with the accidental introductions of carnivorous gelatinous
              zooplankton,  most recently Mnemiopsis leydii. These species have profoundly
              affected  Black Sea community structure. Many aspects of the Black Sea
              ecosystem  make it an attractive system for biological oceanographers to study.
              Major  food web perturbations allow for testing of hypotheses relating to the 
              influence of community organization and on the flow of energy and matter. 
              Basin scale physical processes are becoming increasingly well known, and  the
              physical scale of this sea allows for realistic state of the art  linkages
              among physical and biological processes in contemporary modeling  efforts. The
              foremost of these models are nitrogen based, and they lead to  conjecture
              regarding the sources of nitrogen that drive plankton  production.  However,
              there have been no actual studies of the dynamics of  the annual nitrogen cycle
              and, in particular, no determinations of new  production in the Black Sea.
              Moreover, generalizations that have been  made, such as in models, are
              predicated upon the generalizable behavior of  a Black Sea planktonic ecosystem
              prior to the environmental changes of the   last decade.  In conjunction with
              colleagues in Turkey, Dr. McCarthy has developed a  plan to fill these gaps in
              knowledge of the dynamics of the nitrogen cycle  in the euphoric zone of the
              Black Sea. Rates of N uptake, N2 fixation, and  nitrogen flux among dissolved
              components will be measured with stable  isotope techniques and interpreted
              within the context of plankton  community and geophysical structure. This study
              will serve to document  current conditions, provide a basis for inferring the
              effects of recent  environmental changes, and contribute to more realistic
              modeling efforts  of the Black Sea ecosystem.  This proposed collaboration
              responds to an  unprecedented opportunity to investigate the openwater nitrogen
              cycle in  the Black Sea very efficiently. Turkish scientists at the METU
              Institute  of Marine Science have just launched an intensive program to study
              the  "Dynamics of the lower trophic levels of the Black Sea: Biogeochemical 
              processes, and system modeling". The first field campaign in this program  has
              begun, but a critical component, the dynamics of nitrogen fluxes among 
              nutrient and particulate pools and trophic levels is missing. This Small  Grant
              for Exploratory Research will provide this critical component.
