Title       : Development of Ultrafast Optical Instrumentation to Measure Photon Lifetime in
               Leaves and Other Biological Tissues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9729660

Award Number: 9729660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia J. Moore                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141715             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ting Shan Luk tingshan@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Vogelmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Light-harvesting for photosynthesis within leaves depends on  pigment
              concentrations as well as the light transport  properties of mesophyll cells. 
              Despite the fact that the  light transport properties of leaves are an integral
              part of  their form and function, there is little quantitative  information
              about the biophysics of light transport through  leaf tissue.  One of the most
              important biophysical  parameters is the average pathlength that a photon
              travels  within a leaf, which indicates the time over which a photon  resides
              inside that leaf.  The longer the lifetime, the  greater the probability of
              absorption for photosynthesis.  The wide variety of leaf anatomy and the
              striking changes  that occur when leaves develop under high vs. low light may 
              be adaptations that are directed toward the control of light  capture by
              modification of light scattering properties of  the leaf tissues.  This project
              proposes to construct instrumentation that  utilizes ultrashort laser pulses to
              measure the average  transit time and transit time distribution of the light 
              scattered and transmitted through thin leaves of various  plant species and
              through leaves grown under different light  environments.  The average transit
              time represents the  average lifetime a photon resides in the leaf.  This 
              instrumentation uses a wavelength of light not absorbed by  photosynthetic
              pigments so that the light scattering effect  can be measured exclusively.  The
              proposed instrumentation  will allow sensitive photon transit time measurements
              with  femtosecond (10-15 second) temporal resolution; thus  allowing
              measurements on typical leaves.
