Title       : Bioremediation of Petroleum-Contaminated Antarctic Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9729935

Award Number: 9729935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joyce A. Jatko                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51289              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Ballestero tpbl@christa.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5140      OPERATIONS SUPPORT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                              BALLESTERO  9729935  Preliminary research on
              petroleum contaminated soil from  McMurdo Station, Antarctica, has indicated
              that there  appears to be a strong influence of temperature on the  reduction
              of total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH) in the soil.  To be able to effectively
              remediate contaminated soils in  Antarctica, the remediation system would need
              to incorporate  some means of moderating temperature and maintaining the  soil
              at a constant, uniform, above-freezing temperature.    The basic objectives of
              this research are:  1.   To see if petroleum contaminant levels of 1,000 mg/kg 
                can be achieved by a bioremediation system, and  2.   To design the
              appropriate radio frequency antennae to    provide the heat source  necessary
              to control soil    temperature for pilot and full-scale Antarctic systems.   
              This research will be performed on petroleum contaminated  soil from McMurdo
              Station.  No non-indigenous microorganisms  have been or will be introduced
              into the soil as other  researchers have indicated that petroleum degrading 
              microorganisms are present in Antarctic soils.  The first  objective of this
              research will be investigated by using a  bench-scale study.  Two temperatures
              (50C and 150C) will be  used.  Additionally in the 50C reactors, the effect of 
              moisture content will be analyzed.  Air flow and nutrients  will be used for
              all reactors.  All reactors will be housed  in small, sealed refrigerators. 
              TPH and specific petroleum  compounds will be analyzed for by EPA Method 8100. 
                     While the bench-scale studies will be carried-out in  refrigerators,
              pilot and full-scale efforts would require  the use of some heat source.  What
              is proposed is to use  radio frequency (RF) antennae to generate this heat. 
              The RF  heating of the soil occurs by electromagnetic radiation.  Design
              variables to be considered include: operating  frequency, power level, antenna
              applicator length, number of  applicators, applicator position, applicator
              orientation,  mutu al coupling between applicators, electrical phasing, and 
              soil properties.  Computer modeling will be used to simulate  the RF heating
              process to account for three fundamental  mechanisms:  1)   Specific Absorption
              Rate (in units of watts/kg) of the    materials illuminated by the
              electromagnetic fields;  2)   Thermal conductivity of the regions of interest
              (i.e.,    heat conduction);  3)   Fluid flow (resulting from moving air and/or
              water in    the region) and initial temperatures (i.e., heat transport).       
               By properly accounting for these three mechanisms, the  temperature at any
              point in the region of interest can be  modeled. This modeling effort will aid
              with the antenna  designs.  If bioremediation is not effective for larger 
              particles, RF heating may be useful for volatilization of  the petroleum
              contamination, a course of treatment which may  be preferable to shipping the
              larger particles off  continent.
