Title       : Collaborative Research: Architecture of Functional Categories in American Sign
               Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9729065

Award Number: 9729065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy Kegl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project represents a continuation of research into the  syntactic
              structure of American Sign Language (ASL), funded by NSF  grant #SBR-9410562.
              The research agenda has been to investigate the  distribution of functional
              categories in ASL. Functional categories  are those that signal structural
              relationships among lexical  categories. For example, functional categories,
              such as Tense,  Aspect, and Agreement, contain grammatical information that is 
              often expressed morphologically through inflection. Different  languages make
              productive use of different subsets of grammatical  categories. It is the
              characteristics of functional categories that  establish basic sentence
              structure and determine typological  variation. The goal has been to uncover
              the syntactic structure of  ASL through examination of functional categories.  
                  Research to date has investigated a large number of  syntactic
              constructions in the language, focusing most intensely  on Tense and person
              Agreement projections, as well as the higher  level projection relevant to the
              structure of questions. With  respect to these three areas, our results have
              diverged from  previous beliefs about ASL. We have demonstrated the existence
              of  lexical tense markers (contrary to the belief that ASL lacks  grammatical
              tense). Our discovery of non-manual syntactic  markings of agreement has
              provided new insights into the nature  of agreement, its representation in the
              syntax, and its relation  to the distribution of null pronouns. Our analysis of
              questions  challenges previous claims about the mechanism of question 
              formation in ASL, as well as claims that have been made about  purported
              constraints on phrase structure and movement processes  in language generally. 
                   The syntactic research on functional categories will now  extend to
              several additional projections that display interesting  interactions with
              those that we have already studied. For  example, Aspect has not only manual
              instantiations (which have  been described in the l iterature) but also
              interesting non-manual  correlates that have not yet been examined. We will
              also extend  our work on agreement to number agreement, both within the clause 
              and the determiner phrase. In addition, we will address several  syntactic
              projections above the level of TP (the clause).  Finally, we will complement
              our studies of the functional  structure of ASL with studies of the verb
              lexicon, focusing on  the argument-taking properties of particular classes of
              verbs.
