Title       : Estimate of Panel Data Models of Discrete Choice and Sample Selection and
               Application to Household Brand and Purchase Quantity Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1998       
File        : a9729430

Award Number: 9729430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ekaterini Kyriazidou kyria@cicero.spc.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9222,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9729430  Kyriazidou    This project develops estimation methods for models of
              discrete choice and sample selection using longitudinal (panel) data.  The
              models studied are used in a variety of economic, medical and social studies.  
              A large amount of research has focused on developing methods for estimating
              panel data models, especially in the case of short fixed-length models, that
              rely heavily on the parametric specification of the statistical distribution of
              unobservable variables, both of the permanent individual ones as well as the
              time-varying idiosyncratic shocks or disturbances.  This project addresses the
              limitations inherent in this approach: biased and inconsistent estimation of
              the parameters of interest and incorrect inference due to mis-specifications of
              the distribution of unobservables and their statistical relationship with
              observed explanatory variables, restrictions on parameter values that can not
              be justified by economic theory, and very demanding computational requirements.
                      More specifically, the project constructs a class of M-estimators, that
              includes Least-Absolute-Deviations-type (LAD) estimators, and examines their
              asymptotic properties.   The project examines how these estimators, which rely
              on the assumption of strictly exogenous explanatory variables, can be modified
              to allow for dynamic feedback from the lagged choice and outcome variables on
              the current choice and outcome.  The second part considers estimation of panel
              data discrete choice models where the explanatory variable set includes
              strictly exogenous as well as lagged endogenous variables and unobservable
              individual-specific ('fixed") effects that can be correlated with the other
              explanatory variables in an arbitrary way.   It is currently not known how to
              estimate this type of models or whether estimation is even possible.  The
              contribution of the project will be to give conditions under which such models
              can be estimated, propose estimators and derive their asymptotic properties.   
                  ??
