Title       : Studies of the Effect of Electron Exchange Coupling on the Photophysics and
               Photochemistry of Transition Metal Complexes: Discrete Molecules to
               Magneto-Optical Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1998     
File        : a9729003

Award Number: 9729003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James K. McCusker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              James McCusker
CHE-9729003

Title: Studies of the Effect of Electron Exchange
              Coupling on the Photophysics and Photochemistry of Transition Metal Complexes:
              Discrete Molecules to Magneto-Optical Polymers

Abstract

Dr. McCusker is
              supported by the Inorganic Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program to
              examine how the presence of exchange coupling affects photo-induced
              excited-state properties of metal complexes.  McCusker has proposed to study
              intramolecular exchange coupling, between the radical ligand and the metal ion,
              via the systematic variation of semiquinone ligands coordinated to paramagnetic
              metal centers.  Having demonstrated the effect of electron exchange on
              ground-state characteristics of chromium-semiquinone complexes, effects upon
              the excited-state will be examined using low-temperature time-resolved
              adsorption and time-resolved resonance Raman spectroscopy.  Additional goals of
              the proposed work are to 1) measure the effect of exchange coupling upon
              inter-ligand electron-exchange dynamics and 2) examine the wavelength
              dependence of photoredox activity.  Extension studies will include the
              synthesis and characterization of magneto-optical dimers.

While the impact
              of spin coupling of paramagnetic centers on the physical properties of
              molecules has received considerable attention, there is a paucity of
              information on how the photophysical characteristics of molecules are affected
              by this phenomenon.  An increased understanding of exchange coupling may lead
              to the development of molecular-based magneto-optical materials.

