Title       : Basic Research in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a9729992

Award Number: 9729992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5996300            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Spencer spencer@ias.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre Deligne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Langlands  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. MacPherson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Advanced Study
	      Einstein Dr.
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The School of Mathematics of the Institute for Advanced Study  
(IAS) was
              formed in 1930 at the founding of the IAS.  The initial 
goal of the School
              was to provide a haven for scholars where they 
could work in an environment
              that was exceptionally favorable for 
conducting research.  Over the years,
              other roles have emerged and 
the School has assumed additional
              responsibilities including 
guiding junior visitors in their research and
              organizing special 
programs that widen the School's coverage of mathematics. 
              
Although it has functioned in an international context, the main 
impact of
              the Institute has been on the U.S. mathematical 
community, with a majority of
              its visitors having come from or 
been absorbed by it.  The Institute
              frequently conducts programs in 
special areas of mathematics.  During the
              last few years, there have 
been numerous seminars in such diverse areas as
              kinetic theory, 
weak turbulence, quantum algebraic geometry, geometry, and
              
modular varieties. There have also been workshops in materials 
science,
              mathematical problems in finance, fluid dynamics, kinetic 
theory, quantum
              computing, discrete isoperimetric inequalities, 
and turbulence.  Future
              programs will include geometric methods 
in representation theory and analytic
              theory of automorphic forms 
and L-functions.

This project will support
              postdoctoral and mid-career visiting 
researchers at the School of Mathematics
              of the Institute for 
Advanced Study with the goal of supporting a wide
              spectrum of 
mathematical research at the highest level.  This activity will
              
provide these researchers unique opportunities for consultation and
              
collaboration.


