Title       : New Bioactive Composite Materials: Proteins Immobilized in the Layers of
               Alpha-Zr(IV) Phosphonates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a9729178

Award Number: 9729178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275028             (Estimated)
Investigator: Challa V. Kumar C.V.Kumar@UCONN.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9729178  Kumar    The aim of this proposal is to develop strategies for the 
              successful immobilization of proteins at solid  surfaces. In this study, 
              a-zirconium phosphonates with specific  functionalities will be prepared,  and
              selected proteins will be  immobilized at these surfaces by covalent and
              non-covalent  methods.  Immobilized proteins will be examined with diffuse 
              reflectance spectral methods (Ultraviolet-Visible, Fourier  Transform
              InfraRed),  powder X-ray diffraction, activity  studies, and by differential
              scanning calorimetry.  These data  for the immobilized proteins will be
              compared with those of the  free proteins to gain insight into how surface
              functionalities,  linker lengths, and covalent immobilization influence bound 
              protein behavior.  Such detailed information is essential to  learn how
              specific surfaces can be rationally designed in order  to maximize the bound
              protein function.  %%%  The catalytic efficiency and selectivity of enzymes
              have not  been fully exploited for societal needs due to their instability  and
              high cost.  Immobilized enzymes, on the other hand, are  often more stable,
              result in lower costs, and they can be  recycled.  Immobilized proteins are
              important for applications  involving biosensors, medical implants,  enzyme
              reactors, and biomedical devices.  Immobilized proteins  can provide new and
              improved catalysts to produce fine  chemicals, pharmaceutical intermediates,
              and synthetic fuels to  meet growing societal needs while reducing the
              environmental  impact of  human activities.   This activity is jointly
              supported by the Division of Chemistry, the Division of Materials Research, and
              the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the MPS Directorate.  ***
