Title       : An International Conference on Turbulence: Challenges for the 21st Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9729251

Award Number: 9729251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katepalli R. Sreenivasan katepalli.sreenivasan@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sreenivasan  DMS9729251    "Turbulence: Challenges for the 21st Century"  An
              International Conference        Wind gusts and roaring fires, tornadoes and
              hurricanes, flows around    ships and aircraft, flow through pipelines, pumps,
              turbomachinery, as    well as arteries, are some examples of turbulent motion
              of fluids.    Our ability to describe and predict turbulent phenomena strongly 
                impacts such diverse fields as environmental pollution, weather   
              prediction, commercial chemical processes, aircraft and ship design,    ocean
              dynamics, and astrophysics. Turbulence is thus a subject of    great importance
              and demands serious attention. Yet, it is one of the    poorly understood
              subjects, despite about hundred years of serious    research.    Why is this
              so? It is trite but true to say that it is a very    difficult subject. The
              difficulties stem from the fundamentally    complex dynamical characteristics
              of turbulence including, for    example, strong nonlinearity, the simultaneous
              presence of a large    number of interacting degrees of freedom across a wide
              range of    spatial scales, marked departure from statistical equilibrium, and
              so    forth. More than $10^{18}$ degrees of freedom can be excited in   
              turbulent flows typical of atmospheric phenomena. This makes full    computer
              simulation of such flows impractical. Experimental studies    have also
              suffered because of approximations such as Taylor's    hypothesis and the use
              of one-dimensional surrogates for    three-dimensional quantities.    A
              confluence of important advances has occurred in the last decade:    new
              experimental tools have emerged, and enabled direct measurement    of
              spatio-temporal fields of turbulence, and new parameter ranges are    being
              explored in experiments by harnessing air at high pressures or   
              unconventional fluids such as helium. Direct numerical simulation has    become
              a powerful tool for the study of turbulence. Recent    improvements in computer
              memory and speed, especially the    availability of we ll-integrated massively
              parallel machines, have    made computer simulation a useful complement to
              laboratory    experiments. In addition, greater insights into the behavior of  
               nonlinear partial differential equations are being acquired rapidly.   
              Together, these advances have had a qualitative impact on the    understanding
              of turbulence dynamics, and on the development of    working models in
              engineering practice. Particular progress has been    achieved in the case of
              passive admixtures (such as dye, water vapor,    pollutants which are mixed by
              turbulence, but do not feed back to the    turbulent motion itself). For
              example, theoretical predictions have    been made for anomalous scaling in a
              class of passive admixtures.    These predictions are in turn supported by
              direct numerical    simulation.    To assess these recent advances and define,
              where possible, new    directions for the field, a conference is being
              organized at Los    Alamos between the 25th and 28th of May 1998. The
              conference is being    supported by the National Science Foundation and the Los
              Alamos    National Laboratory. The specific goal of the conference is to   
              provide an opportunity for scientists world-wide to communicate    recent
              critical advances in fundamental studies and engineering    applications of
              fluid turbulence, and to foster further development    of this broad field of
              nonlinear science.
