Title       : Human Ecology of the Rio Verde Drainage Basin, Oaxaca, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9729763

Award Number: 9729763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125068             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur A. Joyce   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Arthur Joyce and his collaborators
              will conduct one field season of archaeological and paleoecological research in
              the Rio Verde drainage in the state of Oaxaca, Mexico. The upper watershed of
              the river is situated in the Oaxaca highlands and derive from valleys which
              witnessed the rise of Monte Alban, one of the largest and most complex
              prehistoric Mesoamerican states. In its lower reaches the Rio Verde crosses the
              coastal plain and empties into the Pacific Ocean. In prior research in the
              lowland region, Dr. Joyce has noted that before 500 B.C. habitation is
              extremely scarce in contrast to many other areas along the Pacific coast of
              Mexico. After 500 B.C. population density and degree of land utilization
              increase dramatically. Dr. Joyce has suggested an environmental explanation for
              this phenomenon. He has noted an apparent period of heavy upland erosion just
              prior to the lowland expansion and believes it was caused by deforestation as
              burgeoning highland groups cleared extensive areas for agricultural production.
              Upstream sediments were deposited, he believes, downstream thereby increasing
              the fertility of the coastal plain. This in turn fostered an increase in
              lowland population density. Although archaeologists and paleoecologists have
              recognized for many years that prehistoric Mesoamerican agriculture had major
              negative  environmental impacts, this Rio Verde case is particularly
              interesting because of its broad regional scale and the possibility that upland
              degradation had just the opposite effect at lower altitudes. The region
              provides an excellent case study into the complexity of human environment
              interaction.       Dr. Joyce and his colleagues will conduct coordinated
              environmental and archaeological studies. In the Rio Verde headwaters the
              archaeological sequence is well known and the team will focus on the collection
              of geological and ecological data. They will examine river cuts to construct a
              geological sequence. They will also collect pollen to monitor vegetation
              change. With these data it should be possible to reconstruct erosional timing
              and sequence and determine the relative inputs of climatically and humanly
              induced factors. In the coastal area the research includes both archaeological
              and environmental components. Through a series of cores, soil formation will be
              studied and paloecoastline reconstructed. Archaeological surface survey
              combined with settlement excavation will provide insight into the changes in
              population size and social complexity over time.       This research is
              important because it with provide an excellent case study in prehistoric
              human-environmental interaction. The timing of population growth and increase
              (and decrease) in complexity varies from region to region in Middle America and
              Dr. Joyce's research should provide insight into potential causes.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
