Title       : Nucleocytoplasmic Transport of Mammalian mRNAs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9729601

Award Number: 9729601
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon G. Carmichael gcarmich@panda.uchc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9729601  Carmichael  The goal of this project is to understand how mRNAs are
              transported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Intron-containing pre-mRNAs are
              usually spliced and polyadenylated within the nucleus before mature mRNAs are
              transported to the cytoplasm. Most unspliced mRNAs are not exported. mRNAs
              transcribed from cDNAs of many intron-containing genes fail to accumulate in
              the cytoplasm, but some cellular mRNAs are intronless yet are transported
              efficiently. A 100-bp sequence within the intronless mouse histone H2a coding
              region has recently been found to permit efficient cytoplasmic accumulation of
              a human (-globin cDNA transcript. This histone element also inhibits splicing
              and can functionally replace Rev and the Rev-responsive element (RRE) for the
              cytoplasmic accumulation of unspliced HIV-1-related mRNAs. Further, this
              element appears to enhance polyadenylation. Therefore, this sequence may be a
              member of the cis-acting elements that facilitate the nucleocytoplasmic
              transport of naturally intronless messenger RNAs. Importantly, this is the
              first cellular RNA sequence that has been shown to have these properties. To
              extend these initial studies, a series of experiments are planned. First, the
              mouse H2a element will be further characterized in a variety of ways, including
              by site-specific mutagenesis. Second, experiments will be undertaken to
              identify the trans-acting factor(s) responsible for the transport effect on
              intronless messages. Third, using a number of different assays, the mode of
              action of the histone element will be compared both in vitro and in vivo to
              those of other known transport elements, which derive from viruses. Finally,
              other mouse histone open reading frames will be screened for sequences that
              facilitate intronless mRNA transport.    Living cells contain genetic
              information (DNA), which must be copied into informational molecules (called
              messenger RNA or mRNA) which is used to decode the information into proteins
              and enzymes. In order to work correctly, these  mRNAs have to be efficiently
              transported from one cellular compartment (the nucleus) to another (the
              cytoplasm). The research planned in this project will help us to understand
              better how mRNAs are transported. For the first time a cellular mRNA fragment
              has been discovered which appears to facilitate transport, and this fragment
              will be characterized in molecular detail to learn how it works.
