Title       : Geoarchaeology of the Built Middle Woodland Landscape at 11-GE-7, Lower Illinois
               River Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1998   
File        : a9729956

Award Number: 9729956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julieann Van Nest jvannest@mail.nysed.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane E. Buikstra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas K. Charles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ctr For Amer Archeology
	      P.O.Box 22
	      Kampsville, IL  620530022    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Julieann Van Nest will conduct one
              season of geoarchaeological research at the Mound House site which is located
              in the Illinois River floodplain in Greene Country Illinois. The site itself
              documents a time span of over 10,000 years of human prehistory beginning during
              the Early Archaic period (ca. 8500 B.C.) and extending through 19th and 20th
              Century Euroamerican settlement. The most extensive occupation appears to have
              been made by Middle Woodland peoples (ca. 50 B.C. - A.D. 250) who built at
              least two and perhaps as many as five earthworks. The `moundbuilder phenomenon`
              is widespread during this time period in the Southeastern and Midwest United
              States and indicates a surprisingly advanced level of social organization which
              permitted relatively large numbers of individuals to work together under
              centralized control for extended periods of time to construct such monuments.
              Based on archeological evidence, the functions of the mounds varied serving as
              burial structures in some instances and as house/temple platforms in others.
              Although it has not been the focus of intense study, archaeologists have noted
              that various construction techniques were employed and it some cases it is even
              possible to note individual piles or basketfulls of earth served to form the
              structure. Because the sides of mounds are severely eroded, it is difficult to
              reconstruct the original shape.  Dr. Van Nest will pursue geological research
              to shed light on the construction process. She will extract a series of cores
              from both the mounds themselves and the surrounding region. She will also
              examine excavated sections within the mound and with these data work to
              separate human construction from the complex natural geological processes which
              occur on an active floodplain. Dr. Van Nest hopes to locate the specific
              sources for the sod and earth which was used. Preliminary research indicates
              that some materials were transported considerable distances. With such
              information it is possible to gauge the amount of person power which
              construction entailed.  This research will shed new light on prehistoric Native
              American social organization. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists and assist in the career development of a very promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
