Title       : Information-Based Complexity of Multivariate Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1998        
File        : a9729971

Award Number: 9729971
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grzegorz Wasilkowski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Multivariate problems appear in many diverse applications;  yet they are often
              intractable in the worst case setting. A  significant part of the research will
              concentrate on the  study of multivariate problems in the average case setting.
               In particular, the study of the reduction in complexity by  switching from the
              worst case to the average case setting  will be one of the central foci. This
              will enrich  understanding of the average case complexity of important 
              multivariate problems and will provide new algorithms that  solve worst case
              intractable problems with small expected  cost and small expected error.
              Related to the average case  analysis are path integrals. The research will
              provide  complexity bounds for his important problem and should  reveal new
              algorithms that are more efficient than Monte  Carlo methods (that are commonly
              used) for some path  integrals. One of the approaches in studying path
              integrals  is through the analysis of multivariate weighted integration  and
              approximation over unbounded domains. A part of the  research will deal with
              the complexity of such problems. In  addition to theoretical results, the
              research will result in  efficient software for such problems as multivariate 
              integration/approximation, weighted  integration/approximation, and path
              integrals.
