Title       : Dissertation Research: Cotaxtla Archaeological Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1998  
File        : a9729317

Award Number: 9729317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11977              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Stark BLSTARK@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Barbara Stark, Mr. Michael Ohnersorgen will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will examine the changes which resulted
              from the collapse of classic Mayan civilization and the emergence of the Aztec
              empire. During the Classic Mayan period, society was organized around small
              independent city-states or `kingdoms` with rural hinterlands surrounding each.
              Although trade among major centers took place, each was independent and
              essentially self sustaining. In Mexico this form of organization was replaced
              by a larger centralized Aztec empire in which Mayan type entities were more
              closely integrated into a more tightly defined system. With the absence of
              wheeled vehicles and domesticated animals the Aztec integrated most of Mexico
              and archaeologists wish to understand the political and economic mechanisms
              involved. Mr. Ohnersorgen's research focuses on this question. He will conduct
              an archaeological survey of the site of Cotaxtla which is located in Veracruz
              Mexico and will focus on the Postclassic period (A.D. 900-1521). Based on
              limited work to date, it is clear that Cotaxtla was originally independent and
              subsequently incorporated into the Aztec empire. Mr. Ohnersorgen will attempt
              to answer two basic questions: first, how did the Aztecs maintain control? Did
              they use direct (through, for example, the stationing of soldiers) or more
              indirect means? It appears that the Aztecs used different methods in different
              parts of their empire. Secondly, what was the economic impact of Aztec
              domination? How did the organization of production change? Did a wide range of
              manufacturing activities continue or did Cotaxtla become a specialized
              producer? Did the production of items such as obsidian tools take place on an
              individualized household or a more centralized level?  To accomplish these
              goals Mr. Ohnersorgen will conduct a survey of the site to locate mound groups
              and other areas of concentrated activity. On this basis he will use a laser
              transit to produce detailed maps. Surface collections of ceramics, lithics and
              other artifacts will then be made. These data will permit economic activities
              to be identified and their distribution plotted over space.  This research is
              important for several reasons. It will shed new light on how complex societies
              develop. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in
              training a promising young scientist.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
