Title       : Electrostatics and Lateral Domains in Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9729538

Award Number: 9729538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart McLaughlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9729538  McLaughlin  The working hypothesis is that physical factors (e.g.
              electrostatics, surface pressure) can lead to the self assembly of specific
              lipids and proteins into lateral domains in cell membranes and that these
              domains are important for cell signaling.  The specific objectives are to
              understand (1) the molecular mechanisms by which basic peptides form lateral
              domains in phospholipid vesicles; (ii) how proteins present at high
              concentrations in the cell membrane, e.g. caveolin, self assemble into domains;
              and (iii) how other cell signaling proteins, e.g. Src, and lipids, e.g.
              phosphatidylinositol 4,5,-bisphosphate (PIP2), are sequestered in these
              domains.  Theory and experiment will be developed interactively to provide
              fundamental biophysical information about this complicated but important
              problem in signal transduction.  Reconstituted systems comprising components of
              the calcium/phospholipid second messenger system (e.g. PIP2, PKC, Src, G
              proteins, phospholipase C) and peptides corresponding to the scaffolding region
              of caveolin (residues 82-101) will be studied using fluorescence, surface
              pressure, and other techniques.  Theoretical calculations will be performed
              using realistic molecular models of peptides, proteins, and membranes.  Four
              factors that may contribute to domain formation will be examined:
              self-aggregation of the proteins or peptides; penetration of the polar head
              group region by W, F, and Y residues; the entropic long rod effect described by
              Onsager; and electrostatics.  Theories that account for each factor's relative
              contribution to domain formation will be formulated.  Preliminary results and
              calculations show that even simple basic peptides such Lys5 and the scaffolding
              domain of caveolin can sequester PIP2 in lateral domains via nonspecific
              electrostatic interactions, which may provide a molecular explanation for the
              sequestration of this lipid in caveolae.    This biophysics project has direct
              biological relevance because there is good evidence that biologic al membranes
              contain several different types of lateral domains that are important in signal
              transduction.  For example, the plasma membrane lateral domains called caveolae
              contain high concentrations of caveolin and signaling molecules such as
              heterotrimeric G proteins, Src family kinases, PKC, and PIP2; the latter is an
              important lipid that is both the source of two second messengers and acts to
              anchor several proteins to membranes.  Much of the PIP2 that is hydrolyzed in
              response to receptor stimulation is localized in the caveolae, suggesting they
              may be a primary site of agonist-stimulated PIP2  turnover.  ***
