Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Establishment of a High Performance Real-Time
               Visualization Research Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9729853

Award Number: 9729853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86714              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Kesavadas kesh@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raj Acharya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rakesh Nagi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christina L. Bloebaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9148,9218,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9729853  Kesavadas, T.  Bloebaum, Christina  State University of New York -
              Buffalo     CISE Research Instrumentation:  Establishment of a High Performance
              Real-Time Visualization Research Laboratory    This research instrumentation
              grant contributes to the purchase of an ONYX   2 Silicon Graphics computer with
              Infinite Reality Engine dedicated to   support research in Computer and
              Information Sciences and Engineering. The   award will enable the following
              projects:    - Virtual Manufacturing Visualization,  - Visualization
              Environment for Large-Scale Multidisciplinary Design     Optimization (MDO)
              Problems,  - Visualization-Based Mass Customization of Complex Assemblies, and 
              - Analysis and Visualization of Multidimensional Biomedical Structures.     The
              research instrumentation will foster new knowledge in four research areas:  
              (i) Virtual Reality (VR) based manufacturing and design, (ii) Multivariable  
              concurrent design visualization, (iii) Analysis and visualization of  
              multidimensional biomedical structures and (iv) Visualization-based mass  
              customization of complex assemblies. In the first application, this computer  
              will be used to develop a Virtual Factory Testbed consisting of models of  
              machines, processes and simulations where new factories and products can be  
              tested without having to build costly physical prototypes. In the second  
              application, a new method called "Graphmorphing" will be developed to enable  
              multi-variable design optimization of aircraft and automobiles. In the third  
              application, researchers at UB will use the visualization laboratory for   very
              advanced bio-engineering application namely study of Microscopic   Biolomedical
              Structures in 3D and Multimodality Cranial Structures for   Radiotherapy. In
              the fourth application a new Visualization-Based Mass   Customization of
              Complex Assemblies will be developed which will benefit   selective design of
              new products in an efficient way.
