Title       : Structural Studies of Defects, Disorder and Phase Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9729297

Award Number: 9729297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon C. Moss smoss@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Moss
9729297
This research project in materials physics employs x-ray and
              neutron scattering methods to address a range of problems in the structure of
              matter. The interest on the one hand is with atomic structure relationships,
              and on the other with those details that lead to important physical properties.
              Topics include interfacial disorder in multilayers, replacive disorder and
              order-disorder transitions in metals, semiconductors and superconductors;
              orientational disorder in molecular solids; displacive disorder in structural
              transitions, and the effects of surface on disorder and phase transitions. The
              project includes computer modeling and simulation, and collaborations with
              theorists. Materials under study include quasicrystals, superconductors,
              fullerenes, vanadium hydrides, metals with martensitic transitions, and
              multilayers of various metals. The research provides excellent training for
              graduate students and post-doctoral associates in x-ray, neutron, synchrotron
              x-ray and small angle x-ray scattering methods. Because of the breadth of
              materials under study, students receive an excellent background in materials
              physics and are prepared for a range of scientific or technical careers.
%%%
              
This research project in materials physics uses x-rays and neutrons to probe
              atomic arrangements in many different types of materials. The task is first to
              determine how the atoms are arrange in the solids and then to determine how the
              physical properties of the materials depend on the atomic arrangements. The
              materials under study include high-Tc superconductors, metals, fullerenes
              (bucky-balls), semiconductors, and multilayers of metals and semiconductors.
              The experiments depend strongly on computer modeling and simulation, and
              interaction with theorists. The research provides excellent training for
              graduate students and post-doctoral associates in x-ray, neutron, synchrotron
              x-ray and small angle x-ray scattering methods. Because of the breadth of
              materials under study, students receive an excellent background in materials
              physics and are prepared for a range of scientific or technical careers.

