Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Instrumentation for an Experimental Control
               Systems Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9729290

Award Number: 9729290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66420              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis S. Bernstein dsbaero@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9729290
Bernstein
Control-system technology is an enabling technology for many
              complex, high performance systems.  In many of these applications the control
              system is so essential that the system simply cannot operate without it.  On
              the other hand, failure of the control system can have dire consequences. 
              Graphic examples include the Chernobyl disaster and Airbus crashes.

In
              recent years it has become clear that one of the principal challenges facing
              control reseaxchers is the need to transition theoretical advances to
              operational systems.  To address this challenge, I am proposing to expand my
              control laboratory by extending current experiments and by developing new
              experiments.  These experiments provide motivation for theoretical control
              concepts and help to transition control theory to practice.

Under prior NSF
              support we have developed five control experiments, namely, the acoustic duct
              experiment, the rotating actuator experiment, the rotating imbalance
              experiment, the control-moment gyro experiment, and the autonomous aircraft
              experiment.  Under the proposed program all of these experiments will be
              extended to increase their versatility and to provide additional challenges. 
              In addition, we propose to develop three additional experiments, namely,
              control of three-dimensional acoustic fields, electrostatic control of a
              membrane, and control of combustion.  These additional experiments provide a
              significant expansion of our prior experimental activities into new and more
              challenging applications of control.

The equipment to be purchased under
              this grant includes a high-speed real-time parallel processor along with
              supporting infrastructure which includes sensors, actuators, filters,
              amplifiers, and power supplies.  
***  

