Title       : Closed-Shell Ion Pair Structure and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2001      
File        : a9729318

Award Number: 9729318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Pochapsky pochapsk@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, Professor Thomas C.  
              Pochapsky, of the Department of Chemistry at Brandeis University, is   studying
              the structure and dynamics of closed-shell ion pairs in   solution.  These
              studies are focused on both the development of a general   methodology for the
              characterization of dynamic self-assembling systems   (i.e., multimolecular
              complexes in which individual components undergo   rapid exchange on the NMR
              time scale) and the development of a more   complete understanding of chemical
              processes which involve ion pairing.    Nuclear Overhauser Effect studies probe
              the time-averaged structures of   ion pairs and, when combined with nuclear
              relaxation data, provide   information about motional behavior.  Pulsed field
              gradient NMR methods   allow measurement of self-diffusion coefficients for the
              ion pairs,   allowing the determination of their aggregation state.  These
              studies are   complemented by infrared spectral analysis and by computational
              methods.  Through a combination of experimental and computational studies,  
              Professor Thomas C. Pochapsky, of the Department of Chemistry at Brandeis  
              University, studies the structure and dynamics of ion pairs, molecular  
              aggregates which display discrete interactions between positively and  
              negatively charged species.  Such ion pairs are observed under a variety   of
              conditions in chemical and biological systems, have been implicated as  
              intermediates in many types of reactions, and are involved in biological  
              processes such as ion transport and molecular recognition.  With the   support
              of the Organic Dynamics Program, Professor Pochapsky is   developing an
              in-depth understanding of the structures of ion pairs and   of the dynamic
              processes associated with them.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
