Title       : Research in Secondary Ion and Neutral Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0135888

Award Number: 0135888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emile A. Schweikert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In research supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor
              Emile Schweikert and his coworkers at Texas A&M University are developing new
              methods for mass spectrometry of surfaces.The research focuses on extracting
              more information from the ejecta generated when bombarding surfaces with keV
              mono and polyatomic projectiles.  One objective is to achieve nanophase
              characterization via the detection of coincidentally emitted secondary ions. 
              The approach relies on the novel concept of "mass separated time-of-flight mass
              spectrometry".  A second objective is to advance detection sensitivity, which
              translates into the requirement of detecting neutrals.  The approach is to
              collisionally cool the desorbed neutrals at ambient pressure, collect them into
              a supersonic molecular beam and subject them to efficient hyperthermal
              ionization for subsequent identification by time-of-flight mass spectrometry.
              In addition to enhanced detection sensitivity, the procedure should be useful
              for surfaces not readily amenable to examination in vacuum.

This project
              deals with advancing chemical analysis expertise for examining surfaces. 
              Progress in surface science and technology with emphasis on nanostructures
              requires the detection of vanishingly small amounts of molecules.  The research
              aims to enhance our capabilities for identifying the chemical makeup of
              nanostructures and for detecting small numbers of molecules dispersed on a
              surface. The work will focus on two novel methods of mass spectrometry.  One
              based on "mass-separated time-of-flight mass spectrometry" is expected to
              enable chemical analysis of nanodomains as small as ~ 30 nm.  The other
              involves "ambient pressure secondary neutral mass spectrometry" with the goal
              of detecting molecules when they are randomly distributed on a surface (rather
              than assembled in a nanostructure) and when they are present in amounts which
              cannot be detected with current techniques.

