Title       : Great Plains Network Workshop: Network Resources for Enabling and Enhancing
               Research in the Earth Systems Science Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0135609

Award Number: 0135609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24961              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Martinko martinko@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theresa Crooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Richard Summerhill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9150,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the workshop is to facilitate use of Internet-enabled
              technologies in conducting fundamental and applied research, disseminating
              results and data between collaborating universities, and transferring research
              and applications to the interested public.  Specifically, the workshop will
              foster interaction among ESS researchers at GPN alliance-member Universities
              who are interested in 1) enhancing their individual research efforts, 2)
              developing new collaborative research efforts, and 3) exploring the potential
              for GPN resources in enhancing research infrastructure at member Universities. 
              GPN Alliance Universities include:  
North Dakota University, North Dakota
              State University, University of North Dakota, South Dakota School of Mines and
              Technology, South Dakota State University, University of South Dakota,
              University of Kansas, University of Kansas Medical Center Kansas State
              University, University of Nebraska - Lincoln, University of Oklahoma,
              University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, University of Tulsa, Oklahoma
              State University, University of Arkansas, University of Arkansas at Little
              Rock, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia,
              University of Missouri

To facilitate the objective and goals of the
              workshop, researchers will be provided an overview of the network and its
              resources, exposed to examples of technologies that are currently available,
              and will hear from fellow GPN ESS researchers about research projects and tools
              being developed in the other universities.

To support and facilitate
              follow-up meetings, discussions, future proposals and collaborative efforts,
              and to facilitate use of the high performance network in the ESS  research
              community, each workshop attendee will be provided with a PolyCom ViaVideo
              (H.323) videoconference unit.  The PolyCom ViaVideo is USB-based desktop
              videoconference unit that utilizes Internet2 networking and provides
              business-quality video.  The equipment will provide attendees with an important
              tool to assist in follow-up discussions and in continuing collaborative
              research and proposal development efforts.

