Title       : Determining the Essential Role of the Major Phosphoprotein of Vaccinia Virus:
               Vp11
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0135877

Award Number: 0135877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Reddy mkr@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The activities of many viral proteins required for viral DNA replication and
              morphogenesis are regulated by phosphorylation.  That this is the case in
              vaccinia virus (VV), which is the best-understood member of the Poxviridae, is
              increasingly clear.  Poxviruses encode the vast majority of their own enzymatic
              components required for the transcription and replication of their viral
              genome.  This remarkable autonomy from the host makes VV one of the most
              premier eukaryotic biochemical and genetic model systems available.  The study
              of VV continues to shed light on parallel systems such as DNA replication,
              chromatin condensation, post-translational modification of proteins, and
              dynamic aspects of kinases and phosphatases.  In particular, VV encodes two
              protein kinases (F10 and B1) and a dual-specificity phosphatase (H1).  These
              enzymes are all essential in the viral life cycle.  However, the precise
              molecular role dynamic phosphorylation plays during the viral life cycle
              remains largely undefined.  The vaccinia viral protein that is at the heart of
              this research, Vp11, is an 11-kDa-phosphoserine protein.  Although Vp11
              (encoded by the gene F17) is the most abundant protein (in terms of number of
              molecules) in the virion, its precise in vivo function(s) remains elusive.  As
              such, the primary goal of this research is to determine the in vivo function(s)
              of Vp11.  Vp11 binds to DNA in vitro, and has long been postulated to be
              involved in condensation of the viral genomic DNA.  By modulating nucleic
              acid-binding activity, protein phosphorylation can be a positive or negative
              regulator of gene expression.  Phosphorylation may also be necessary for the
              oligomerization of a protein. Furthermore, protein phosphorylation can also be
              required for the proper subcellular localization of a protein, or may be
              critical for the protein's stability in vivo.  This project is designed to
              explore these scenarios.  Recent results from this project point to an
              important role of the MAP/ERK kinase-signaling pathway during the VV life
              cycle.  The proven tractability of vaccinia as a model system allows a
              dissection of this possible contribution of the host cell.  Aspects of these
              processes are addressed within this project by a focused molecular
              characterization of Vp11 as well as the role of the MAP/ERK signaling pathway
              in the life cycle of poxviruses.

The research described in this project
              involves an animal virus called vaccinia.  Vaccinia was the live vaccine used
              to eradicate smallpox.  The study of vaccinia virus by biochemists has long
              provided insights into the more complicated workings of human cells.  For the
              correct growth of a human cell, many forms of control (also called
              "regulation") are required.  Without this regulation, cell growth becomes
              abnormal.  The most common type of regulation is a simple chemical process by
              which a phosphate ion is placed on certain types of protein.  Regulation of
              this sort is termed "phosphorylation".  This NSF-funded research will provide a
              window into this crucial event by using a much simpler, and therefore more
              tractable, viral model system.  
