Title       : "Using Your Brain for a Change": Neuroscience and Identity in Self-Help
               Literature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0135559

Award Number: 0135559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Harrington aharring@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia Hoffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES 0135559
"Using Your Brain for a Change:" Neuroscience and
              Identity in Self-Help Literature
Anne Harrington/ Ginger Hoffman
Harvard
              University


What can a definition of a synapse offer individuals seeking
              hope, solace, and self-improvement?  This postdoctoral project generates a
              detailed study of the role neuroscientific information plays within a widely
              used resource for self-betterment: the self-help literature.  Specifically, a
              combination of historical, anthropological, and cultural/science studies
              methods are used to realize three principal objectives: 1)to document the types
              of neuroscientific information relayed to the public via the self-help
              literature,  2)to explore how this information influences individuals '
              identities and sense of agency, and  3) to chart how (1) and (2) have changed
              over time.

The fellowship holder's hypothesis is that neuroscientific
              information within the self-help literature delivers complicated messages about
              the relationship between us and our bodies, and that these messages have
              profound implications for both who we are and who we can end up being. To
              explore this claim, critical textual analysis of the self-help literature is
              combined with interviews of self-help readers and self-help authors, and will
              result in the production of several scholarly articles and the foundations of a
              book..  These research activities are enhanced by three in-depth training
              activities: 1)graduate level coursework in the history of science, anthropology
              of science, and public understanding of science;  2) the development and
              teaching of an undergraduate course on the history and philosophy of
              neurobiological models of mental illness, and  3) participation in a
              interdisciplinary working group (named Psychopharmaceuticals and Identity)
              conducting ethnographic research.  This training serves as a critical adjunct
              to Hoffman's graduate training in neuroscience, and enables her research to be
              conducted from a solid interdisciplinary base.

Investigating the presence of
              neuroscientific data within the self-help literature helps both scientists and
              the public understand how scientific facts travel from the lab bench to popular
              culture, and indeed, how these facts shape concepts of personhood,
              self-control, and the ways in which hope and help are attained.

