Title       : Role of Amino Acid Transporters in Seed Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0135344

Award Number: 0135344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mechthild Tegeder tegeder@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Assimilate distribution (partitioning) in plants is hypothesized to be regulated
              by transport processes located in importing organs (sinks) such as developing
              seeds. The transport of amino nitrogen, in particular, is a major factor
              influencing plant productivity, crop yield and reproductive success. However,
              key nitrogen transport processes remain to be identified and characterized.
              This project utilizes a multidisciplinary approach to characterize amino acid
              transport processes in sink tissues and specifically to determine the function
              of amino acid transporters expressed in reproductive structures. The overall
              goal is to understand, at a cellular and molecular level, the role of amino
              acid transporters in controlling nitrogen transport to and within seeds. Using
              Arabidopsis fruits (siliques) and seeds as a sink model, we intend (1) to
              identify the cellular and subcellular localization of members of the amino acid
              transporter family that are expressed during silique/seed development, (2) to
              understand mechanisms controlling amino acid transport in sinks by
              characterizing the physiological and molecular regulation of amino acid
              transporters, and (3) to assess the functional significance of amino acid
              transporters in controlling import of organic nitrogen into developing seeds
              using molecular genetic manipulation of transporter expression and activity. 
              The information obtained from the proposed work will form the basis for
              understanding the function of various amino acid transporters in nitrogen
              transfer and partitioning to and among seed tissues. In addition, it will
              provide a platform for more detailed future studies to evaluate transporter
              contribution to nutrient accumulation by seeds in other plant species. The
              program will also offer a framework for the development of biotechnological
              innovations to increase crop yield and for modifying nutritional qualities of
              seeds with respect to their amino acid complement. 






