Title       : Density Functional Theory of Electronic Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0135678

Award Number: 0135678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Perdew perdew@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical research and education motivated in part by the
              desire to improve the accuracy of density functional theory as practiced in
              condensed matter physics and quantum chemistry.  The PI describes a "ladder" of
              approximations for the exchange-correlation functional in which the first rung
              is the local spin density approximation and the second rung is the generalized
              gradient approximation (GGA).  These standard approximations do not enable
              electronic structure calculations with chemical accuracy. In particular, they
              do not accurately describe strongly correlated or strongly spatially
              inhomogeneous densities, polarizabilities of long-chain molecules, or highly
              excited states. The PI proposes to address these problems through work on
              several projects: (1) Develop and test approximations for the
              exchange-correlation functional that correspond to the third and fourth rungs
              of the "ladder" of approximations.  The meta-GGA would be developed as a
              controlled interpolation between the slowly varying and iso-orbital density
              limits. The hyper-GGA uses the exact exchange energy density to achieve freedom
              from self-interaction error and a correct non-uniform scaling behavior. (2) The
              uniform electron gas will be explored using a modified pair density functional
              method with a self-consistent electron-electron interaction. An energy
              interpolation between exact high- and low-density limits will be used to
              explore the spin-polarized electron gas. The results will be compared with much
              more computationally expensive diffusion Monte Carlo calculations.  (3)
              Diffusion Monte Carlo, density-functional theory, and RPA studies of the
              jellium surface energy will be carried out in parallel to resolve the apparent
              discrepancy between surface energies calculated using diffusion Monte Carlo and
              other methods. (4) Calculations for real solids will test a new analytic
              equation of state and will construct a Kohn-Sham potential for the
              orbital-dependent meta-GGA and hyper-GGA energy functionals. (5) A
              Laplacian-level meta-GGA will be constructed non-empirically for the orbital
              kinetic energy.  This project also contributes directly to the education of
              undergraduate and graduate students, and to the professional development of
              postdoctoral researchers.

This award supports fundamental theoretical
              research with an aim to improve the accuracy of density-functional based
              theories of materials. Analytical and numerical methods will be used. Density
              functional theory is widely used to predict a variety of materials properties,
              such as crystal structures, electron spin densities, and phonon modes. Another
              component of the PI's research would study fundamental problems associated with
              the electron gas and improved approximations for the kinetic energy. The
              homogeneous electron gas plays a fundamental role in the practical application
              of density functional theory. This award also supports education at the
              undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels.

