Title       : Dissertation Enhancement Grant: Understanding the Evolution of Neotropical
               Diversity: Implications from Phylogenetic Patterns in Ttwo co-distributed Avian
               Genera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0135532

Award Number: 0135532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vicki B. Booker                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18480              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Bates jbates@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5913,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation enhancement grant will support Jose G. Tello under the
              direction of Dr. John M. Bates of the Field Museum of Natural History for a
              detailed study of the phylogeography of two bird lineages distributed
              throughout the Neotropical lowlands in Brazil. Phylogeography is a field of
              study concerned with the principles and processes that underlie the
              geographical distribution of genealogical lineages. Phylogenetic patterns of
              avian (bird) differentiation within the Neotropics, or the existence of spatial
              and temporal congruence of those patterns, are just beginning to be studied.
              This research involves the study of the diversification of two independent
              avian lineages -- Cercomacra antbirds and Platyrinchus flycatchers --  using
              mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequences.

The generation of phylogenies will
              not only shed light on the region's evolutionary history, but also will help to
              elucidate the roles that different ecological and behavioral traits may have
              played in the diversification process. This fundamental research will
              constitute one of the first to extensively examine phylogeographic patterns in
              the Neotropical lowlands using multiple data sets and multiple lineages, and
              hence provide important insights into the history of diversification in the
              region.
