Title       : CAREER: Development of Continuous-Flow Laser-Spin Polarized Xe-129 NMR
               Spectroscopy in Magnetic Stray Fields for the Investigation of Nanoporous
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a0135082

Award Number: 0135082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Meersmann meer@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Meersmann will combine continuous-flow laser-spin-polarized
              129Xe nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy with pulsed-field-gradient
              diffusion techniques to develop a non-invasive analytical technique that allows
              the study of porosity, pore-size distribution and pore connectivity in porous
              host materials. A combination of magnetic stray fields with continuous flow
              laser polarized xenon Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) will be used to study
              long range structural order in materials with small diffusion constants. An
              important system that will be probed with this new technique is the gas
              dynamics in one-dimensional nanochannels that is driven by very slow
              single-file diffusion processes. A variety of novel phenomena such as the
              correlation of xenon lineshape with diffusion or concerted cluster diffusion
              can be probed for the first time with these experiments. 

A non-invasive
              analytical technique will be developed to provide information about the
              porosity, pore-size distribution and pore connectivity of porous materials.
              Nano-channels play an important role in a wide range of industrial catalytic,
              geologic and biological processes. The results of this research are expected to
              make a significant contribution to material science concerned with
              heterogeneous catalysis, separation processes and in the understanding of
              fundamental physical chemistry. Graduate and  undergraduate students will
              participate in this research. They will gain excellent training in forefront
              research techniques in preparation for advanced studies or entry into the
              scientific/technological workforce.  

