Title       : Genetic Dissection of Wolbachia Infection in Drosophila Melanogaster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0135166

Award Number: 0135166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389679             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy L. Karr tkarr@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1155,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Wolbachia  pipientis is one of the most widespread endosymbiotic microorganisms
              known. First characterized in mosquitoes of  the Culex pipiens complex, it has
              since been found in greater than 20% of insect species and about 25% of 
              Drosophila melanogaster used in genetic research. Wolbachia has specialized in
              the manipulation of host reproduction. In Drosophila,  Wolbachia  primarily 
              causes  cytoplasmic  incompatability  (CI),  a  form  of reproductive
              isolation. The expression of CI renders infected males unable to father
              offspring when mated to uninfected females. While infected males mate normally,
              transfer sperm and the sperm fertilize the egg, the egg fails to complete
              karyogamy and dies. Reciprocal crosses between uninfected males and infected
              females are viable, but since Wolbachia are transmitted vertically through the
              female, all resulting progeny  are  infected. The research project will attempt
              to understand the genetic basis of Wolbachia distribution in Drosophila
              melanogaster testes and the resulting effects on CI. Deficiency mapping will
              identify loci with large effects on Wolbachia distribution and  density  within
               D. melanogaster  testes. Deficiency  stocks  will  be  screened  for  the
              presence of Wolbachia. Those  strains  with  dissimilar patterns of Wolbachia
              distribution will be studied further for their ability (or inability) to cause
              CI as well as the for the host genetic basis of differential bacterial 
              distribution. Following identification of important candidate loci through
              deficiency mapping, alleles with different levels of penetrance will be studied
              for their impact on bacterial distribution and CI. 
The identification of
              genes and biochemical pathways involved in determining Wolbachia distribution
              patterns will advance the  understanding  of  how Wolbachia manipulate host
              reproduction in Drosophila and spermatogenesis in general. It may  also provide
              clues as to what pathways are manipulated when Wolbachia  infect more distantly
              related insects, particularly insect pests that cause human diseases (for
              example, malarial diseases transmitted by mosquitoes. Such knowledge will also
              aid in the design of effective pest management  programs  utilizing
              Wolbachia.

