Title       : Assessment of Basal Melt of Petermann Gletscher in Northwestern Greenland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0135450

Award Number: 0135450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Konrad Steffen koni@seaice.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
0135450
Steffan

The research is a collaborative effort between the
              University of Colorado, Boulder, the British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge, and
              the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.  The Office of Polar Programs (OPP) at National
              Science Foundation and the National Aeronautical and Space Administration
              (NASA) will support the project.  The Greenland Ice Sheet is thinning rapidly
              along its outlet glaciers and is contributing an estimated 0.13 mm/yr global
              sea level rise. Signs of its warming have been documented, including rising air
              temperature in its central part and retreating sea ice in its surrounding
              ocean. Extensive floating ice tongues in the northwest sector are ice
              undergoing massive rates of ablation from the surrounding warm ocean waters and
              are presently in a state of fragile equilibrium, but this ablation rate has
              never been measured. The Petermann Gletscher is the largest and most
              influential outlet glacier in northern Greenland, draining an area of 71,580
              km2, with a discharge of 12 cubic km of ice per year.  Remote sensing results
              suggest that its ice discharge exceeds that required to maintain the ice sheet
              interior in a state of mass equilibrium by 63%, and its grounding line is
              retreating at an anticipated rate at nearly one meter per year. Its floating
              ice tongue is only a few meters above sea level at the ice front, so it is
              highly vulnerable to ice thinning. If confirmed by in-situ observations and if
              this trend continues for several decades, the rate of thinning would be
              sufficient to threaten the stability and survival of the ice tongue.  The
              Principal Investigators propose to do a detailed analysis of the glacier
              floating ice tongue in front of Petermann Gletscher that integrates key field
              observations with remote sensing data. The field program is designed to obtain
              the in-situ observations to confirm, validate, and calibrate the remote sensing
              estimates of basal melting, derive reliable estimates of surface melt from an
              energy balance model, observe changes in ice volume with precision, and
              understand the contribution of ice dynamics, surface melt and bottom melt to
              volume changes of floating ice. The experiment is will take place at the most
              crucial part of the glacier, the grounding line. Bottom melt rates are
              estimated to reach 25 m/yr near the grounding zone from remote sensing data,
              and 75% of the ice that crosses melts in contact with warm ocean waters in the
              first 20% area of floating ice. Basal melting will be measured in-situ over
              several time intervals using a novel phase-sensitive radar sounding system
              developed and tested by the British Antarctic Survey. At the surface, the
              energy budget of the ice will be characterized using a network of automated
              micrometeorological stations, and the results will be employed to determine how
              well surface melt can be predicted from an energy balance model and how much it
              changes with time. Remote sensing data that include strain rates from
              interferometric synthetic-aperture radar (InSAR), elevation changes from
              airborne laser altimetry, and ice thickness from airborne ice-radar sounding,
              will be employed to yield spatial estimates of basal melting to be compared
              with in-situ data. InSAR and Global Positioning Systems will be used to detect
              changes in flow rate with time. The results will provide invaluable insights
              into dynamics and climatic processes of northern Greenland glaciers.


