Title       : Conference: Sensory Transduction in Microorgranisms; January 13-18, 2002,
               Ventura, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2001  
File        : a0135717

Award Number: 0135717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey E. Segall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
This award is in partial support of the Gordon Conference on Sensory
              Transduction in Microorganisms to be held Jan 13 - Jan 18, 2002 at the Ventura
              Beach Hotel in Ventura, CA. 

This meeting provides a unique opportunity for
              cross fertilization of cutting edge research in prokaryotic and eukaryotic
              organisms. The isolated, informal atmosphere characteristic of the Gordon
              Conference format is important for providing the opportunities for generating
              novel concepts. It is anticipated that there will be around 150 attendees from
              the United States and abroad to discuss the latest developments and ideas
              regarding the molecular mechanisms of  signal transduction in unicellular
              microorganisms. The species covered will include bacteria, yeast, slime molds
              and ciliates, as well as selected examples of speicalized cell types from
              higher organisms (e.g., pollen tubes, neutrophils) where sensory transduction
              mechanisms are key to functionality.  There will be 9 formal sessions, each
              consisting of an introduction by a leading researcher, 4 - 5 major
              presentations, and 2 - 3 'minitalks' that provide special opportunities for
              students and postdoctoral fellows to present poster data. The selection
              criteria for invited speakers (and participants) include expertise relevant to
              the meeting topics, gender balance, minority representation, and promise as a
              future scientific leader.  The sessions will be integrated across species and
              explore fundamental topics such as receptor structure and function,
              transmembrane signaling, intracellular signaling pathways, and coupling to
              output responses. In addition, sessions on important emerging topics such as
              microbial biofilms/quorum sensing and genomic/proteomic approaches will aid in
              directing future research. A combination of poster and oral presentations will
              enable scientists ranging from graduate students to senior professors to
              present and discuss their work.

