Title       : Proximate Mechanisms of Sexual Size Dimorphism in Lizards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a0135167

Award Number: 0135167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230337             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry B. John-Alder henry@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	Sexual size dimorphism (SSD) is a widespread biological phenomenon in which
              adults of one sex attain characteristically larger body sizes than the other
              sex.  Depending on the species, males might be larger than females, or vice
              versa.  It is often assumed that SSD evolves due to differential selection on
              body size, and several adaptive hypotheses invoking advantages for male- or
              female-biased SSD have been widely discussed.  However, the genetic basis and
              thus the potential for evolution of SSD is almost completely undescribed, and
              relatively little is known about physiological and other proximate mechanisms
              that lead to sex differences in body size in the vast majority of species.  It
              is therefore premature to focus on ultimate as opposed to proximate causation
              of SSD, as has been the general tilt of previous studies in this area.  The
              present project will focus on physiological and ecological mechanisms of
              proximate causation of SSD in a lizard (Sceloporus undulatus) in which females
              grow faster as juveniles to become about 10% larger than males as adults.  This
              project will address the following questions: 1) Is testosterone fundamentally
              responsible for sexually dimorphic growth rates and the development of
              female-biased SSD?  2) To what extent is SSD subject to environmental
              variation?  3) How do constraints imposed by growth/activity trade-offs affect
              the occurrence of SSD?  To answer the questions posed in this project, two sets
              of studies will be done.  1) Descriptive studies will characterize growth
              rates, behavior, and sex steroid levels in juvenile lizards active in their
              native habitat.  2) Experimental studies involving hormone manipulations will
              resolve unambiguously the potential role of testosterone in leading to
              female-biased SSD.  The work completed in this project will contribute
              important new information regarding the general question of how sex differences
              in growth lead to SSD.  This work may open the door for future comparative
              studies on growth regulation in phrynosomatid lizards, a large family with a
              well-described phylogenetic history. Future comparative molecular studies in
              this group could provide a detailed understanding of the evolution of the
              regulation of growth-promoting gene expression and could help to resolve the
              contribution of genetic vs. environmental determinants of growth and SSD.  As
              such, phrynosomatid lizards may prove to become a significant new model system
              for studies on growth regulation.
