Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Processes of Early Inca State Expansion in the
               Sacred Valley (Cusco, Peru)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2001  
File        : a0135913

Award Number: 0135913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce Marcus joymar@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Joyce Marcus, Mr. R. Alan Covey will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. Using samples of grass, carbonized corn, and charred
              wood, he will obtain radiocarbon dates that will help to answer several
              important questions about the Inka empire.  The samples were collected during
              Covey's regional survey research and excavations in the Vilcanota Valley (known
              popularly as the Sacred Valley), located immediately to the north of Cusco, the
              Inka capital.  The new dates will help to refine our understanding of the
              development of regional pottery and architectural styles between AD 1000-1450,
              the time during which the Inka empire formed in the Cusco Valley and began its
              first imperial conquests.  A well-defined archaeological chronology for this
              period will elucidate some of the processes enabling rapid Inka imperial
              expansion, providing an additional line of evidence that can be compared to
              Colonial Spanish accounts of Inka history.

The goal of Mr. Covey's research
              is to describe how the Inka created a well-integrated imperial heartland that
              included the Sacred Valley, an area occupied by several different ethnic groups
              in the pre-Inka period.  This work integrates four independent datasets:  (1)
              regional settlement patterns, collected in a systematic survey; (2) excavation
              data from pre-Inka households; (3) Colonial period Spanish accounts of Inka
              history; and (4) Colonial archival documents on land tenure in the study
              region.  While the Spanish chronicles provide valuable information about Inka
              origins, they do not offer a reliable chronology for this period.  The full
              potential of archaeological data has remained unrealized because a clear
              radiocarbon chronology is still not available to subdivide the period from AD
              1000-1450. A more accurate chronology will in turn yield more powerful regional
              data for analyzing the processes of early Inka territorial expansion.

This
              research is important because it will help to demonstrate that processes of
              Inka imperial expansion and administration were developed through a long period
              of regional political interactions and integration strategies.  Mr. Covey's
              research will advance our understanding of the conditions that promote the
              formation and expansion of empires. It will also assist in training a promising
              young scientist.

