Title       : SGER: Exploratory Investigation of Simulation of Solar Plasma with Accelerated
               Compact Toroid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0135347

Award Number: 0135347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29360              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Q. Hwang dqhwang@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 9196,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will generate magnetic plasmoids that can excite non-linear
              processes relevant to solar and inter planetary plasmas. The main effort is to
              develop the laboratory diagnostics capable of measuring the non-linear
              processes and to develop theoretical and computer models of the physical
              processes and their relevancy to solar and interplanetary plasmas. The
              Spheromak-like compact toroid (SCT) is a magnetized blob of ionized material
              (plasmoid) with self-generated equilibrium magnetic field structures that can
              confine the plasma over its lifetime of several tens of microseconds. This type
              of plasmoid is of great interest in laboratory magnetic fusion experiments and
              its development has been supported through DOE projects. One of the unique
              properties of the SCT is that it can withstand a tremendous accelerating force,
              so high speed (over 100 km/sec) can be reached in relatively short distance.
              Therefore, SCT accelerators are fairly compact and easily usable in laboratory
              experiments. In the past, one of the drawbacks of the SCT accelerator is the
              limit on its repetition rate by lack of high power repeatable switches. The low
              rate limits the use of this apparatus in physics experiment where statically
              meaningful database is required in a reasonable time frame. The investigators
              have now developed and operated a repeatable SCT accelerator using passive
              switching. At present, the pulse rate has increased from one per minute to one
              every 5 seconds. Improvement in the gas valve system will increase the rate to
              over 100 Hz. Moreover, the reliability of the accelerator has achieved over
              1000 shots at the .2 Hz rate. Laboratory plasmas have the distinct advantage
              that its physical parameters can be carefully controlled and dynamic processes
              can be precisely diagnosed. Neither of these is possible with astrophysical
              plasmas.
