Title       : International Conference on Orgranic Nonlinear Optics VI, December 16-20, 2001,
               Tuscon, Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2001  
File        : a0135287

Award Number: 0135287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6250               (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth R. Marder smarder@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1984,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This conference award to the University of Arizona is made by the Advanced
              Materials Program in the Chemistry Division, the Electronic Materials Program
              in the Division of Materials Research, and the Electronic and Communications
              System in the Engineering Directorate in support of the International
              Conference on Organic Nonlinear Optics VI (ICONO VI). The symposium in
              non-linear optics of organic and polymeric materials will provide a forum for
              discussion of recent developments and fundamental studies, and their
              applications in photonic technologies, devices and architectures.  Previous
              ICONO meetings in different countries were widely attended, and brought
              together internationally distinguished researchers for discussion and
              interactions.  These conferences have been very well received by participants,
              both national and international scientists, and are always oversubscribed. The
              planned conference is expected to provide a forum for discussion of ongoing and
              emerging areas of research and education among scientists with common interests
              in organic and polymeric materials with non-linear optical properties, and to
              promote dialog between industry, government and academic scientists from around
              the globe. Funds from NSF will be used to cover registration fees and some
              local expenses for attendees from historically black and minority institutions.
              Attempts also will be made by the organizers of the conference to encourage
              participation from other under-represented groups.

The International
              Conference on organic Nonlinear Optics VI will provide a forum conducive to the
              development of ideas, help bridge gaps among the materials chemistry
              constituencies in academia, industry and government laboratories from around
              the globe, lead to new collaborations and define the frontiers of photonic
              materials based on polymers.
