Title       : Vertical Integration of Research and Education in the Mathematical Sciences -
               VIGRE: VIGRE/GT: Vertical Integration of Research & Education at Georgia Tech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0135290

Award Number: 0135290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2131693            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Lacey lacey@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Pelesko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Duke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robin Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph M. Landsberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1618,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0135290 

Mathematical Sciences: Vertical
              Integration of Research & Education at Georgia Tech   
              

Abstract
DMS-0135290 
Lacey   



This VIGRE project will build on
              the strengths of the School of Mathematics at The Georgia Institute of
              Technology, and on the many innovations introduced by the curriculum review
              which accompanied the Institute's conversion to the semester system two years
              ago.  The project creates innovative educational programs that link teaching
              and research and promote interactions among undergraduate and graduate
              students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty members. 

At the undergraduate
              level, the project will increase the number of mathematics majors, improve
              retention, and provide students with a deeper and more relevant educational
              experience. This will be accomplished by the introduction of new courses and
              seminars for beginning students, more focused advising, and much expanded
              efforts to foster undergraduate research.

The postdoctoral fellows supported
              by the VIGRE project will receive increased guidance as they continue to
              develop their teaching and research skills.  They will interact more
              extensively with undergraduate and graduate students, both through one-on-one
              mentoring and through seminars that they themselves will organize. 

The
              VIGRE program will have a major impact on Georgia Tech's doctoral program in
              mathematics. Graduate trainees will be provided with full non-teaching support
              during their first year and during summers and portions of their later years.
              This will enable them to complete their degrees in a more timely fashion, and
              will also provide them with the added freedom needed to broaden their education
              by taking advantage of the many other strong programs at Georgia Tech. New
              seminars will smooth the transition from coursework to dissertation research. 
              Increased contact with undergraduate mathematics majors and the school's
              postdoctoral fellows will further diversify their training.  The VIGRE program
              will draw together the talents and energy of faculty members, postdoctoral
              fellows, undergraduates, and graduate students to create an integrated
              community of scholars dedicated to discovery and learning. 

