Title       : Mechanisms of Fast Neurotransmitter Secretion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0135428

Award Number: 0135428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Konrad E. Zinsmaier kez@neurobio.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1192,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Regulated neurotransmitter exocytosis is a fundamental process for the
              intercellular communication among neurons.  It is widely accepted that
              neurotransmitter secretion is a tightly regulated form of constitutive
              vesicular exocytosis shared by all eukaryotic cells.  At the nerve terminal, a
              depolarization-induced Ca2+ influx through ion specific channels triggers the
              fusion of synaptic vesicles, which expel their neurotransmitter cargo onto the
              postsynaptic cell.
A combination of biochemical and genetic approaches by many
              laboratories has lead to molecular models describing exocytotic and endocytotic
              mechanisms. In particular, recent advances uncovered the SNARE- or core complex
              driving constitutive membrane fusion. However, little is known about mechanism
              that mediate vesicle docking, arrest fusion-competent vesicles in the readily
              releasable pool, accomplish Ca2+ signaling from the sensor to the fusion
              machinery, adjust the probability of vesicle fusion, or regulate the size of
              readily releasable pool.
We have initiated a genetic screen to identify
              further components mediating Ca2+-triggered exocytosis at nerve terminals and
              identified several novel mutations, which potentially affect neurotransmission.
              Of these, the mutation B682 is especially interesting because it inhibits a
              unique activity-dependent loss of evoked release, which coincides with a
              simultaneous increase in spontaneous neurotransmitter release, suggestive of an
              impaired releasable vesicle pool. A unifying hypothesis suggests that B682
              protein mediates a late step in synaptic vesicle maturation that accumulates
              fusion-competent vesicles in the "readily releasable vesicle pool".
              Specifically, B682 may "clamp" these fusogenic vesicles such that they await
              the fusion-triggering Ca2+ signal.
To test this hypothesis (and explore others
              if warranted), loss- and gain-of-function B682 mutations will be examined for
              their effects on synaptic function at NMJs. These effects will be examined by a
              multi-disciplinary approach including electrophysiology, Ca2+ imaging, FM1-43
              imaging, confocal and electron microscopy, and biochemistry.
The first two
              Objectives will lay basic and essential groundwork for evaluating B682's
              synaptic role. Specifically, we will verify that B682 is indeed a presynaptic
              protein that affects a physiological step of synaptic transmission but not
              neuromuscular synaptogenesis. Once these points are fully established the third
              Objective will test the essence of the B682 protein hypothesis. Specifically,
              it will test the prediction that B682 mutations do not impair Ca2+ entry and/or
              extrusion. In addition, this objective will test whether the abnormal vesicle
              distribution in B682 mutants is caused by a defect in vesicle recycling, steps
              of vesicle trafficking to active zones and/or refilling the readily releasable
              vesicle pool. Together, these studies will help to better understand the
              molecular mechanisms that mediate the regulation of fast, synchronous
              neurotransmitter exocytosis at nerve terminals.
 


