Title       : Acquisition of an X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometer for Geological and
               Environmental Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a0135318

Award Number: 0135318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131200             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Berry Lyons lyons.142@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Olesik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Elliot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel J. Traina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lonnie G. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0135318
Lyons

A state-of-the-art X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer will
              provide new elemental chemical analysis capabilities for a variety of Earth and
              environmental sciences research projects at the Ohio State University.   The
              instrument will also be used by both undergraduate and graduate students as
              part of courses and their research projects with faculty.   Some selected
              research projects that will use the new instrument are described below.  Profs.
              W. Berry Lyons and Anne Carey and their students will investigate major sources
              of geochemical input into the world's oceans from suspended materials in rivers
              that may contribute a large portion of the sediment that enters the oceans.  In
              order to understand ocean chemistry, the main sources of chemical species from
              natural and anthropogenic origins must be determined.  Prof. David Elliot's
              research group will collect and analyze a igneous rocks in order to understand
              better the tectonic processes and transport of magma associated with initial
              Gondwana break-up.  This research will contribute to understanding changes in
              earth history, specifically the break up and movement of continents.  Prof.
              Samuel Traina's group will investigate the nature of adsorption of inorganic
              chemical contaminants onto soils and sediments. Understanding these processes
              is important because adsorption of pollutants, including radioactive waste, to
              soils and sediments could control their transport and effect on living
              organisms.  Prof. Frank Schwartz, an Ohio Eminent Scholar, and his students,
              will study how inhomogeneities in surface soils affect the propagation of
              reaction fronts.  This information will be used to understand better potential
              processes for remediation of polluted sites.  Prof. Prabir Dutta's group will
              make measurements to support their development of senor arrays for toxic gases
              in high temperature environments, such as automobile engines.  Prof. Lonnie
              Thompson and his research group, will analyze dust from ice cores that they
              have collected from throughout the world.  In order to assess current or future
              global climate change, past history and the factors that caused climate change
              must be understood. The ice cores from polar ice sheets and high altitude
              tropical ice caps, collected by Thompson and co-workers, contain
              high-resolution records of climatic and environmental variation that can extend
              over thousands of years.  The information gained from this research will be
              useful in assessing historical changes in global climate.  

