Title       : Microbial Genome Sequencing: Phages of Agronomic Bacteria: A Student-Based
               Genomics Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0135653

Award Number: 0135653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ryland F. Young   (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Mullet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Sundin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andreas Holzenburg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A student-based program to establish a genomic database of bacteriophages that
              infect agronomically important bacteria, especially agricultural pathogens will
              be established.  The initial bacterial host will be Pseudomonas syringae, which
              causes a number of important plant diseases. After a development period, the
              program will constitute the laboratory core of an advanced
              undergraduate/beginning graduate course in Phage Genomics, in which the teams
              of students will adopt a bacteriophage, determine and annotate its complete
              genome sequence, and conduct standard physical and physiological analyses
              during a full year of supervised
research and lecture course activity. In
              addition to the educational goals served by this effort, the
phage genomics
              database will be a resource to address questions about bacteriophage
              evolution
in the context of plant bacterial hosts and the influence of phage
              on plant-bacteria interactions,
and to probe the possible utility of phage
              cocktails in biocontrol applications against acute or
chronic diseases of
              plants. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded through a
              collaborative activity between the National Science Foundation and the
              Department of Agriculture Initiative for Future Agriculture and Food Systems.
