Title       : Microbial Genome Sequencing: Genomic Biodiversity in Hypersaline Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a0135595

Award Number: 0135595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shiladitya DasSarma dassarma@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Extremely halophilic archaea inhabit brine pools containing 3-5 M NaCl, which
              are
extraordinarily diverse and dynamic with respect to salinity, pH,
              temperature, pressure, nutrients,
etc.  In addition to their obligately
              halophilic character,some are also acidophilic, alkaliphilic,
psychrophilic,
              barophilic, or slightly thermophilic. Extreme halophiles are easily cultured in
              the
laboratory and are excellent experimental systems with well-developed
              genetic tools. However,
thus far, only a single genome from an extremely
              halophilic archaeon, Halobacterium species
NRC-1, has been sequenced. In order
              to study the genomic diversity of extreme halophiles, we
plan to sequence the
              genome of Haloarcula marismortui, a metabolically versatile halophile with
a
              high-resolution ribosome structure. If time and resources permit, additional
              genomic analysis
will be conducted on diverse strains, including Natrialba
              asiatica, a non-pigmented alkaliphile.
Halorubrum lacusprofundi, a
              psychrophile capable of growing at temperatures down to 4oC,
Halosimplex
              carlsbadense, a likely ancient halophile recently isolated from a Permian
              brine
inclusion, which appears to be a genetic chimera, and Halobacterium
              species GRB, a closely
related strain to NRC-1.  Sequencing will be conducted
              at the Institute for Systems Biology and
annotation will be done at the
              University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute, Center of
              Marine
Biotechnology. This project will provide better understanding of
              biodiversity among extreme
halophiles, including genome structure and
              evolution, adaptation to extreme environments, and
lateral gene transfer. In
              the long term, the proposed work should provide novel applications
              in
biotechnology, e.g. engineering salt tolerance in crop plants and
              development of new antibiotics. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award
              funded through a collaborative program between the National Science Foundation
              and the Department of Agriculture Initiative for Future Agriculture and Food
              Systems.
