Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: The Nature of Race: Concepts
               of Human Difference in the Social and Natural Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0135507

Award Number: 0135507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7965               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marta Tienda tienda@opr.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              It is often claimed that the idea of significant biological differences existing
              between racial groups has all but disappeared from science, if not from the
              minds of the American public. Yet some observers challenge this depiction,
              arguing instead that many scientists continue to understand race to be a human
              biological marker. This dissertation research project, "The Nature of Race,"
              addresses this debate by posing two broad research questions: How do scientists
              today define and conceptualize race? What kinds of concepts of race are
              transmitted by scientists to the public? Drawing on the sociology of knowledge
              and on relevant existing research findings, a series of hypotheses concerning
              the relationship between social location (e.g. gender, age, academic
              discipline) and racial conceptualization are also assessed.  Funds support the
              collection of data, which will occur through interviews conducted with
              approximately 100 U.S.-born faculty and undergraduate students at two
              universities. Faculty respondents are randomly sampled from departments of
              anthropology and of biology; undergraduates from among those who have declared
              majors in anthropology, biology, or other fields. Qualitative content analysis
              is used to characterize respondents' definitions of race and the types
              of
arguments, claims, evidence, images and metaphors they use to support and
              elaborate these understandings. Quantitative analyses including descriptive
              statistics and chi-square testing are used to explore patterns of variation in
              racial conceptualization according to social status. The project findings are
              particularly relevant for educators at all levels. Both academic scientists and
              other educators have demonstrated ethical concern that scientific research
              relating to human diversity be conveyed to the public in a manner that does not
              exacerbate but rather attenuates racism. But blanket statements assuring that
              biological race is an unscientific concept may need to be re-evaluated if the
              scientists whose legitimacy is being evoked in anti-racist public education in
              fact hold a markedly diverse range of beliefs on the matter. This project
              provides a careful assessment of how scientists in different disciplines
              understand race and racial difference.

