Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Cross-Cultural Study in e-Business
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a0135238

Award Number: 0135238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jung P. Shim jshim@cobiLan.msstate.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 5921,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
0135238
Shim

This award supports the participation of American scientists
              in a U.S.-Japan seminar on a cross-cultural study of Electronic Commerce
              (E-Commerce) and Mobile Commerce "M-Commerce." to be held in Niigata and Tokyo,
              Japan from April 1-5, 2002.  The co-organizers are Professor Jung P. Shim of
              Mississippi State University and Professor Takuro Munizawa at Niigata
              University in Japan.  Participants will also be attending from Hong Kong, Korea
              and Taiwan.   The Internet/Web has become one of the most important mediums for
              the sharing of business information between firms and their customers (B2C). 
              While E-commerce and M-commerce have received considerable attention, virtually
              all the studies dealing with E-Commerce and M-Commerce have given cursory
              attention to the cross-cultural study.  In Japan, the recent increase of
              handy-phones (mobile phones) and Internet users are remarkable.  Over seventy
              percentage of Japanese are using mobile phones and half of them use the
              internet/web.  In addition, new "I-Commerce" handy-phone systems enable the end
              users to connect to e-mail, view homepages, and do e-trading and e-commerce. 
              
 
Several surveys estimate that Internet/Web users are growing
              exponentially.  "Forrester Research" estimates the worldwide E-Commerce market
              will grow to $3.2 trillion by the year 2003.  Emerging technologies (e.g.,
              voice over Internet Protocol, video streaming and synchronized multimedia
              integration language) are opening the way E-Commerce is transacted.  These
              technologies could have significant implications for the E-Commerce and
              M-Commerce market.  The seminar may also have important implications for
              individuals in both the academic and professional communities.  The project
              advances international human resources through the participation of many junior
              faculty, postdocs, graduate students and an undergraduate student.  Through the
              exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
              knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation.  The
              researchers plan to publish results of the seminar proceedings on the World
              Wide Web.

