Title       : Predator-Prey Interactions: A Multilevel Analysis of the Bat-Moth Arms Race
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0135825

Award Number: 0135825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127600             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Conner conner@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      1834 Wake Forest Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27106    336/758-5000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

	The interactions of insectivorous bats and their prey can be
              thought of as an evolutionary arms race. Bats began the race with the evolution
              of sophisticated, high frequency sonar with which they echolocate flying
              insects, track them through space, and ultimately eat them. Many nocturnal
              insects including moths countered with the evolution of sonar detection devices
              - ears - that alert insects to the echolocation cries of approaching bats. 
              Moths take evasive action in the form of loops, spirals, and power dives and an
              impressive aerobatic "dog fight" between predator and prey ensues. Tiger moths
              (Lepidoptera: Arctiidae) have added a new twist to the fray. Tiger moths answer
              bats with a series of intense ultrasonic clicks produced by paired thoracic
              structures called tymbals.
	For over thirty years researchers have attempted
              to determine why tiger moths answer bats. There are currently three theories
              about the proximate mechanisms by which the sounds work. First, it is possible
              that moths produce sounds that startle bats, giving them a momentary advantage
              in aerial combat. Second, bats may jam the sophisticated ultrasonic
              echolocation system of bats by sending out sounds that mimic moth echoes but
              with inappropriate timing. The third possibility is that tiger moths send out
              an acoustic warning that they are not palatable food items, much as insects use
              bright colors to warn visual predators that they are noxious. These hypotheses
              are not considered mutually exclusive and they may all work simultaneously.
	
              The proposed experiments will take the three theories to the next level - from
              the level of proximate questions about mechanism to the level of ultimate
              questions about the evolution of behavior. Using two novel approaches - a
              learning approach and a phylogenetic approach -  the selective advantages of
              tymbals will be determined. Laboratory experiments in which bats are pitted
              against insects with and without chemical defenses or sound will reveal how
              learning has shaped bat-moth acoustic interactions. Cladistic methods will then
              be used to explore when, where, and how tymbals originated and why they have
              been maintained for millions of years since their origin. The answers to these
              question will not only explain the fascinating details of bat-tiger moth
              evolution, they will also illustrate how a keystone behavioral innovation has
              allowed a temporary escape from predation and the radiation of a clade of
              ~11,000 species in relatively predatory free space. 
	The results of these
              experiments will be shared with grade school children through a new website
              dedicated to the interactions of  "Bats and Bugs".  The information will also
              be added to an exciting new ecological and environmental curriculum being
              developed in cooperation with the Archbold Biological Station near Lake Placid,
              Florida.

