Title       : Rural Systemic Initiatives in Science, Mathematics,and Technology Education -
               RSI: Arizona Rural Systemic Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0135526

Award Number: 0135526
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Anselm Davis, Jr.                       
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Brighton brighton@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nora Ramirez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip J. Huebner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Canchola  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yvonne A. Billingsley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Arizona-Rural Systemic Initiative (AZ-RSI) proposes to create a learning
              environment to improve science, mathematics and technology education in 22
              rural, economically disadvantaged K-12 schools/communities with high American
              Indian and Hispanic enrollments. The 22 schools are located within the
              boundaries of 7 public school districts and 2 Bureau of Indian Affairs agencies
              with a total student enrollment of 9,698.  The AZ-RSI is a partnership among
              the 22 rural schools, 2 County School Offices, Arizona State University East,
              and WestEd Education Laboratory.  Memoranda of Agreement with school boards
              support the proposed implementation plan to improve mathematics and science
              education for nearly 10,000 students by focusing on comprehensive and cohesive
              capacity-building at the local site.  The AZ-RSI has designed an implementation
              plan that emphasizes reform at the school level. The plan is flexible and full
              of technical assistance and leadership training for all stakeholders to help
              build requisite capacity for implementing and sustaining lasting reform.  The
              AZ-RSI has formed a highly qualified management team to oversee the
              implementation plan. Field specialists with expertise in classroom
              implementation of effective instructional strategies and experience in
              education reform will provide on-site support to Local Leadership Teams.  Said
              teams will implement school-wide plans to improve mathematics and science for
              all students with the help from field specialists.  The AZ-RSI anticipates that
              the overall impacts will be improved student achievement in mathematics and
              science in participating schools, increased capacity of schools to sustain
              improvements, and a significant contribution to rural education research. 


