Title       : The Level Expert: Cornelius Vermuyden and the Drainage of the English Fens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0135548

Award Number: 0135548
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric H. Ash   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : E, Ash
	      314 Virginia Ave.
	      Royal Oak, MI  48067    248/398-0828

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract 
SES Proposal 0135548
The Level Expert: Cornelius Vermuyden
              and the Drainage of the English Fens
Eric Ash, Independent Scholar 


The
              goal of this research project is to investigate one of the largest and most
              important engineering works undertaken in seventeenth-century England: the
              drainage of the English fens. The research focuses primarily upon the career of
              one of the principal engineers responsible for the drainage, Cornelius
              Vermuyden, and his relationships with the English investors who employed him.
              The construction of such large-scale drainage works (spanning parts of five
              counties in eastern England) required a great deal of hydraulic expertise, a
              rare and valuable commodity in early modern England. Vermuyden's expertise made
              him an indispensable asset to his employers, and a key agent of London's
              increasingly centralized economic and social control of the realm. Over the
              course of nearly five decades, Vermuyden assisted various land speculators in
              London (including the king and his advisors) in acquiring thousands of acres of
              what had up until then been commonly-held fenland. He then oversaw the drastic
              alteration of the lands' ecology, in return for a share of the profits
              resulting from the speculation over the drained lands' increased agricultural
              value. In overseeing the drainage works, Vermuyden played an important role in
              bringing the fens under the more direct (and profitable) control of London
              administrators and investors.

This award supports full-time archival
              research in the Harvard University Libraries, with its microfilm copies of
              English manuscript collections, including the State Papers Domestic and the
              Lansdowne Manuscripts, as well as printed primary sources, during the summers
              of 2002 and 2003.  The award also supports travel to the United Kingdom to
              enable the PI to examine manuscript collections at the British Library not
              available on microfilm. Other research includes visits to Cambridge, East
              Anglia, and the Wash, the location of a number of important seventeenth-century
              drainage works, in order to examine relevant archival manuscript collections
              and to make a personal survey of the former fenlands that are to be the focus
              of project. 

The evolution of the idea of technical expertise during the
              early modern period and the rise of powerful, centralized administrations in
              early modern European states are both issues that have received considerable
              attention in recent historiography. This project will seek to shed greater
              light on both stories by uniting them through the activities of a single
              individual, Cornelius Vermuyden, in whose life and career they were
              inextricably linked. 

