Title       : Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate Core Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0135923

Award Number: 0135923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris Elfring celfring@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elbert W. Friday  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a grant to support the continuation of the core activities of the Board
              on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate (BASC) of the National Academy of Sciences.
              The objectives of the effort include:

(i) providing a national and
              international forum for the atmospheric sciences, focusing on research needs,
              policy issues, educational implications and issues and the resources required
              to improve understanding of the atmosphere and its interaction with human
              societies and other components of the Earth System;
(ii) coordinating and
              overseeing the BASC study units involved in developing and publishing
              disciplinary assessments that probe the frontiers articulated in the
              Atmospheric Sciences Entering the Twenty-First Century report, and other
              studies requested by agencies on specific issues;
(iii) serving as a
              continuing resource to inform and provide advice from the atmospheric sciences
              community to federal agencies and other relevant decision-makers, and to serve
              as a linkage to the entire cross-section of the atmospheric sciences community.
              To this end, BASC proposes to initiate annual forums to discuss the Federal
              plans and budgets for the atmospheric sciences and climate related research.
              The resulting forums will serve as major mechanisms for improving the
              coordination of the entire Federal program in these vital areas.
(iv)
              coordinating atmospheric science expertise for other National Research Council
              (NRC) units (most frequently with Ocean Studies Board, Polar Research Board,
              Board on Earth Sciences and Resources, Board on Environmental Studies and
              Toxicology, Space Studies Board, and the Committee on Global Change Research,
              but others as needed), international project offices, and bodies whose
              activities involve atmospheric sciences and whose actions may impact
              atmospheric science policy, societal impacts and educational issues. The
              relationship with the Committee on Global Change Research is particularly close
              with both the BASC chair and the chair of the Climate Research Committee
              serving as members.
(v) creating a national forum for responsive dialogue on a
              number of atmospheric science phenomena of immediate and growing concern to
              society, including the conduct of specific studies and workshops in response to
              emerging science issues and Federal agency needs.

These activities are
              important because they provide advice to and review of the Federal atmospheric
              and climate sciences funding agencies.
