Title       : Collaborative Research: COMPRES Grand Challenge for Experimental Study of
               Plastic Deformation under Deep Earth Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0135411

Award Number: 0135411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $804511             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry W. Green HGREEN@UCRAC1.UCR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Green
0135411

Quantitative rheological measurements on Earth materials have
              been conducted only under relatively low-pressure conditions corresponding to
              the depth of ~60 km or less. The main thrust of this project is to extend this
              limit, through technical developments, at least to ~800 km covering not only
              the upper mantle but also the transition zone and the lower mantle. We propose
              to establish a new inter-institutional program coordinated with COMPRES
              (Consortium for Materials Property Research in the Earth Sciences) by utilizing
              the infrastructure for operation of national facilities and educational
              program, and we will expand the capabilities of these facilities for the
              broader scientific community. Through inter-institutional collaboration, we
              will develop two new types of apparatus (a modified cubic apparatus (D-DIA) and
              a rotational Drickamer apparatus (RDA)) in addition to further improvements to
              the well-established deformation techniques using a multianvil apparatus (MA).
              Both D-DIA and RDA (as well as MA) can readily be fitted to synchrotron
              radiation facilities to allow quantitative measurements of stress and strain at
              high-pressure and temperature conditions. D-DIA is suited for quantitative
              rheology measurements including shear localization and resultant instabilities
              while RDA has a unique capability of large strain deformation experiments at
              high-pressures, an important feature for study of lattice preferred
              orientation. These apparatus will be used to obtain the first quantitative data
              set on rheological properties and deformation-induced microstructures of Earth
              and planetary materials under high-pressure, high-temperature conditions (to
              ~15-25 GPa, ~2000 K). The results of such measurements will contribute to
              better understand (i) the radial and lateral variation of rheological
              properties for whole mantle, (ii) the interaction of rheological behavior with
              chemical reactions including phase transformations, and (iii) the nature of
              deformation-induced microstructures such as lattice preferred orientation
              (which causes seismic anisotropy). The unique facility thus developed will be
              accessible to a large mineral and rock physics community and will significantly
              enhance the contribution of mineral and rock physics research to a wide range
              of solid Earth sciences. 

