Title       : Regulation of Protein Phosphatase 2A Activity in Arabidopsis by the RCN1 Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0135458

Award Number: 0135458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison DeLong Alison_DeLong@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Reversible protein phosphorylation is a ubiquitous regulatory mechanism
              governing biological processes such as the cell cycle, metabolism,
              transmembrane signalling and gene regulation.  Phosphorylating (kinase) and
              dephosphorylating (phosphatase) enzyme activities are carefully balanced in
              normal cells, and these activities often are regulated by covalent
              modifications, association of specific regulatory subunits, and by formation of
              large multi-component signaling complexes.  The protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A)
              holoenzyme is a heterotrimeric complex containing a catalytic subunit (PP2A-C)
              bound to one A and one B regulatory subunit.  The mechanisms allowing the A and
              B regulatory subunits to control PP2A activity remain poorly defined.  In
              Arabidopsis, small gene families encode each of the PP2A subunits, and only a
              few mutations in PP2A genes have been isolated.  The ROOTS CURL IN NPA (RCN1)
              gene encodes one of three regulatory A subunits, and phenotypic analysis of the
              rcn1 mutant has shown that the RCN1 protein acts as a positive regulator of
              PP2A activity.  Loss of RCN1 function in seedling roots perturbs polar
              transport of the plant hormone auxin, altering gravity response and growth of
              lateral roots. Thus, although the A subunits of Arabidopsis PP2A exhibit very
              strong sequence similarity, their functions are not fully redundant.  The basis
              for functional specialization of A subunit isoforms is unknown.  

This
              project will extend our analysis of RCN1 function, and will provide key
              insights into the roles of PP2A and the regulation of its activity in
              Arabidopsis.  The subcellular localization of the RCN1 protein will be
              determined using reporter gene fusions.  Complementation assays will test the
              ability of other A subunit genes to supply RCN1 function.  Isoform-specific
              antibody reagents will be developed to allow detailed analysis of
              isoform-specific functions and interactions.  PP2A subunits and other proteins
              that bind to the RCN1 protein will be identified to gain insight into the
              mechanisms of RCN1 action.  Genetic experiments will test for interactions
              between RCN1 functions and the functions of other genes with roles in auxin
              transport or signaling.  Auxin-responsive reporter genes will be used to
              determine whether the altered auxin transport activities observed in the rcn1
              mutant result in abnormal auxin distribution.  These experiments will yield
              information on the regulation of auxin transport by reversible protein
              phosphorylation.  Our goals in this project are to clarify the role of RCN1
              protein in governing PP2A activity, and to elucidate the normal functions of
              RCN1-containing PP2A enzymes.  These studies will lead to a better
              understanding of the circuitry that regulates PP2A activity in plants.




