Title       : Dissertation Research: Disciplinary Emergence in the Environmental Health
               Sciences, 1940-2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0135381

Award Number: 0135381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7720               (Estimated)
Investigator: Adele E. Clarke aclarke@itsa.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation project is a historical sociological analysis of the emergence
              of genetic/genomic practices in epidemiology and toxicology, the environmental
              health sciences. Drawing on historical and qualitative research methodologies,
              this project addresses three broad and interrelated areas of inquiry. First, it
              analyzes the scientific,clinical, social, political, and economic concerns that
              have shaped the introduction, application, and development of genetic/genomic
              technologies in the environmental health sciences. This analysis focuses
              especially on the emergence of molecular epidemiology and toxicogenomics,
              examining the processes through which molecular biomarkers and DNA microarrays
              have been constructed as the "right tools for the job" (Clarke and Fujimura
              1992) of environmental health research. Second, this research examines the
              consequences of molecular epidemiology and toxicogenomics for the practice and
              organization of environmental health risk assessment. It investigates the
              co-construction of technologies and practice, examining both the effects of
              molecular biomarkers and DNA microarrays on environmental health risk
              assessment and the ways in which the demands of regulatory science (Jasanoff
              1995) have shaped the development and meanings of these technologies. Finally,
              this project explores the social, cultural, and political implications of the
              use(s) of genetic/genomic technologies in the environmental health sciences. It
              follows such technologies, and the knowledge they produce, outside of the
              laboratories and clinics where they have been developed, in order to describe
              how they are reinterpreted, reconfigured, renegotiated, reified, and/or
              resisted by actors in multiple social locations and with what varied
              consequences.  NSF funds will support the collection of historical and
              ethnographic data on genetic/genomic technologies and research methods in the
              environmental health sciences and in environmental health risk assessment. One
              of the important research sites is National Institutes of Environmental Health
              Sciences in Research Triangle, NC. Funds will in part support interview
              transcriptions.


