Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Individual in the
               Global Economy: International Organization and the Politics of Fair Trade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0135422

Award Number: 0135422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10055              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon Pevehouse pevehous@polisci.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              


States create and join multilateral trade organizations at a faster pace
              then ever before in history. As these institutions grow in number and scope,
              mass protests against globalization around the world challenge the legitimacy
              of global governance through managed trade. The charge is clear: trade
              organizations impact more than market access among states. They also contribute
              to the demise of state capacity or willingness to protect individuals from
              global market forces. Despite a wealth of research into the general impact of
              international organizations on state-state relations, there is a virtual
              absence of systematic research into their impact on state- individual
              relations. In this Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project the student
              engages this debate whether and how states' commitments to trade impact the
              lives of individuals in a global economy. The argument is offered that human
              rights are a particularly important case study to explore this tension.
              

Using an institutional approach to the study of international political
              economy, the student challenges extant belief among many economists, political
              scientists, activists, and policy- makers that state commitment to trade
              organizations is inherently 'good' or 'bad' for human rights. Rather, it is
              hypothesized that state choice between different organizations, in terms of
              design and membership, will structure the impact of economic globalization on
              individual human rights. Human rights and free trade are therefore potentially
              compatible goals, which depend on the configuration of international and
              domestic institutions; yet they are by no means inevitable. Using both
              quantitative and qualitative methods, this research explores this proposition
              across a sample of more than 150 states from the mid 1970s to the present. 


              


