Title       : Development of the Next Generation Megabar High-Pressure Cells: A COMPRES Grand
               Challenge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0135626

Award Number: 0135626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $651737             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Hemley hemley@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ho-kwang Mao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0135626
Hemley

We propose to develop the next generation static
              ultrahigh-pressure apparatus that will allow an increase in sample volumes in
              excess of 100 times those currently available in conventional diamond cells at
              megabar pressures. This will enable myriad mainstream analytical techniques
              currently unavailable for ultrahigh-pressure research, including those required
              for the successful utilization of major neutron and synchrotron radiation
              facilities that are coming on line. The new class of high-pressure cells will
              also improve measurement accuracy for existing in situ probe techniques,
              provide well-calibrated hydrostatic pressures and uniform temperatures, allow
              higher and more uniform temperatures to be achieved with laser heating, and
              provide robust and user-friendly operation. These capabilities are required to
              address numerous current problems in high-pressure geochemistry, geophysics,
              and planetary science; as such, the proposed advances are expected to have
              major impact in each of these areas. The increases in sample volume for the new
              cells will result from a combination of improvements that include enlarged
              anvils, modified culet shapes, designed gaskets, and added binding support for
              the anvils. Single-crystal diamonds synthesized at high pressures and
              temperatures will be enlarged by homoepitaxial chemical vapor deposition
              overgrowth of single-crystal diamond films to create anvils reaching 25 carats
              and above. Synthetic moissanite (SiC) anvils will be used for testing and for
              100-fold volume increases at pressures up to 50 GPa. The larger sample chamber,
              in turn, will remove restrictions currently imposed by microscopic volumes and
              greatly improve the pressure-temperature conditions and probing capabilities at
              ultrahigh pressures. New presses will be built to provide the loads necessary
              for the larger volumes. The project will be carried out in coordination with
              the newly formed COnsortium for Materials Properties Research in the Earth
              Sciences (COMPRES), through which the new high-pressure capabilities will be
              made available to the high-pressure geoscience community.
***

