Title       : Adsorbate Mediated Electrodeposition: Experimental and Multiscale Numerical
               Investigations on Surface Roughness and Shape Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0135621

Award Number: 0135621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Alkire r-alkire@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Braatz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Title: Adsorbate Mediated Electrodeposition: Experimental and
              Multiscale Numerical Investigations on Surface Roughness and Shape
              Evolution
Proposal Number:	CTS-0135621
Principal Investigator:Richard
              Alkire
Institution:University of Illinois


The objective of this
              collaborative effort is to improve understanding of how surface roughness and
              shape evolution are influenced by trace quantities of solution additives during
              electrodeposition of metals and alloys.  Multiscale simulations of the
              electrodeposition process including both continuum and non-continuum behavior
              will be performed.  Hypotheses for how additives influence surface roughness
              evolution will be inferred from large datasets obtained through atomic force
              microscopy (AFM) measurements carried out in conjunction with high throughput
              electrochemical cells and well-characterized model additive systems. 
              Hypotheses will be refined through quantitative comparison of these data with
              multiscale simulations of roughness evolution.  Non-continuum phenomena will be
              modeled by a three-dimensional kinetic Monte Carlo method that simulates how
              roughness evolution is controlled by additives.  Verification experiments that
              measure shape evolution on surfaces of convoluted geometry will be carried out
              to test predictions over multiple length scales.  This work will lead to a
              better understanding of processes used in the manufacture of novel structures
              formed by electrodeposition of metals, alloys and semiconductors.

