Title       : 'Dreamers with Shovels': Science and Technology in the New Deal Political
               Imagination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a0135333

Award Number: 0135333
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jessica Wang jwang@history.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES Proposal 0135333
"Dreamers with Shovels:" Science and
              Technology in the New Deal Political Imagination Jessica Wang, University of
              California, Los Angeles


The project investigates, through a series of
              biographically-based historical case studies,
the role of science and
              technology in political thought and action during the New Deal period in
the
              United States. Within science and technology studies, many observers of
              technocratic
political thought have emphasized its hegemonic, instrumentalist,
              and undemocratic character.
In recent years, however, scholars have recognized
              that while this approach has contributed much
toward understanding the nature
              of technological society, it needs to be revised and augmented.
A study of the
              New Deal provides an important opportunity to reconsider prevailing
              assumptions
and scrutinize the complex nature of technocratic politics as a
              set of beliefs and practices.

The study centers on three main subjects --
              planning, electrification, and state-building -- and
discusses how science and
              technology affected policymaking in each of these areas during the
New Deal
              years. The section on planning illuminates how Rexford Guy Tugwell, Frederic
              A.
Delano, Wesley C. Mitchell, and Charles E. Merriam sought to translate
              technocratic ideology
into action. With electrification, the study turns to
              technology itself and investigates the conflicts
within the Tennessee Valley
              Authority and the Rural Electrification Administration over the
proper
              relationship between technology and human values, and the appropriate
              political
structures for technological development. The discussion of
              state-building examines how Jerome
N. Frank and William M. Leiserson used
              ideas about science to legitimize the New Deal state
and justify its expansion
              of state power via the new administrative agencies of the 1930s. The
final
              part of the project probes the postwar experiences of Henry A. Wallace and
              David E.
Lilienthal, examines the transformation of technocratic politics
              wrought by the cold war, and
explores how cold war instrumentalism replaced
              the technocratic liberalism of the New Deal.

By examining how the New
              Dealers understood science and technology as a resource for
politics, the
              project contributes to a renewed debate within STS over the nature of
              technocratic
ideology and its political ramifications. The New Deal reveals
              the full complexity behind
technocratic politics. Some of the New Dealers
              adopted subjectivist beliefs about the nature of
knowledge, some brought a
              nostalgic, agrarian dimension to their version of technological
progress, and
              most took seriously the problematic relationship between experts and
              democratic
society and struggled over the question of whether technocratic
              politics could be made consistent
with democratic values. The diverse range of
              thought and experience among the New Dealers
suggests that an image of
              technocratic politics as naively positivist, dedicated to an unwavering
faith
              in technological progress, and overly willing to subordinate democratic values
              to a cult of
expertise requires refinement and reevaluation. The project will
              reinforce STS's current efforts
to readdress the relationship between
              expertise and democracy and explore the full meaning of
science and technology
              as forms of political thought and practice.

