Title       : RUI:Transcriptional Activation by the Bacillus Subtilis ComK Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0135899

Award Number: 0135899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Lovett clovett@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to elucidate the mechanism by which the
              Bacillus subtilis competence transcription factor, ComK, activates
              transcription. Competence in B. subtilis is characterized by the cell's ability
              to bind and take up exogenous DNA.  In addition to controlling its own
              expression, ComK is essential for the expression of the proteins that comprise
              the DNA binding and uptake system and for the competence-related expression of
              the recombination genes recA and addAB.  ComK binds in the minor groove to
              sequences upstream of the -35 region and causes bending of the DNA.  Three
              classes of ComK-regulated promoters are distinguished based on the spacing
              between ComK dimer binding sites: In the first class (recA, addAB, dinA, and
              nucA) the interval between dimer binding sites is 2 helical turns; the second
              class, comprising the late competence genes (comC, -G, -E, and -F), contain
              binding sites separated by 3 helical turns; and the third class contains a
              single representative, the comK promoter, in which the binding sites are
              separated by 4 helical turns.   The downstream binding sites for all
              ComK-dependent promoters are located in regions proposed for the binding of the
              alpha subunits of E. coli RNA polymerase, which also binds in the minor groove.
               The PI will characterize the DNA binding domain of ComK and test the
              hypothesis that ComK affects the binding of the a subunits of RNA polymerase. 
              The ComK DNA binding domain will be characterized using a combination of
              mutational analysis, NMR structural determination, and molecular modeling.  The
              PI will determine whether or not ComK interacts with RNA polymerase alpha when
              it binds to representatives of the three classes of ComK-dependent promoters,
              recA, comG, and comK, by a combination of hydroxyl radical footprinting,
              targeted footprinting, protein-protein crosslinking, and mutational analyses. 
              DNA binding and transcriptional activation will be assessed for wild-type and
              mutant ComK proteins using mobility shift assays, in vitro transcription
              assays, and analyses of transcriptional activation of recA-lacZ, comG-lacZ, and
              comK-lacZ fusions.

This research involves investigating the way in which the
              ComK protein turns on the expression of an assortment of genes that enable the
              bacterium Bacillus subtilis to take up external DNA and incorporate this DNA
              into its chromosome.  The results should elucidate how ComK controls the
              expression of dozens of genes that are required when Bacillus subtilis cells
              enter a specialized state for genetic exchange.  Since the action of ComK
              likely involves interactions with RNA polymerase, the enzyme that governs gene
              expression in all bacteria, this research should further the understanding of
              bacterial gene regulation in general.    
