Title       : Quantum Transport of Correlated Systems in Novel Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0135931

Award Number: 0135931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert Chang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Melloch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Investigations of fundamental issues in strongly-correlated electron (SCE)
              systems form a major area of condensed matter research today.  This program
              contains two main thrusts: (1) the observation and elucidation of new phenomena
              in SCE, and (2) the development of nanoscale devices using novel fabrication
              techniques both for the exploration of fundamental physics and for creating
              opportunities to capitalize on nano-physics to help meet the challenges of
              next-generation technological needs.  The combination of fundamental research
              and the implementation of novel devices are designed to maximize the impact of
              this program, through scientific advances and the education/training of future
              researchers.  Two genres of correlated systems--non-Fermi liquids in
              semiconductors, and metallic nanowires exhibiting correlated effects--will be
              studied.  Non-Fermi liquid behavior constitutes a central theme of SCR systems.
               Unusual metallic behaviors observed in the normal state of high-Tc
              superconductors and in one-dimensional conductors are pushing beyond the
              standard Fermi liquid picture for conventional metals, toward a possible new
              paradigm of non-Fermi liquids in low-dimensional correlated systems.  Two such
              systems are studied by transport measurements, the chiral Luttinger liquid at
              the 1-dimensional edge of the fractional quantum Hall fluid, and the two
              impurity Kondo system in double-quantum-dots.  The edge of the fractional
              quantum Hall fluid supports exotic fractionally-charged quasi-particles obeying
              fractional statistics which will be investigated.  Work in double-quantum-dots
              serves a dual purpose.  In addition to exploring non-Fermi liquid behavior, the
              implementation of this system as a prototypical 2-qubit system will be pursued
              to create a building block of a semiconductor-based quantum computer.  From a
              long term perspective, this may have a profound impact on bringing the
              challenging task of implementing quantum computation closer to reality.  In
              metallic wires, investigation will concentrate on the phenomena of
              superconductivity, magnetism, etc., in nanowires fabricated by a novel
              cleaved-edge technique, as well as interaction between adjacent wires running
              parallel to each other.  Understanding the properties of nanowires in proximity
              may impact next generation interconnects as device density in ULSI increases
              further.  This program will train students in nanoscience and technology with
              an emphasis in nano-fabrication techniques and ultra low-noise electrical
              measurements.  Such skills are particularly valuable for preparing the students
              to help drive forward the all important nano-science technology revolution
              which forms the basis of the technology and economic engine of the 21st
              century.
%%%
Investigations of strongly-correlated electron (SCE) systems
              form a major area of condensed matter research today.  This program contains
              two main thrusts: (1) the observation and elucidation of new phenomena in
              strongly- correlated systems, and (2) the development of nanoscale devices
              using novel fabrication techniques both for the exploration of fundamental
              physics and for creating opportunities to capitalize on nano-physics to help
              meet the challenges of next-generation technological needs.  The combination of
              fundamental research and the implementation of novel devices is designed to
              maximize the impact of this program, through scientific advances and the
              education/training of future researchers.  Strong correlations between
              electrons lead to unusual and novel metallic behaviors.   Examples include high
              temperature superconductors and other low-dimensional conductors such as 0- and
              1-dimensional conductors.  Non-Fermi liquid behavior constitutes a central
              theme of SCE systems.  For these systems, a new paradigm beyond the standard
              picture for conventional metals may become necessary.   Two such systems will
              be studied by electrical measurements, the chiral Luttinger liquid at the
              1-dimensional edge of the fractional quantum Hall fluid, and the two impurity
              Kondo system in double-quantum-dots.  The edge of the fractional quantum Hall
              fluid supports exotic particles which carry charges in fractional units of the
              fundamental electron charge.  Work in double-quantum-dots serves a dual
              purpose.  In addition to exploring non-Fermi liquid behavior, the
              implementation of this system as a 2-quantum qubit system will be pursued to
              create a building block of a semiconductor- based quantum computer.  If
              successful this may have a profound impact in the long term on bringing quantum
              computation to reality.  In metallic wires, investigation will concentrate on
              the phenomena of superconductivity, magnetism, etc., in nanowires as well as
              interaction between wires in close proximity.  Understanding the properties of
              nanowires in proximity may impact next generation interconnects as device
              density in ULSI increases further.  This program will train students in
              nanoscience and technology with an emphasis in nano-fabrication techniques and
              ultra low-noise electrical measurements.  Such skills are particularly valuable
              for preparing the students to help drive forward the all important nano-science
              technology revolution which forms the basis of the technology and economic
              engine of the 21st century.

