Title       : Thermochemistry of Metal-Ligand Bonds and the Dynamics of Collision-Induced
               Dissociation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0135517

Award Number: 0135517
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $674225             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Armentrout armentrout@chem.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal:  CHE-0135517
PI:  Armentrout, Peter B.


This project
              consists of continuing research in the fields of chemical dynamics and
              gas-phase organometallic ion chemistry using a combined techniques of flow tube
              ion production and guided ion beam tandem mass spectrometry (GIBMS). With this
              apparatus, thermalized atomic and polyatomic ions will be produced. Detailed
              kinetic and thermodynamic data on single mass-selected species will be obtained
              by accurately measuring the absolute reaction probabilities at thermal and
              hyperthermal energies.  Two new experimental facilities will be developed: 1)
              An electrospray ion (ESI) source that should enable more routine generation of
              nonvolatile and thermally fragile ions in the gas phase and provide easier
              access to multiply charged species.  2) A source to study state-specific
              chemistry of heavier transition elements that utilizes "electronic state
              chromatography".  A range of chemical systems will be studied and will
              emphasize three related areas: 1) the dynamics of collision-induced
              dissociation; 2) the chemistry of the heavier third-row transition metals; and
              3) metal ion binding to biologically relevant molecules.  Implicit in all three
              areas will be theoretical calculations needed to augment the experiments. One
              motivation for this program is the obvious interest in making better
              correlations between the detailed information available from gas-phase ion
              studies with the "real world" of condensed-phase organometallic chemistry,
              homogeneous catalysis, and biological systems. We make the conscious choice to
              study simple systems that progress in complexity in order to quantitatively
              assess trends in metal chemistry. By comprehensively studying the
              thermochemistry of many metals and many ligands, the trends (periodic, changes
              with number of ligands, variations in electronic states) in the thermodynamic
              data allow us to transcend the gas-phase venue where the data are obtained. 
              Students and post doctoral research associates will participate in this
              research.

As chemical reagents, metals are important components of
              biological systems, acting as active sites in enzymes and helping to regulate
              cell function and to control structure.  Technologically, metals are used
              extensively as catalysts to produce a wide range of important fine chemicals
              and fuels.  In addition, molecules specifically designed to interact
              selectively with certain metals are needed for nuclear waste cleanup and
              decontamination.  The research done in this project is designed to provide
              fundamental information about the strength of the interactions of metals with
              chemical components relevant to biological systems and the chemical industry. 
              This is most readily accomplished by examining model systems that progress in
              complexity.  This permits the trends in this information to be quantitatively
              assessed, which allows the development of predictive capabilities for more
              complex chemical environments.  In this work, specialized devices known as
              guided ion beam tandem mass spectrometers are utilized to examine metal ion
              interactions with a variety of chemical species.  This can be accomplished on
              single molecules such that interfering interactions from the environment can be
              eliminated.  This allows the study to focus on elucidating the specific factors
              that control the interaction.  A close collaboration with theory provides
              additional insight and provides essential predictive capabilities. The research
              will be done with students and post doctoral research associates who thereby
              receive training in preparation for advanced studies or entering the
              scientific/technical workforce.

