Title       : Hierarchical Self-assembly and Characterization of Photonic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0135509

Award Number: 0135509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Drain cdrain@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this work is to prepare a number of metalloporphyrin material
              building blocks and then assemble them into photonic materials.  A number of
              metalloporphyrins will be or have been prepared and the thermodynamics,
              kinetics, and cooperative interactions involved in the self assembly of these
              materials will be studied.  These self assembled materials will then be
              assembled into supramolecualr photonics with multiple functions and these
              photonic systems will be processed onto surfaces and into polymers. The
              assemblies thus formed will be characterized by a number of physical methods,
              some in the laboratory of the PI and some in collaboration with other
              investigators.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program is supporting the research of Dr. Charles M. Drain of the Department of
              Chemistry at CUNY Hunter College.  Dr. Drain will explore the synthesis of
              photonic materials.  Photonic materials are assemblies of molecules which can
              absorb and emit photons in small defined spaces.  These light absorbing
              materials (chromophores) are typically assembled onto surfaces (photogated
              transistors for example or materials on surfaces with controllable luminesence
              properties) or into polymers or wires.  Students trained as a result of working
              on this project will gain experience in materials research as well as
              supramolecular organic chemistry, hence they will have skills needed by both
              the specialty chemicals and the computer/materials industries.

