Title       : Dissertation: Biotechnology Research and Doctoral Socialization: The Impact of
               Changing Expectations and Modes of Support on Social Norms and Ethical
               Standards in the Life Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0135438

Award Number: 0135438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6360               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peggy L. Placier placierp@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Across the country, the last two decades have witnessed an increasing emphasis
              on biotechnology as an engine for state and national economic development.
              Within the last two years, the amount of federal, state, and industry funding,
              media attention, and public expectation focused on this issue at Missouri's
              public Research I university has exploded. The combination of the culture of
              academic science, the economic development goals of the state, and the
              proprietary needs of industry may create a lively stew of potentially
              conflicting value orientations around this initiative. Within this confluence
              of changing expectations and values, the next generation of academic life
              scientists is being socialized into their research roles. This dissertation
              research project will address the ethical implications these changes may have
              for these doctoral students. Qualitative research methods will be used to
              ascertain student's perceptions regarding the existence of the biotechnology
              initiative, the norms of research, the training they have received in research
              ethics, and the possible impact of changing expectations on their career plans.
              The results of this study will be shared with a variety of audiences who are
              struggling with new ethical issues and conflicts associated with changing
              expectations and modes of support in academic research.

