Title       : CAREER: Elucidation of Surface Affects on Biochemical Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a0135109

Award Number: 0135109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel T. Chiu chiu@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Daniel Chiu of the University of Washington has received a CAREER
              award from the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program to investigate the
              effects of constrained space on enzyme kinetics.  Single molecule spectroscopy
              will be utilized to examine enzymes such as beta-galactosidase acting on
              fluorophores contained in 100 nm synthetic vesicles and designed planar
              supported bilayers in nanochannels. Electroporation and microfluidics will be
              used for manipulation of vesicles and single enzymes.  The studies will
              ascertain whether the surface charge and hydrophobicity associated with
              cellular nanoenvironments can exert significant influence on the activity of
              proteins.  These studies will lead to a better understanding of cellular
              functioning and compartmentalization.  The PI will offer a new graduate course
              covering topics in microfabrication, fluid mechanics, Fourier optics and
              bioanalytical methods, and also will use web-based technologies extensively to
              assist in the General Chemistry courses.  

Most protein reaction studies are
              carried out in solutions in beakers, and any effects of the cell surfaces are
              lost.  The advent of single molecule spectroscopy makes possible the study of
              single enzyme molecules inside tiny channels or vesicles, mimicking the
              enclosed ultrasmall spaces found in cells.  Differences from molecule to
              molecule have shown up in previous studies, and these can be significant.   The
              effects of the walls and limited spaces on the biochemical reactions can then
              be studied.  Students engaged in the technologies used in this research and in
              the graduate course can transfer the knowledge to many efforts such as
              lab-on-a-chip and sensors.


