Title       : New Statistical Techniques for Probabilistic Weather Forecasting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0135940

Award Number: 0135940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $458089             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roman Krzysztofowicz rk@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rational decision making by industries, agencies, and the public in anticipation
              of heavy precipitation, snow storm, flood or other disruptive weather
              phenomenon, requires information about the degree of confidence that the user
              can place in a weather forecast.  It is vital, therefore, to advance the
              meteorologist's capability of quantifying forecast uncertainty to meet the
              society's rising expectations for reliable information.

The long-term goal
              of this research is to lay down a methodological foundation for the next
              generation of probabilistic forecasting systems.  The specific objective is to
              develop and test (i) a set of statistical techniques for probabilistic
              forecasting of weather variates and (ii) a set of performance measures for
              verification of probabilistic forecasts.  The basic technique, called Bayesian
              Processor of Output (BPO), will process output from a numerical weather
              prediction (NWP) model and optimally fuse it with climatic data in order to
              quantify uncertainty about a predictand.  The extended technique, called
              Bayesian Processor of Ensemble (BPE), will process an ensemble of the NWP model
              output.

The techniques will harness recent advances in Bayesian statistical
              theory, multivariate distributions, estimation methods, and ensemble
              forecasting.  Each technique will be developed and tested in three versions,
              for (i) binary predictands (e.g., indicator of precipitation occurrence), (ii)
              multi-category predictands (e.g., indicator of precipitation type), and (iii)
              continuous predictands (e.g., precipitation amount conditional on precipitation
              occurrence, temperature, visibility, ceiling height, wind speed).  The primary
              test will involve the production and verification of probabilistic quantitative
              precipitation forecasts (PQPFs) for up to 3 days ahead.  The primary benchmark
              for evaluation of the new techniques will be the 30-year old Model Output
              Statistics (MOS) technique used currently in operational forecasting.

The
              expected impacts of these new, state-of-the-art techniques for probabilistic
              forecasting will be improved forecasts of all major weather variates, and hence
              increased societal benefits.  In particular, reliable and informative PQPFs,
              produced by the BPO or the BPE and suited to requirements of hydrologic models,
              will enable the production of probabilistic river stage forecasts,
              probabilistic flood forecasts, and flood warnings with explicitly stated
              detection probabilities.
