Title       : Magnetostrictive Composites for Sensors and Actuators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0135196

Award Number: 0135196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49657              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. White swhite@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Tremendous growth in information and biomedical technologies coupled with the
              increased complexity of modern transportation systems has fostered an increased
              demand for sensors and actuators with higher performance, enhanced reliability,
              and lower cost. Magnetostrictive sensors/actuators have become increasingly
              popular and can be found in a diverse set of applications ranging from on-line
              torque sensors in automobiles to acoustic transducers in hearing aids. Yet,
              monolithic versions of the most popular magnetostrictives are prone to several
              technical problems including low tensile strength, brittle fracture, high eddy
              current losses, and complex and costly manufacturing.
One solution to these
              problems is to develop a magnetostrictive composite sensor/actuator in which
              the desirable properties of the magnetostrictive phase are combined with those
              of the matrix phase to create a composite of high strength, excellent
              processability, and low eddy current losses. Although some initial attempts
              have been undertaken to develop magnetostrictive composites, very little work
              has been accomplished in several key areas. A comprehensive experimental
              database spanning the full range of volume fraction is currently lacking.  No
              comprehensive micromechanical model has emerged to design magnetostrictive
              composites for specific performance targets.
This research project will focus
              on generating a complete set of magnetomechanical experimental data spanning
              the full range of volume fraction for magnetostrictive (Terfenol-D) composites.
               The experimental data will then be utilized in developing a micromechanical
              model for performance prediction and design of sensors/actuators. The ultimate
              aim of the research is to provide the scientific and engineering basis for
              industrial application of magnetostrictive composites technology. From a
              broader perspective this research project addresses the NSF and national
              initiative for IT research and development by addressing the need for further
              scientific efforts in developing new and better sensors and actuators.


