Title       : Femtosecond IR Probe of Ultrafast Dynamics of Molecular Adsorbates on
               Nanoparticles: Solvation and Electron Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0135427

Award Number: 0135427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312387             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tianquan Lian tlian@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Tianquan Lian of Emory University is funded for his research on femtosecond
              IR probe of ultrafast dynamics of molecular adsorbates on nanoparticles -
              solvation by a grant in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry
              Division. He will further develop and test the theory of solvation-induced
              vibrational peak shift and use this novel approach to study solvation dynamics
              of molecules at nanoparticle/liquid interfaces. For molecules with large dipole
              moment changes between ground and excited states, femtosecond excitation
              prepares the excited molecule in a non-equilibrium solvent configuration. The
              effect of the subsequent solvation on solute vibrational spectra is not yet
              understood, unlike the well-studied effect on solute electronic spectra. He is
              developing a theory of solvation-induced solute dynamic vibrational peak shift
              based on the Onsager dielectric continuum model of solvent-solute interaction.
              Dynamic peak shifts will be measured in Re(dcbpy)(CO)3Cl and related molecules
              in different solvents. The magnitude and dynamics of the CO stretching peak
              shifts will be used to compare with and critically test the theoretical model.
              He also will use vibrational peak shift as a new method to study solvation
              dynamics at solid-liquid interfaces. The combination of IR probe and
              nanocrystalline films will allow the study of  solvation dynamics in a wide
              range of solvents. This approach is complementary to existing techniques such
              as fluorescence Stokes shift and the optical Kerr effect, and may have unique
              applications in slightly scattering media such as nanocrystalline thin films,
              that are difficult to study using these extant techniques. 
	
The proposed
              research is a continuation of Dr. Lian's research effort in understanding
              ultrafast dynamics of molecular adsorbates on nanoparticles. Semiconductor and
              metal nanoparticles have many potential applications ranging from
              nanoelectronics, solar energy conversion, to biomedical-imaging. Most
              nanoparticles are synthesized or modified with attached molecules as
              passivating, structural linkage, sensitizing, or molecular sensing groups.
              These molecules play essential roles in transfer, transport and dissipation of
              charge and energy in these systems. The proposed work will lead to a
              fundamental understanding of the dynamics of molecules on the nanoparticle
              surface, such as solvation and energy relaxation. This knowledge is essential
              to developing more efficient devices based on nanoparticles. The proposed
              research will also allow the training of postdoctoral fellows, graduate
              students and undergraduate students in the area of nanoscience and
              nanotechnology, educating the workforce of the future.

