Title       : Synthesis of Spherical Molecular and Ionic Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0135636

Award Number: 0135636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry L. Atwood atwoodj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this work is to prepare very large molecular and ionic capsules
              and investigate their molecular recognition properties.  A number of
              calixarenes and alkyl substituted resorcinarenes and pyrogallolarenes will be
              or have been prepared and the self assembly of these materials into pentamers
              and hexamers will be studied.  The spherical assemblies thus formed will be
              characterized by a number of methods.  These spherical assemblies will then be
              systematically presented with potential guest molecules and mixtures of
              potential guests to gain information about their molecular recognition
              properties.  Lastly, hexameric assemblies with very long alkyl "tails" will be
              tested for their ability to form even larger assemblies via hexamer-hexamer
              interactions through these tails.

 With this award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Jerry L.
              Atwood of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Missouri-Columbia. 
              Dr. Atwood will explore the synthesis of spherical molecular and ionic
              capsules.  Tetramers of phenols related to naturally occuring compounds can
              self assemble into a variety of Platonic and Archimedean polyhedral shapes. 
              The resulting spherical assemblies have defined internal volumes, hence the
              term molecular capsules, capable of recognizing and distinguishing other
              molecular guests.  Such assemblies may have practical applications for drug
              delivery or the removal of contaminants from mixtures.  Students trained as a
              result of working on this project will gain experience in inorganic materials
              research as well as supramolecular organic chemistry, hence they will have
              skills needed by both the specialty chemicals and pharmaceutical
              industries.




