Title       : CAREER: Scalable Mathematical and Computational Models for Biomolecular Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0135195

Award Number: 0135195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312483             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesus Izaguirre izaguirr@cse.nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The proposed activities aim to create mathematical and computational methods for
              modeling large biological molecules. Computational simulation of dynamics and
              sampling of proteins, DNA, and nucleic acids promise to be a tool for
              understanding the relationship between structure and function, and for computer
              assisted drug design. Processes of interest include protein dynamics and
              folding and the study of other cellular components. Despite significant
              progress in the field, there is still a gap between the simulations that can be
              routinely performed with current technology and the complexity of processes and
              systems of biological interest. The proposed mathematical and computational
              methods will overcome the size and time scale limitations inherent in atomistic
              dynamics and sampling, while preserving the atomistic resolution of the
              biological systems. The new methods will be disseminated for research and
              educational purposes through an open source and scalable software framework
              called ProtoMol, and tested in a range of systems, from small proteins to
              potassium channels that reside in lipid bilayers. These new algorithms will
              translate into speedups of one or more orders of magnitude over current
              methodologies. This technology will enable simulations that are sorely needed
              in the expanding field of proteomics and the processing of data from the human
              genome project. To study dynamical processes, trajectories of large
              biomolecules are generated using molecular dynamics (MD). In an attempt to
              overcome the time scale limitations, multiple time stepping (MTS) integrators
              have been introduced. Nevertheless, even these methods have been limited by
              stability, and thus the time steps used in MD have not been dramatically
              increased. The PI proposes to devise multiscale algorithms for MD that are not
              limited by stability. To accomplish this goal, research will proceed in two
              phases: the _rst will extend the PI's work on stabler MTS numerical integrators
              by overcoming instabilities present in these methods. This will allow an
              estimated two- to eight-fold speedup over current methods for MD. The second
              phase involves the use of a symplectic semi-implicit method for MD using a
              splitting that separates cleanly many time scales, and incorporates the faster
              and less interesting ones in a more approximate manner. Speedups of two orders
              of magnitude or more are possible, depending on the degree of accuracy desired.
              This proposal will also tackle the related problem of statistical sampling. The
              large conformational space of biomolecular systems causes many difficulties to
              traditional sampling methodologies such as MD and Monte Carlo methods, or
              hybrids of both, all of which super performance degradation as the system size
              increases. We will use a biased hybrid Monte Carlo method that scales nearly
              linearly with system size. This will produce speedups of one or two orders of
              magnitude over MD, MC, or conventional hybrid MC methods. Synergy between this
              research project and teaching will occur at several levels. There will be an
              enhancement of materials of undergraduate and graduate courses taught by the
              PI, on data structures and applied algorithms, numerical methods, and
              computational methods for biomolecular modeling. Learning modules for
              engineering and science students will be developed in ProtoMol to facilitate an
              understanding of the behavior of large biological molecules. 

