Title       : Collaborative Research Symposium: Some Next-Generation Leaders in Science and
               Technology Policy Workshop (November 2002)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0135170

Award Number: 0135170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49188              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Guston guston@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A symposium gathers together outstanding scholars, analysts, and practitioners
              in science and technology policy who are within seven years of their PhDs.  It
              provides an opportunity to meet and exchange ideas and to present their work to
              a high-level (senior) audience. This research symposium is oriented toward
              eight theme tracks in science and technology policy: 
New history of science
              and technology policy.
R&D program analysis and evaluation 
Expertise,
              advice, assessment, and evaluation
Science, technology, and human needs and
              values
Science, technology, and international issues
Science education, human
              resources, and workforce
Science and technology policy institutions and
              processes
Science, technology, and the public. 
Proposals for these tracks
              were broadly solicited and peer reviewed for acceptance. Accepted authors were
              funded to attend the workshop held in Washington, DC. Senior scholars and
              practitioners served as discussants. The new scholarship presented and the
              interaction among academics and practitioners have the potential to improve
              policy and programs and to benefit education in science and technology policy
              in a variety of ways.  An edited book containing the presented papers will be
              published.

