Title       : CAREER: Manipulating the Atom --- Bottom-Up Assembly of Nanoscale Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0135122

Award Number: 0135122
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hari C. Manoharan manoharan@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This integrated research and educational CAREER project will apply the
              "bottom-up" approach of atomic and molecular manipulation to produce new
              nanoscale structures.  Three areas of emphasis are involved: (1) probing and
              manipulating the intrinsic degrees of freedom of the atom, such as energy
              levels, charge, and spin; (2) probing and manipulating the interface between
              the atom and the external environment, involving imaging chemical bonds,
              electronic and vibrational structure, and electron correlation effects; and
              ultimately (3) the nuclear properties of single atoms, for example isotopic
              mass and nuclear spin.  Synergistically with the laboratory component, the PI
              and Stanford University will implement a substantial educational and outreach
              program.  This cross-cutting effort includes:  (1) the introduction of a new
              co-terminal physics teaching program, (2) the development of two sets of new
              courses into which current research in nanoscale science and technology will be
              interwoven, (3) an outreach program to build nanoscience research and education
              within the Americas, and (4) the construction of a remote-control station for
              atom manipulation in order to promote nanoscience education via visual tools to
              visiting students and to the public.

This integrated research and
              educational CAREER project seeks to apply the "bottom-up" approach of atomic
              and molecular manipulation to several focused areas in science and technology. 
              Controlled atom and molecule manipulation and atom-by-atom assembly of complex
              structures on the nanometer length scale are capabilities existing now only at
              the frontiers of science and technology.  The students involved in this
              proposed research and education plan will receive a unique and cross-discipline
              training in emerging fields now universally identified as critical to society
              and our understanding of nature.  Synergistically with the laboratory component
              of this plan, the PI and Stanford University will implement a substantial
              educational and outreach program.  This cross-cutting effort includes the
              introduction of a new co-terminal physics teaching program, the development of
              two sets of new courses into which current research in nanoscale science and
              technology will be interwoven, an outreach program to build nanoscience
              research and education within the Americas, and finally the construction of a
              remote-control station for atom manipulation in order to promote nanoscience
              education via visual tools to visiting students and to the public.

