Title       : CAREER: Investigation of Atomic Motion in Ultrafast Reactions of Metal Complexes
               with Ultrafast X-ray Pulses and Remotely accessible Real-time Experiments for
               High School Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0135132

Award Number: 0135132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $464000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ting Guo tguo@chem.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              We plan to elucidate the mechanisms of atomic motion and its relationship with
              electron transfer in photon-induced ultrafast reactions of metal complexes
              using a new type of ultrafast x-ray absorption spectroscopy, ultrafast selected
              energy x-ray absorption spectroscopy (USEXAS) that is currently being developed
              in the PI's laboratory. This method enables us to more directly investigate the
              atomic motion in non-crystalline materials on the ultrafast timescale. The
              atomic and electronic motion in several exemplary chemical systems will be
              investigated. The outcome of these investigations can shed light on the
              structures of the critical transition states in those systems. We will build an
              experimental educational program for local high school students and help them
              understand chemical reactions at the molecular level. Our aim is to enhance
              students' ability to understand and appreciate physical and analytical
              chemistry at the most fundamental levels and at a young age. In this program,
              Internet-connected, remotely accessible, real-time chemical experiments (RARE)
              will be developed by undergraduate and graduate students at UC Davis. PI's lab
              will be used to train and prepare graduate students and undergraduate students.
              

Understanding atomic motion during chemical reactions is critical to
              improving our ability to make new devices and materials such as solar cells,
              molecular electronic components, and drugs. We plan to elucidate the details of
              the interplay between atomic and electron motion in several important chemical
              systems using a new type of ultrafast x-ray absorption spectroscopy that is
              currently being developed in the PI's laboratory. This method allows us to
              visualize the motion of atoms during fast chemical reactions in a more directly
              manner. The educational component of this proposal involves the building of an
              experimental educational program for local high school students that will help
              them understand chemical reactions at the most fundamental levels and at a
              young age. The experiments are Internet-connected, remotely accessible,
              real-time chemical experiments (RARE) that will be developed by undergraduate
              and graduate students at UC Davis. 

