Title       : Vertical Integration of Research and Education in the Mathematical Sciences -
               VIGRE: Research Focus Groups in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0135345

Award Number: 0135345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3201784            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruno L. Nachtergaele bxn@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel Hass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Hunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jesus De Loera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Abigail A. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1618,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0135345
PI: Bruno L. Nachtergaele, UC Davis
Title: Research Focus Groups
              in Mathematics

Abstract

The UCDavis VIGRE project offers a range of
              activities designed to integrate the excitement of research mathematics into
              every facet of its undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral programs. To
              accomplish this, the investigators and their colleagues are running up to four
              Research Focus Groups as a means to coordinate the activities in four research
              areas. Each Research Focus Group includes regular faculty members, postdoctoral
              fellows, graduate students, and undergraduates. The areas of research of the
              Groups vary from year to year, depending on the interests and expertise of the
              faculty and graduate students. Initial proposals include:  1) Geometry and
              Topology, including Computational Aspects; 2) Dynamics of Classical and Quantum
              Many-Body Systems; 3) Mathematical Biology, including Protein Structure and
              Function, Biofluid Mechanics, and Spatial Models in Ecology; 4) Discrete
              Mathematics, including Algebraic and Geometric Combinatorics and Stochastic
              Discrete Optimization. The Research Focus Group activities include a research
              seminar, a reading seminar, research projects, and outreach programs.  An
              internship program has also been set up as part of the project.

Among the
              goals of the Research Focus Groups are to introduce undergraduates to
              mathematical research, to provide a mechanism for graduate students to interact
              closely with faculty and postdoctoral fellows early in their graduate careers,
              and to give postdoctoral fellows an opportunity to learn leadership skills
              necessary to a successful mathematical career. The Research Focus Groups offer
              participants direct involvement in active areas of research of great current
              interest. This allows beginning students to focus on a promising career path in
              mathematics early on, and creates an environment where they can be more
              effectively prepared for such careers. The VIGRE project and the
              Research
Focus Groups also serve as a focus of new initiatives in graduate
              recruitment. Feedback from Research Focus Groups and internship participants is
              used to revise the mathematics undergraduate and graduate programs at UC
              Davis.

