Title       : Dynamics of On-line Communities on Topics of Professional Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0135602

Award Number: 0135602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerardine DeSanctis gd@mail.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              What organization design factors account for the growth or decline of online
              learning communities? What does one need to know in order to build sustainable,
              professional interest groups online? "On-line learning communities" in this
              project refers to discussion forums devoted to topics of professional
              management interest, such as knowledge management, supply chain management, or
              customer relationship management. The forums are publicly accessible through
              the Internet and attract professionals who have similar interests and confront
              practical problems related to the topic at hand. "Meta-communities" are the
              full collection of online communities devoted to anyone topic area. Online
              learning communities offer the potential to operate as inter-organizational
              professional groups, that is, as relatively distinctive entities with their own
              participants, knowledge resources and ongoing routines. In a sense, each
              community is akin to a new firm in an industry or market that competes with
              other firms to attract resources and grow. Of scientific interest is the
              question of why some of these communities grow and thrive whereas others fail
              to flourish, or become active for a time and then die. 
The research begins by
              examining one full population (i.e., meta-community) of all online communities
              devoted to a single topic area and then expands to include a second
              meta-community in order to test the generalizability of findings. Three types
              of analyses will be conducted within each meta-community: 
Estimation of the
              effects of community size, posting volume, linked resources, and discussion
              routines on community growth and mortality rates
Mapping of social network
              structures, including the strength of information exchange ties within the
              communities and inter-community participation patterns
Content coding of
              communication to gauge amounts and types of organizational learning that occur
              in each community, specifically, question asking, feedback seeking,
              experimentation, and reflection. 
Communities that grow and thrive will be
              compared with those that have died or failed to thrive. 

The research
              complements the work of other scholars who are investigating samples of online
              communities but not populations, who study special niche or general purpose
              communities other than communities of practicing managers, and who examine the
              social life of online communities rather than their organization structures.
              The findings should be directly useful to online community building activities.
               The data will be made available to researchers at other universities
              interested in the study of online communities and new organizational forms. 

