Title       : The Dispersion of Feynman Diagrams in Postwar Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a0135615

Award Number: 0135615
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51264              (Estimated)
Investigator: David I. Kaiser dikaiser@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES 0135615
The Dispersion of Feynman Diagrams in Postwar
              Physics
David Kaiser
MIT

Unlike traditional approaches to the history and
              philosophy of theoretical physics, which have been framed as intellectual or
              conceptual histories, this project examines the history of recent physics with
              a focus on calculational skills, local practices, and theoretical tools and
              techniques.  In particular, this project traces the history of a theoretical
              tool which came to dominate nearly every branch of modern physics:
              Richard
Feynman 's simple line-drawings, introduced in the late 1940s.  Of
              central interest is how generations of young theorists learned to frame their
              research in terms of the diagrams, in and out of a series of competing
              theoretical frameworks for describing sub-atomic matter. Such a skills-based
              view allows historians to unpack the history of postwar theoretical physics
              from the ground up, as a story ultimately about designing, deploying, and
              disputing the tools which undergird everyday calculations. Complementing
              earlier studies of conceptual worldviews or "paradigms," Kaiser's historical
              project concentrates on the simultaneous crafting of research practices and of
              the scientific practitioners who put them to work. Focusing on Feynman diagrams
              and their dispersion from the late 1940s through the mid-1960s illuminates
              larger transitions within  postwar physics, including changing notions of how
              to collaborate with roomfuls of graduate students; how to make sense of
              unprecedented reams of experimental data; how to train young physicists at the
              postdoctoral stage; and how to communicate new research techniques in
              mimeographed summer school lecture notes and preprints. The competing uses and
              interpretations of Feynman diagrams during the early postwar decades can only
              be understood within the context of these institutional and pedagogical
              transitions.  At stake was nothing less than what should count as "theoretical
              physics," and how someone should be trained to become a "theorist." This
              project should therefore be of interest both to historians and sociologists of
              modern physics, as well as to philosophers of science who work on theory
              construction and selection.  The expected outcome is book on the early history
              of Feynman diagrams, as well as conference presentations and published
              articles.

