Title       : Dissertation Research: The Tainted Gift: A comparative study of the framings of
               risk and safety of the contamination of the blood supply with AIDS virus in
               France and the U.S
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0135920

Award Number: 0135920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7992               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Hilgartner shh6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project proposes to examine how framings of risk and
              safety, and understandings about which entities pose risks, change over time,
              and how these changes influence political, technical, social, and medical
              decisions. It will focus on the contamination of the blood supply with the AIDS
              virus in France and the United States. Through examination of the dynamic
              process of risk perception and the construction of conceptual objects of risk
              from a network of elements, this study will trace an episode of contention of
              science and/or politics, and grapple with the question of why attempts to
              contain crisis can often have the opposite effect. The contamination of blood
              during the early 1980s provides a particularly good site for tracing the
              succession and interaction of conceptual objects of risk. The proposed project
              covers the mid-1980s when the etiology of AIDS was not well understood, and
              when knowledge about the disease was evolving rapidly. In addition, the
              populations "at risk" for the disease were not yet well defined. Hemophiliacs
              framed the threat in terms of their previous experience with hepatitis, blood
              bankers struggled against a threat to an adequate supply of blood, and doctors
              in both countries identified antibodies to the virus as indicators of
              protection and as indicators of infection. The study of AIDS in the blood
              supply by tracing risk objects can provide a better understanding of the
              dynamics of risk more generally. It is socially significant for assessing the
              role of risk perception, identification, and change in policy making processes,
              and can point to new ways of producing knowledge about potential risk for
              scholars and professionals in policy-related areas, public health, risk
              management, and health-related fields, particularly when dealing with
              situations of great uncertainty and grave potential consequences, such as AIDS
              in the 1980s or variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease today. NSF funds will pay
              primarily for archival work in the Washington/Baltimore area, which has the
              largest number of interview and research sites relevant to the project.

