Title       : Microbial Genome Sequencing: Comparative Genomics of Telomeres in Pathogenic and
               Saprophytic Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0135462

Award Number: 0135462
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $793000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Farman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph A. Dean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chuck Staben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew S. Sachs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher L. Schardl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7187,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Eukaryotic chromosomes are linear molecules that terminate in repeats of simple
              DNA sequences. These structures, called telomeres, guard against loss of DNA
              during replication and prevent fusion of different chromosomes. Telomeres also
              have important roles in chromosome behavior, gene expression and genome
              evolution. In fungi and other eukaryotic microbes, telomeric regions tend to be
              rich in genes for ecological adaptation and are often highly variable,
              providing evidence that they are subject to niche-dependent diversifying
              selection. Despite their importance, telomeric sequences usually are not
              captured using strategies employed for high-throughput genome sequencing and
              are, therefore, highly underrepresented in genome databases. In this project,
              targeted approaches will be used to isolate and sequence telomeric regions of
              two fungi: Magnaporthe grisea, a very important plant pathogen; and Neurospora
              crassa, a saprophyte whose study has made profound contributions to biology.
              Two strains of each fungal species will be examined to provide a thorough view
              of their telomere content and organization; and comparison of sequences between
              strains will reveal mechanisms of telomere variability. This information will
              improve understanding of how fungi adapt to their environment and, in
              particular, how pathogenic fungi avoid host defenses. The 2.4 megabases of
              high-quality sequence generated in this project will be essential for eventual
              completion of the genome sequences of these fungi. The project will provide
              education through undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral training in
              molecular genetics, high-throughput sequencing, and bioinformatics. DNA
              libraries and clones generated in the project will be available to other
              researchers. Assembled and annotated sequences will be released to public
              databases and unfinished sequences will be accessible through the websites:
              http://fungus.ceeb.uky.edu/cgibin/web-blast.cgi and http://www.riceblast.org.
              This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded through a collaborative
              activity between the National Science Foundation and the Department of
              Agriculture Initiative for Future Agriculture and Food Systems.


