Title       : RUI: Recruitment Limitation and Space: Vochysia ferruginea and Dipteryx oleifera
               in Post-Hurricane Secondary Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0135350

Award Number: 0135350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas H. Boucher dboucher@hood.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hood College
	      Rosemont Avenue
	      Frederick, MD  21701    301/663-3131

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ecologists have long asked how hundreds of species of trees can coexist in
              tropical rain forests without a few superior species outcompeting all the rest
              and driving them extinct. Two recent theories to explain this situation are
              recruitment limitation - lack of seed production or germination  prevents
              dominant species from outcompeting others, and spatial variation - seeds only
              travel limited distances, so each species only competes with a limited number
              of neighbors. Dr. Boucher, his Nicaraguan colleague Javier Ruiz Perez and their
              students will test these theories in forests in southeastern Nicaragua. To do
              this, they will tag, map, trap seeds, and measure soil and light variables for
              two important forest trees: Vochysia ferruginea and Dipteryx oleifera.

The
              two theories they will test are important for knowing how to preserve tropical
              biodiversity and for predicting whether global warming will lead to forests
              being taken over by a few "weedy" species. The two tree species under study are
              both economically valuable, so their work will also be useful for developing
              sustainable forestry systems for rain forests. Undergraduates from a US and a
              Nicaraguan small college will work together to gather and analyze the data,
              strengthening international cooperation and developing capacities for
              conservation and sustainable use of tropical rain forests. 

