Title       : CAREER: New Polymeric Material Design at the Interfaces with Biology and
               Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a0135233

Award Number: 0135233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhibin Guan zguan@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research explores new polymeric material design at two interfaces:
              (1) materials and biology, and (2) materials and catalysts.  At the first
              interface, high value advanced polymeric materials is targeted by mimicking the
              structures and strategies used in natural materials.  The remarkable combined
              strength and toughness of muscle protein, titin, appears to derive from their
              modular structures comprising a linear array of domains, in which each domain
              is held together by secondary forces.  Synthetic polymers will be constructed
              using molecular nanostructures that simulate the modular, multi-domain design
              of titin.  These materials will be tested a both single molecule and bulk
              material level.  The proposed research at the material-catalysis interface is
              targeted at developing new polymeric materials from simple commercial monomers.
               Built upon previous successes, new directions are proposed to expand the scope
              of using catalysts to control polymers with tunable topologies via catalysis,
              and design of polymers with unconventional topologies via catalysis.  In
              parallel to the synthetic effort, the physical properties and potential
              applications for the new polymers will be investigated through collaborations
              with chemists, materials scientists and engineers on campus and at universities
              nearby.
%%%
The PI's educational goal for the next 4-5years is to build a
              strong polymer materials program at the University of California at Irvine. 
              The current rapid growth of this campus and the cross campus Materials
              Initiative provide an excellent opportunity to implement this plan.  An effort
              was initiated to integrate the course offerings in polymer science across a few
              disciplines to foster interdisciplinary interactions and collaborations.  The
              goal in the undergraduate education is to spark their interests in polymer
              during introducing the basic concepts and essential knowledge of polymer
              science.  Attention will be paid to interactive teaching methods, the relevance
              of polymers to our society, and the undergraduate laboratory research.  The
              goal in graduate polymer education is to provide students a solid foundation in
              polymer chemistry by vigorous treatments of the fundamental mechanism,
              thermodynamics, and kinetics of each type of polymerization while in the
              meantime cover major research areas and recent progresses in polymer science. 
              These broad topics will be approached in an interdisciplinary manner and the
              course format will be developed to encourage greater student involvement.  In
              addition to curriculum development, mentoring also figures prominently in
              laboratory, classroom, and seminar contexts.  The proposed research will
              increase understanding of the molecular mechanisms for achieving excellent
              material properties based on structural organization at nanoscale and produce
              materials with potential biomedical applications.  Insight into the relation
              between the molecular properties of these materials and their performance
              should allow rational materials designs.  The proposed research on catalytic
              route to new polymer synthesis has the potential to make new polymeric
              materials with complex topologies from simple and readily available monomers.

