Title       : Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of Chromatin Modulators in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0135190

Award Number: 0135190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380228             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Hampsey michael.hampsey@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The metabolic activity of eukaryotic DNA is restricted by its packaging into
              chromatin.  Accordingly, transcription, replication and repair require
              chromatin remodeling activities to allow factor access to template DNA.  Two
              classes of chromatin remodeling activities have been described.  One promotes
              ATP-dependent remodeling, as exemplified by the highly conserved and
              well-characterized SWI/SNF complex.  The other class catalyzes covalent
              modification of the histones, primarily at their N-terminal tails.  Histone
              acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation and ubiquitination have been
              described.  Presumably these modifications weaken histone-DNA or
              nucleosome-nucleosome interactions, thereby allowing factor access to DNA. 
              This project addresses the role of covalent chromatin modifiers in gene
              silencing.  The premise of the project is that the novel Set2 and Hsl7 proteins
              directly catalyze histone modifications as components of chromatin modifying
              complexes.  Three specific Aims are being pursued, exploiting a powerful
              combination of yeast genetics, biochemistry and genomics.  Aim #1 is to
              identify factors that genetically interact with Set2 and Hsl7; Aim #2 is to
              isolate and define Set2 and Hsl7 complexes; Aim #3 is to define the interplay
              among histone methyltransferases, acetyltransferases, kinases and deacetylases.
               This project is based on the recent characterization of the effects of histone
              acetylation and deacetylation on silencing.  The successful outcome of this
              project is likely to identify novel chromatin modifiers and to define how these
              factors interact to regulate gene expression.

The genetic information in
              higher organisms is packaged into chromatin, a complex structure consisting of
              DNA and histone proteins.  In the past several years several proteins have been
              identified that regulate gene expression by affecting chromatin structure.  The
              goal of this project is to isolate and define new proteins that control gene
              expression by biochemically modifying histones.  A powerful combination of
              genetics, biochemistry and genomics will be used in this project.  Novel
              information gained from this study is likely to be generally applicable given
              that chromatin structure and known histone modifiers are highly conserved among
              different organisms.


