Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Approach to Researching Teacher Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a0135062

Award Number: 0135062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $569380             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kay J. McClain Kay.McClain@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The purpose of the proposed work is to coordinate the activities of testing
              and refining a trajectory for supporting teacher change with that of testing
              and refining an interpretive framework as a lens for analyzing that change in
              both pre- and in-service teachers' perceptions of what it means to teach
              mathematics effectively and how they develop an understanding of the
              complexities involved. Following Simon (1997), a hypothetical learning
              trajectory for teachers is proposed that builds from the current literature on
              teacher change by incorporating the following:
1. the importance of a deep
              understanding of the mathematics to be taught,
2. a focus on pedagogical
              strategies to support students' learning of significant mathematics,
3. a
              focus on students' diverse ways of reasoning on tasks,
4. lesson planning and
              design that takes account of students' current understandings, and
5.
              teacher-developed cases from the classroom as tools for reflection and
              critique.
The trajectory therefore involves conjectures about both a learning
              route and the means of supporting that learning. 
The research will test an
              interpretive framework referred to as the  Critical Aspects of Teachers'
              Knowledge:
    knowledge of content,
    knowledge of pedagogy, and
   
              knowledge of institutional context.
This framework builds from Shulman's
              (1986) notion of pedagogical content knowledge to take account of the
              importance of both content and pedagogy in teaching for understanding. It
              extends this work by also acknowledging the importance of the institutional
              context of the teachers and its implications for their decision-making.
      
                      Numerous scholars have noted the lack of carefully constructed and
              empirically grounded frameworks for characterizing the process of teacher
              change.  Thus, research is needed that more fully explicates the criteria for
              conducting rigorous analyses of teacher change.  This study addresses the need
              by combining the efforts of testing and revising the conjectured learning
              trajectory with analysis framed in terms of the Critical Aspects of Teachers'
              Knowledge. This process is therefore positioned to make a significant
              contribution and provide the opportunity for development of new theories in the
              field. 
	The proposed work takes place in two phases. The first entails
              collaborating with a cohort of in-service teachers (grades six through eight)
              with the goal of supporting and analyzing their practice in order to document
              change. The activities of the cohort will build from the conjectured learning
              trajectory to include a focus on 1) an in-depth exploration of mathematics, 2)
              development of lesson sequences to address the mathematics, and 3) development
              of cases from the teachers' classrooms where the teaching of these lessons is
              the focus. The second phase of work involves taking the teacher-developed cases
              as resources for modifying a mathematics methods course for pre-service
              teachers so that it focuses on the  Critical Aspects of Teachers' Knowledge. In
              this way, the cases first serve as a vehicle for the in-service teachers'
              change and then later as the tools for supporting an emerging practice in the
              pre-service teachers. As a result, this process provides a rich setting in
              which to investigate the utility of the interpretive framework as a lens for
              analysis of both pre- and in-service teachers' growth and change, tightly
              integrating the research and education activities.

