Title       : Social Inequality and African Independent Churches in Mozambique
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0135860

Award Number: 0135860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66293              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Pfeiffer jtp8@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0135860 Pfeiffer
Over the last decade central Mozambique has experienced a
              dramatic proliferation of independent Christian faith-healing churches whose
              membership has jumped from an estimated 10% of poor peri-urban populations to
              well over 50%.  Rooted in the Zimbabwean and South African "Zionist" and
              "Apostolic" movements, the majority of the churches are "syncretistic",
              combining local Shona religious notions of illness causation with Pentecostal
              beliefs in the healing power of the "Holy Spirit" to recruit new members,
              mostly women, through treatment of reproductive and child health problems.
              Often referred to as the African Independent Churches (AICs), these
              denominations are a distinctively African expression of a world-wide
              Pentecostal boom that has gained remarkable momentum over the last 20 years.
              Throughout southern Africa, the AIC movements represent an extensive
              transformation of public discourse on health and treatment-seeking among the
              poor. During this period of AIC proliferation, central Mozambique also
              experienced rapid growth in economic disparity and social inequality as a
              result of economic reforms, privatization, and an influx of foreign aid
              projects. The research will examine the hypothesis that growing social
              inequality has fueled the popularity of the AICs, since poor women's social and
              economic vulnerability in urban settings is perceived to have intensified in
              the increasingly competitive environment. The project will test the hypothesis
              that reduced social cohesion and greater social competition find cultural
              expression in increased fears of witchcraft, sorcery, and new categories of
              avenging spirits believed to cause reproductive health problems. AICs appear to
              offer unique protection from these perceived threats to women and children's
              health. Using surveys and in-depth interviewing the research will a) identify
              demographic characteristics of AIC participants, b) measure community
              perceptions of change in social inequality, social cohesion, and
              sorcery/witchcraft practices that affect health, and 3) examine how new church
              recruits made decisions concerning how to treat their reproductive health
              problems and why they eventually chose to consult church healers. Research
              findings will help provide a better understanding of why religious movements
              influenced by Pentecostalism have become so popular in the developing world and
              why healing plays such a key role in recruitment. The results will contribute
              to a growing body of research among public health and economic development
              planners on the relationship between economic disparity, social environment,
              and health. The findings will also provide insight into health care utilization
              patterns, useful to policy makers for improvement of primary health care
              delivery in Mozambique and Southern Africa. 

