Title       : The Formation of Vertical Vortices in the Atmospheric Convective Boundary Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2002  
File        : a0135510

Award Number: 0135510
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339591             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharine M. Kanak kkanak@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Snow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas K. Lilly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The boundary layer vortex, which includes the relatively well-known dust devil,
              generally takes the form of a benign columnar atmospheric vortex.  It is less
              well understood than its more dramatic cousin, the tornado, but recent evidence
              suggests that it may be more common than originally thought and may be
              important as a controlling factor of boundary layer structure and interactions.
               An investigation is proposed of the dynamics of the initiation and maintenance
              of boundary layer vortices, in particular, the dust devil vortex.  

The
              research objectives include the elucidation of the necessary meteorological
              conditions required for the existence of vertical vortices and the dynamical
              mechanisms responsible for their formation.  Flow regimes are classified into
              three categories: a) convection in the presence of mean horizontal wind shear;
              b) convection in mean vertical wind shear; and c) convection in the absence of
              ambient wind or wind shears.  Vertical vortex formation for category a) is
              straightforward and will not be considered under this research.  The
              methodological approach to regimes b) and c) will be primarily through the use
              of a Large Eddy Simulation numerical model (LES) with some complementary
              theoretical work.

Prior research results show that for category c), vertical
              vortices form readily at the vertices of cellular convective patterns.  The
              current research will expand to also consider category b) in order to explore
              the parameter space of conditions that permit vertical vortex formation in the
              convective boundary layer.  Prior investigators have suggested that strong mean
              winds can be inhibiting to the formation of dust devils and this contention
              will be investigated in the current research.

The primary emphasis, however,
              will remain on category c), which is the most dynamically intriguing.  In this
              case vertical vorticity centers that may be generated by convective
              circulations themselves and, subsequently tilted into the vertical, must exist
              initially above the surface.  Therefore, the questions of how vertical
              vorticity extrema become co-located with updrafts and how a vortex becomes
              connected with the ground surface will be examined.  Higher resolution
              numerical simulations and analyses will be performed to uncover the possible
              dynamical mechanisms.

The results may be applicable to other small-scale
              vortices, including steam devils, fire-whirls and possibly tornadoes.  This
              project may promote the understanding of the interactions and/or relationship
              between a vertical vortex and larger scale convective circulations.  In turn
              the parameterization of the planetary boundary layer and the effects of these
              vortical flows may be improved in large-eddy simulation models.  The results
              regarding vertical transports by such boundary layer vortices may have impact
              on pollution studies, hazardous waste management and possibly the deep
              convective initiation problem.
