Title       : Dissertation Research: Vertebrate Paleontology and the Evolutionary Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a0135586

Award Number: 0135586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11989              (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Provine wbp2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              From 1870 to 1930, vertebrate paleontology enjoyed a central position among the
              sciences working out the details of Darwin's Theory of Evolution By Natural
              Selection. During the next twenty years, and the so-called "modern synthesis"
              of evolutionary biology, vertebrate paleontology moved to the periphery
              of
disciplines now orbiting chromosome genetics and theoretical population
              genetics. Existing histories of vertebrate paleontology seem to accept this
              life span for the discipline: the very few that venture into the 20th century
              end before 1940. The emergent new fields, conversely, gained "origin myths"
              told, debated, refined and studied scientists and historians alike. The
              dissertation research supported by this grant is a last phase of work that will
              support a dissertation in the history of biology. That project has three aims.
              First, it is an empirical project that will recover the history of American
              vertebrate paleontology between 1900 and 1950. Second, the study will consider
              the role of history-writing by scientists as they forge a place for their
              discipline among others. Third, the project will consider the historiographic
              problems inherent to producing a new account of the evolutionary synthesis told
              from the perspective of an "outsider" discipline. How does the marginalization
              of a science and its history in the present relate to the project of describing
              the past moment in which that move was accomplished? The research carried out
              under this grant consists of interviews with scientists and historians who have
              contributed to our understanding of vertebrate paleontology's place in the
              evolutionary synthesis. Many of those men are at retirement age or older; the
              few who can give "eye-witness" accounts of events during the synthesis are
              invaluable to this study. Information and opinions from these conversations
              will be combined with completed research using primary- and secondary material.
              The perceptions of these scientists are crucial for a project intended to
              measure the impact of history-writing in science. A second, equally important
              product of this grant's research is the set of interview transcripts. In order
              to enlarge the set of primary materials representing vertebrate paleontology
              during the 1930s and 1940s, the set of interviews will be tape recorded,
              transcribed and deposited as a collection with the American Philosophical
              Society. The intention is to provide some sort of solution to this project's
              basic methodological concern with the connection between disciplines that are
              poorly represented in modern biology, in historical studies and in
              archives.


