Title       : Sociopolitical Organizaton of Chevelon Ruin and the Homol'ovi Settlement
               Cluster, Northeastern Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0135492

Award Number: 0135492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230357             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Charles Adams ecadams@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. E. Charles Adams and his
              colleagues will conduct three field seasons of archaeological research at
              Chevelon Ruin. Chevelon is the third largest member, at 500 rooms, of a cluster
              of ancestral Hopi settlements in northeastern Arizona collectively called the
              Homol'ovi cluster. This cluster was occupied from A.D. 1250-1400, a period of
              enormous political and social change in ancient Pueblo communities throughout
              the northern Southwest. This change is most clearly evident in increased
              average village size, which tripled to more than 500 rooms during the cluster's
              occupation. Excavation has been conducted in five other members of the
              Homol'ovi cluster enabling Adams and his colleagues to establish the local
              chronology and study details of village reorganization associated with village
              growth. Because the cluster is situated along the Little Colorado River and
              villages were dependent on stream flow for growing crops and drinking water,
              they were dependent on one another economically and probably interacted
              politically. Chevelon is located upstream from all but one of the other
              villages along Chevelon Creek, one of two permanent streams flowing into the
              Little Colorado River that provide water to the cluster. Chevelon differs from
              the other villages at Homol'ovi in having five to ten times more ceramics
              traded from villages 100 km east of the cluster. Either Chevelon had a unique
              trade relationship with these eastern villages or immigrants from these pueblos
              lived at Chevelon. The focus of the research will be to locate plaza spaces,
              abutment and bonding of walls, the presence and location of spinal room blocks,
              and the location of ritual structures at Chevelon using a total station and
              wall tracing followed by excavations. An important concept identified in
              previous excavations in Homol'ovi villages is what we term "enriched deposits."
              Enriched deposits have high quantities of whole and unusual objects and highly
              formalized deposits that are associated with ritual activity. The testing
              program will also look for deposits that have concentrations of exchanged
              pottery or riparian resources unique to the Chevelon area. The relationship of
              these deposits to architectural units within Chevelon should inform on the
              distribution of wealth within the community and the nature of groups or
              households controlling this wealth. Heterarchal, hierarchical, corporate, and
              communal models of village organization will be tested. In addition, the
              connection of the villages through sharing Little Colorado River water suggests
              cluster-level organization. The location of Chevelon along a permanent stream
              with potentially unique fauna and flora and its distinctive ceramic assemblage
              identify objects that could be exchanged with other cluster members. Tracing
              these objects to previously excavated villages will allow the team to assess
              the flow of these items from Chevelon to other cluster members and whether
              these follow patterns associated with confederacy or hierarchical models of
              cluster organization. The results of this research will inform archaeologists
              working in the Southwest and elsewhere on the material correlates and
              associated behaviors to power and sociopolitical organization within non-state
              societies and how these are expressed beyond the level of the village.
