Title       : Collaborative Research: Elasticity Grand Challenge of the COMPRES Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0135540

Award Number: 0135540
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178539             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Hemley hemley@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ho-kwang Mao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hemley
0135540

Elasticity measurements on minerals are the bridge between
              the observed seismic velocity structure of the Earth and properties of the
              Earth at depth, such as chemical composition and temperature.  The mineral
              physics community is poised to undertake a new generation of experiments, which
              will allow us to accurately determine the properties of deep-Earth materials
              under a new regime of pressure and temperature (P-T) conditions.  We will
              undertake a coordinated, multi-institutional effort to develop advanced
              experimental and theoretical techniques for determining sound velocities and
              elastic moduli on Earth materials.  We will build on the current technology
              that utilizes light scattering and ultrasonic methods and exploit the full use
              of synchrotron radiation facilities for simultaneous characterization.  We will
              pursue new methodologies utilizing inelastic x-ray scattering or gigahertz
              ultrasonics to expand the current capabilities.  We will closely integrate
              theoretical approaches with the experimental to ground-truth both.  Using
              multiple techniques, including theoretical calculations, we will focus our
              efforts on determining the elastic properties of olivine and its high-pressure
              polymorphs under high P-T conditions, and standard materials for high P-T
              calibrations (e.g., Pt, Au, MgO, NACI).  Samples will be synthesized at a
              central community facility.  The accuracy of each technique will be improved
              through inter-laboratory cross-checks and comparison with theory.  This
              collaborative approach will greatly advance the technology of high pressure
              geophysics, and focus a community effort on accurate determination of the
              elastic properties of the most important mantle phases.  These results will, in
              turn, be used to clarify our view of mantle composition and thermal
              structure.

