Title       : Deep-Sea Biodiversity: A Morphological Dimension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0135949

Award Number: 0135949
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Rex michael.rex@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Research on the biodiversity of deep-sea soft sediment habitats has centered
              largely on a?diversity, that is estimating local species diversity and its
              geographic variation in the ontext of traditional explanations involving
              disturbance, biological interactions and environmental heterogeneity.  Little
              is known about the natural history and distributional patterns of the species
              themselves - information that is vital to understanding the roles species play
              in community organization, and the relationship between local diversity and the
              regional-scale processes that ultimately regulate it. Here we propose two
              avenues of research to relate biogeographic and life-history characteristics of
              species to deep-sea species diversity. The first is to introduce morphological
              variation in shell architecture of gastropods as a new dimension of
              biodiversity. The second is to explore the relationship of body size to depth
              within and among species of prosobranch snails. Both add a new level of
              understanding about how deep-sea communities are structured that could not be
              attained by analyses of simple a-diversity. The proposed research directly
              addresses the NSF Biological Oceanography theme of Biological Diversity in
              Marine Systems, particularly the areas of distribution, abundance, and life
              history of marine organisms from deep-sea ecosystems; adaptations of marine
              organisms; and their population ecology.

1.	Morphological Variation. We
              present a preliminary analysis of bathymetric ranges and variation in shell
              architecture in lower bathyal and abyssal assemblages of gastropods from the
              western North Atlantic. The abyssal fauna is revealed to be merely a subset of
              the bathyal fauna consisting of species that extend their ranges deeper and out
              onto the abyss. In gastropods, shell architecture reflects feeding type, mode
              of development, predator defense mechanisms, locomotion and calcium carbonate
              conservation. We construct both empirical and theoretical morphospaces of shell
              form by using an eigenshape analysis and Raups model of shell geometry. Both
              approaches yield the same result. In terms of the range of basic shell types,
              the abyssal fauna appears to be a random subset of the richer bathyal fauna.
              However, the abyssal fauna is dominated numerically by a few core
              deposit-feeding species of bathyal origin with shells that are preadapted for
              carbonate conservation below the CaCO3 compensation depth. The combination of
              morphological variation, bathymetric range, feeding type and dispersal ability
              suggests a new hypothesis for abyssal biodiversity that is radically different
              from the ecological determinism of current theories. We propose that bathyal
              and abyssal environments comprise a source-sink system in which the abyssal
              fauna largely represents a mass effect. The abyssal fauna appears to be an
              attenuation of the bathyal fauna with a small minority of abundant species, and
              a majority of extremely rare species that may represent nonreproducing
              populations maintained by dispersal. We will test this hypothesis by extending
              the analysis to four other deep-sea basins, and by determining the reproductive
              state of bathyal and abyssal populations of the same species. Since the great
              abyssal plains represent such a huge ecosystem, this research has very
              significant implications for the genesis and maintenance of diversity, and for
              estimating the level of global deep-sea biodiversity.

2.	Body Size. Body
              size is an issue of fundamental significance in biology, and one that has an
              important bearing on abundance, distribution, macroecology and
              biodiversity.

Results from prior NSF support (OCE-9301687) showed that, in
              contrast to the prevailing view, individual gastropod species increase in size
              with depth. Size-depth clines decrease in slope with depth and bathymetric
              ranges expand. We present a conceptual model that integrates this very
              consistent trend within species with the observation that average size among
              species appears to decrease with depth. We propose measuring the average size
              component of the model. This research has the potential to reconcile a very
              basic paradox in deep-sea ecology, and will provide, by far, the largest and
              most well-controlled database on size in the deep-sea benthos.

