Title       : Hydrogen Tunneling in Enzyme Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0135446

Award Number: 0135446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith P. Klinman klinman@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              There are now close to 20 documented examples of a role for quantum effects in
              enzyme catalyzed C-H activation processes. Insights from the ongoing work on
              H-tunneling in enzymes include the recognition that enzymes modify the entire
              reaction barrier shape (i.e., reaction barrier width as well as height) and
              that protein dynamics may play a role in the bond cleavage events catalyzed by
              enzymes. Further investigations are to be focused on establishing a firmer and
              more detailed relationship between protein dynamics and H-tunneling. Several
              hydride transfer reactions will be studied, catalyzed by a high temperature
              alcohol dehydrogenase (ht-ADH) with homology to the mesophilic horse liver
              alcohol dehydrogenase and a thermophilic dihydrofolate reductase (ht-DHFR) with
              significant homology to mesophilic DHFR. In the case of ht-ADH, studies are in
              progress to solve the three dimensional structure for this enzyme. This
              structural information will guide site specific mutagenesis experiments to
              analyze the effect of protein side
chains on catalysis. In particular, the
              effects at elevated temperatures where tunneling is dominant and at reduced
              temperatures where H-transfer becomes more classical will be analyzed.   Since
              the ht-ADH is too large for a study of dynamics by NMR, H/D exchange, followed
              by limited proteolysis and mass spectrometric analysis will be pursued to map
              out protein flexibility. This laboratory has recently succeeded in cloning and
              over-expressing a ht-DHFR from B. stearothermophilis. This protein will be
              analyzed for the contribution of tunneling to H-transfer as a function of
              temperature. In parallel studies, this small protein (19 KDa) will be studied
              by NMR (as a probe of local dynamics) and by FT-IR H/D exchange (as a probe of
              global flexibility).

