Title       : Dynamic Subcellular Protein Localization During Bacillus Subtilis Sporulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0135955

Award Number: 0135955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kit J. Pogliano kpogliano@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The localization of membrane proteins to specific regions of the cell is a
              conserved and essential feature of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. In
              bacteria, protein localization is essential for cell division, DNA replication,
              as well as for chemotaxis, pathogenesis and the development of specialized cell
              types. However, in contrast to eukaryotic cells, little is known about the
              mechanism by which proteins reach their correct subcellular location in
              bacterial cells. Many cases of protein localization in bacteria involve the
              localization of membrane proteins to specific regions of the cytoplasmic
              membrane, often at the cell pole or septum. During B. subtilis sporulation,
              protein localization involves the specific localization of proteins to one of
              two separate membranes within the cell, similar to eukaryotic protein
              localization.
The long term goals of the research described here are to
              understand the mechanism by which bacterial membrane proteins assemble at their
              correct locations within the cell. This project uses genetic and cell
              biological methods to investigate the mechanism by which proteins localize to
              specific membrane regions during sporulation, and to investigate the
              possibility that B. subtilis contains two integral membrane protein insertion
              complexes that serve to direct membrane proteins to different locations within
              the cell. It will also develop new methods to investigate if proteins made
              before division are restricted to one or the other cell after division, or if
              they are differently localized in the two cells, as these processes may provide
              a simple mechanism to generate daughter cells of differing fate. They also may
              control the activity of proteins that act in a vectoral manner across a
              newly-synthesized septum.
These studies will provide further insight into the
              mechanism by which integral membrane proteins reach their correct subcellular
              address in bacterial cells. Thus far, the mechanisms of integral membrane
              protein insertion and assembly have been almost exclusively studied in Gram
              negative bacteria, primarily in E. coli. These studies will be extended to the
              Gram positive bacterium B. subtilis, which represents a separate bacterial
              kingdom that includes many human pathogens such as the Mycobacteria,
              Streptococcus sp. and Staphylococcus sp., and many bacteria of industrial
              importance, such as the Actinomycetes.
The project will contribute to training
              graduate and undergraduate students in microbial cell biology and genetics.


