Title       : Research Agenda Workshop on Internet Research Ethics, December 14-16, 2001,
               Lancaster University, England
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2001   
File        : a0135590

Award Number: 0135590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20529              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen Nissenbaum hfn1@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award helps to support the participation of researchers in a workshop on
              internet research ethics.  Four US-based scholars will meet with three
              U.K./European scholars and researchers to outline a research agenda directed
              towards establishing an ethics of Internet research.  Similarities and
              ethically pertinent differences between traditional human subjects research and
              on-line research with human subjects will be considered.  Such differences
              emerge because the Internet allows for varieties of research never before
              possible, raising new ethical questions.  Needed are guidelines for Internet
              research that are genuinely global in their validity (as required for a global
              medium) while acknowledging important cultural and national differences that
              might require specific ethical codes.  Workshop participants were chosen on the
              basis of their expertise both as internet researchers and ethicists who have
              worked extensively on the problems of Internet research ethics.  The workshop
              will be held in conjunction and interaction with CEPE participants--moral
              philosophers who have long focussed on computer ethics hence providing an
              audience uniquely suited to engaging productively with the issues raised by the
              workshop.
The workshop builds on recent efforts to develop such principles of
              research ethics, including several national statements developed in the United
              States and abroad.  It also builds on the forthcoming report  of the Ethics
              Working Committee (EWC) of the Association of Internet Researchers, which
              attempts a first synthesis of available analysis and guidelines and tentative
              proposals for local and global Internet research ethics.  Expected outcomes of
              this workshop include a series of articles in a special issue of Ethics and
              Information Technology, workshop results posted on
              www.cddc.vt.edu/aoir/ethics/, and stimulation of much many practical outcomes
              such as national and international guidelines or principles governing human
              research on-line.


