Title       : Congestion and Strategic Behavior in Queueing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0135811

Award Number: 0135811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228560             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darryl A. Seale dseale@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amnon Rapoport  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Queueing theory is a body of mathematical theory that attempts to find solutions
              to a large class of problems where the arrival pattern of customers is assumed
              to be exogenously determined. This is the case, for example, when motorists
              pull into gas stations along the highway to refuel their cars. In a radical
              departure from this approach, the focus of the present research is on queueing
              problems when the arrival pattern of customers is assumed to be endogenously
              determined, with each customer determining if and exactly when to join a queue.
              This is the case, for example when drivers decide at what time to bring their
              cars for emission inspection.  If communication is not possible, endogenously
              determined arrivals give rise to problems of tacit coordination. We are
              interested in studying these problems from three perspectives-theoretical,
              experimental, and empirical. From a theoretical perspective we formulate the
              problem as one of interactive decision making, solve it using solution concepts
              of game theory, and study its equilibrium behavior.  Experimentally, we
              investigate the emergence of tacit coordination, or any other patterns of
              behavior, in progressively more realistic queueing problems.  One proposed
              experiment controls the level of congestion by manipulating the fixed service
              time.  Another relaxes the assumption that service time is fixed and models it
              as random variable drawn from a commonly known distribution. A third experiment
              allows customers to form queues before service commences. In yet another
              experiment, the investigation is extended to multi-server queueing systems with
              parallel waiting lines. Empirically, we propose to collect data on arrival
              time, waiting time, and service time in actual emission control
              stations.

Congestion and waiting in lines have become pernicious problems of
              modern society. Yet we know almost nothing about the strategic thinking that
              governs the behavior of customers who wish to minimize their waiting time in
              line by choosing the "right" arrival time. Nor do we know much about the
              dynamics that result in improvement in coordination over time.  Decisions
              regarding the amount of service capacity to provide must frequently be made in
              governmental offices, supermarkets, banks, medical clinics, gas stations, etc.
              From the perspective of the agency, providing too much service involves
              excessive cost, whereas providing too little service may cause the waiting line
              to become excessively long. Excessive waiting time carries with it heavy social
              costs, and at times costs of lost customers. Therefore, the ultimate goal of
              the server is to achieve an economic balance between the cost of service and
              the costs associated with waiting for that service.  Our proposed research is
              aimed at determining the factors that affect congestion, and the conditions
              that may help or hinder tacit coordination when customers make strategic
              decisions about joining queues.
