Title       : Space and Geometry in Kant's Critical Epistemology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a0135441

Award Number: 0135441
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Shabel shabel.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES Proposal 0135441
Space and Geometry in Kant's Critical
              Epistemology
Lisa Shabel, Ohio State University


This project has two
              interdependent aims: 1) to examine Kant's philosophy of mathematics in its
              eighteenth-century historical context; and 2) to determine the role that Kant's
              philosophy of mathematics plays in the epistemological view he defends in the
              "Critique of Pure Reason." The project is motivated, at least in part, by the
              weakness of traditional  interpretations of Kant's philosophy of mathematics.
              Most recent commentary on Kant's philosophy of mathematics falls victim to one
              or another sort of isolationism: commentators interpret Kant's philosophy of
              mathematics in isolation either from the eighteenth-century mathematical milieu
              that was familiar to him and his contemporaries, or from the epistemological
              arguments and results that his own philosophy of mathematics was deployed to
              serve, or both. This project aims to provide an account of Kant's philosophy of
              mathematics that situates it with respect to both the mathematical results that
              inspired it and the epistemological results that it inspired. 

The project
              uses textual research to show that in the eighteenth-century both symbolic and
              non-symbolic mathematical methods were dependent on constructive geometric
              procedures; in particular, early modern editions of Euclid's Elements show that
              modern geometric methods  depend on diagrammatic reasoning. This textual
              research will support a defense of Kant's  philosophy of geometry as a rich and
              compelling account of eighteenth-century mathematical practice. The project
              also shows that Kant's epistemological arguments regarding the nature of space
              serve to provide a foundation for constructive geometric procedures by
              establishing the pure cognitive faculty of spatial intuition as the source of
              geometric reasoning. It follows that, for Kant, the a priori representation of
              space is both the object of geometry and the medium in which we perceive
              spatial objects. In defending this interpretation of Kant, the project also
              provides a new explanation of Kant's defense of the applicability of pure
              geometry.  

