Title       : Regulation of M. xanthus Social Gliding by Dif Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0135434

Award Number: 0135434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhaomin Yang yangzha@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	Myxococcus xanthus exhibits the most spectacular morphogenesis among bacteria
              during its developmental life cycle. In response to starvation, tens of
              thousands of cells move by gliding motility to aggregate and to form
              multicellular fruiting bodies visible to the naked eye. Vegetative cells within
              mature fruiting bodies differentiate into dormant and stress-resistant
              myxospores. Distinct from any other known gliding bacteria, M. xanthus
              possesses two gliding systems, the adventurous (A) and the social (S) motility
              systems. While A motility enables M. xanthus cells to move as isolated
              individuals, S motility is manifested as movement of large cell groups. It
              remains an enigma how M. xanthus cells interact and coordinate with one another
              to bring about S motility. A new set of genes, the dif genes, is implicated in
              S motility. The predicted dif gene products show high similarity to chemotaxis
              proteins from many bacteria. It is known that bacterial chemotaxis proteins
              constitute sensory signal transduction pathways that are responsible for
              bacterial tactic responses to environmental stimuli. The similarity between Dif
              and chemotaxis proteins and the S-motility defects of dif mutants strongly
              suggest the involvement of a sensory component in the regulation of S-motility.
              This project takes a multidisciplinary approach of genetics, molecular biology
              and biochemistry to examine and to consolidate working hypotheses. dif
              mutations will be constructed for functional and structural studies. Genetic
              suppressors of difA mutants will be characterized to identify genes with
              functional, biochemical and/or physical interactions with the dif
              chemotaxis-like signal transduction pathway. 

In a broader context, the
              outcome of this project is expected to advance our understanding of cell-cell
              interactions and intercellular communications, which are widespread and play
              essential roles in various biological systems and processes.

