Title       : Public Science: Discourse on the Strategic Defense Initiative, 1983-1888
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0135622

Award Number: 0135622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh Gusterson Guster@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David I. Kaiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca Slayton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES 0135622
Public Science: Discourse on the Strategic
              Defense Initiative, 1983-1988
Gusterson/Slayton
MIT

Scientists hold a
              paradoxical place in American society today, for while their knowledge
is
              woven into the fabric of everyday human life, scientists themselves are often
              imagined to dwell above the plane of everyday human concerns. This postdoctoral
              project explores this paradox  -- both its roots and its implications for
              science policy and communications --  by examining dialogue on the Strategic
              Defense Initiative (SDI) in the mid-1980's.  Three immediate objectives lie in
              examinations of three interacting communities: scientists in the political
              sphere, journalists and others presenting the debate, and a pluralistic public.
               Findings from this research are to be communicated in academic journals, in
              conference papers, and in ongoing dialogue with local scholars. Longer-range
              goals tie this research to the retraining of Rebecca Slayton in historical and
              sociological studies of science and technology. Slayton builds on doctoral
              training in physical chemistry at Harvard, working under the sponsorship of PI
              Hugh Gusterson and co-PI David Kaiser, both at the Massachusetts Institute of
              Technology.

This project brings together historical studies of scientists in
              the political sphere and
studies of public communication of science. In debate
              over SDI, the same scientists acted as advisors and political activists,
              straining a long-standing tension between fears of technical tyranny and the
              need for technical expertise. Slayton examines the political roles that
              scientists assumed in debate surrounding SDI from a historical perspective,
              contributing to an understanding of the shifting role of the scientist in
              society. Because this role has been reflected in popular depictions of
              scientists, this project also examines public images of scientists and
              technology, as portrayed in magazines, newspapers, and on television. By
              comparing portrayals within and among these media, this work emphasizes how the
              constraints of particular media shape presentations of science and technology.
              Finally, this project examines discourse about scientists and SDI among several
              communities, analyzing the role particular communal values played in
              understanding science communication as an interactive process.

Slayton's
              retraining involves coursework in sociological and historical approaches to
              science will build relevant methodological skills; courses in media studies;
              and teaching an undergraduate seminar course with the hope of stimulating
              dialogue about popular voices of science and their implications for the social
              roles of scientists.    Her research plan includes interviewing scientists and
              analyzing their technical assessments and political statements;  gathering and
              analyzing public presentations of scientific aspects of SDI in newspapers,
              magazines, and on television; examining public discourse in letters to editors
              in a variety of newspapers and among several smaller communities with common
              concerns.  Ultimately, this project result in a better understanding of
              dialogue between scientists and publics, a dialogue that is central to today's
              science policy and culture.

