Title       : Microbial Genome Sequencing: Microsporidia and the Next Generation of Genome
               Scientists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  2001 
File        : a0135272

Award Number: 0135272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1078381            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell L. Sogin sogin@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hilary G. Morrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Vossbrinck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Except for a small number of human pathogens, microbial genome efforts have
              steered clear of the diverse world of protozoans, many of which are important
              agricultural parasites. Of particular interest are the Microsporidia, which by
              eukaryotic standards have remarkably small genomes. Since they infect most
              invertebrate taxa and all classes of vertebrates, their impact on agriculture
              and fisheries is significant. They either cause disease or can serve as
              bio-control agents. These same organisms have attracted the interests of
              biologists and molecular evolutionists. They offer excellent models for
              studying interactions between the genomes of a host and an obligate,
              intracellular parasite. But molecular phylogenetic analyses point towards a
              confused evolutionary history. To advance knowledge of these unusual microbes
              and to address the ever-increasing demand for researchers broadly trained in
              genome sciences, the genome of the microsporidian Nosema locustae will be
              sequenced to closure and a comprehensive course in genome science will be
              established to provide broad-based training in high throughput sequencing
              techniques and bioinformatics. By integrating this course with the N. locustae
              project, nearly 100 students will be trained in all aspects of genomics.
              Although this model for research and training could be applied to other
              microbial groups, Microsporidia were selected because of their impact upon
              agriculture, their enigmatic character in molecular evolution studies and what
              they may reveal about interactions between the genomes of hosts and obligate
              intracellular parasites. Sequence data (3X and higher coverage, monthly updates
              and annotation) will be available to the research community on the Marine
              Biological Laboratory's web server (www.mbl.edu). This is a Microbial Genome
              Sequencing Award funded through a collaborative program between the National
              Science Foundation and the Department of Agriculture Initiative for Future
              Agriculture and Food Systems

