Title       : Direct Probing and Modeling of Adsorbed Layers of Surfactant/Lipid/Protein
               Mixtures atT Air/Water Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0135317

Award Number: 0135317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elias I. Franses franses@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0135317
Franses, Elias I
Purdue University

"Direct Probing
              and Modeling of Adsorbed Layers of Surfactant/Lipid/Protein Mixtures at
              Air/Water Interfaces" 

The main objectives are to understand quantitatively
              and qualitatively how surfactants, lipids, and proteins adsorb at air/water
              interfaces.  By adsorbing, alone or in competition, surface active molecules
              modify the equilibrium and dynamic surface tension, the surface charges, the
              foaming behavior, and the protein denaturation behavior. These phenomena have
              important applications in bioprocessing of biological and
biochemical
              dispersions, spray drying of pharmaceutical solutions, spreading of
              agricultural chemical in leaves; also in foaming stability, and foam-based
              separations of dilute solutions of surfactants and proteins, mineral ore
              flotation, and detergency.  A major focus is the area of replacement therapy of
              lung surfactant, which is a mixture of lipids and proteins responsible for
              stabilizing the lung alveoli and controlling breathing.

The equilibrium and
              dynamic adsorption is probed not only with indirect surface tension methods but
              with direct optical (ellipsometry, EL) and infrared reflection absorption
              spectroscopy (IRRAS). IRRAS is used primarily to determine the extent, rates,
              and mechanisms of individual components.  IRRAS, in combination with EL and
              surface tensiometry, has proven to be a valuable tool for quantitative probing
              of complex
industrial or biological mixtures. The results are used to develop
              formulations which are technically effective, cost-effective, and biologically
              or environmentally friendly; and to develop new, potentially effective lung
              surfactant formulations. The systems examined are bovine serum albumin,
              fibrinogen, various lipids and soaps, and model ionic surfactants. The data are
              used to guide quantitative modeling of diffusion/adsorption processes of
              surfactants, lipids, and proteins from the bulk solution or dispersion to the
              interface. The models are used to help design new improved formulations, and to
              predict how formulations may function in different solutions and different
              geometries.

