Title       : Molecular Basis of Arabidopsis Susceptibility to Pseudomonas Syringae Infection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0135286

Award Number: 0135286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheng Yang He hes@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In the co-evolution between plants and microbial pathogens, most plants have
              developed sophisticated defense mechanisms to ward off the majority of (but not
              all) potential pathogens.   When a plant fails to mount a defense response and
              the pathogen carries appropriate positive virulence factors, disease occurs. 
              In the past decade, significant efforts have been invested in studying how
              plants defend against pathogens.  The use of the Arabidopsis-Pseudomonas
              syringae pathosystem played a critical role in advancing the understanding of
              pathogen recognition and plant resistance responses.  In contrast, very little
              is known about how a plant fails to defend itself and ultimately succumbs to
              infection by virulent pathogens. The goal of this research is to understand the
              molecular mechanism by which Pseudomonas syringae causes infection in
              Arabidopsis thaliana.  This research is based on the recent finding that the
              majority of bacterial pathogens of humans, animals, and plants use a
              specialized protein secretion system (the type III secretion system) to
              actively "inject" virulence proteins into the host cell. Mutations affecting
              this pathogen secretion system often eliminate the ability of pathogens to
              infect the respective hosts, suggesting an important role of "type III
              virulence proteins" in modulating host susceptibility.  However, the molecular
              mechanisms by which these type III virulence proteins affect host signaling and
              metabolic processes, which ultimately lead to the establishment of the
              susceptible interaction, is not understood in any system.  In this research,
              two specific objectives are proposed.  The first objective is to link the
              effects of Pst DC3000 infection to expression of specific Arabidopsis response
              genes.  Successful accomplishment of this objective will remove a major
              roadblock to progress in the study of susceptible host-bacteria interactions,
              namely the lack of host cellular and molecular markers.  The second objective
              of this proposal is aimed at achieving a deep understanding of how a specific
              type III virulence protein, VirPtoB, modulates host susceptibility.  Emphasis
              will be on how VirPtoB, when transgenically expressed inside Arabidopsis leaf
              cells, alters Arabidopsis gene expression and response to pathogen infection.  
               This research involves the use of genomic, transgenic, and pathogenic methods.
               Successful completion of this study will contribute to our understanding of
              those plant cellular mechanisms that must be altered for a plant to become
              susceptible to pathogens.  A postdoctoral student and an undergraduate student
              will be trained during the course of this research project. 
