Title       : U.S.-Japan Seminar: Nanoscale Thermal Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0135632

Award Number: 0135632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arunava Majumdar majumdar@newton.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0135632
Majumdar

This award supports the participation of American
              scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on nanoscale thermal science and engineering
              to be held in San Francisco, California from June 25-28, 2002.  The
              co-organizers are Professor Arunava Majumdar of the University of California,
              Berkeley and Professor Ken Okazaki at the Tokyo Institute of Technology in
              Japan.  Both Japan and the U.S. are deeply committed to the emerging field of
              nanotechnology.  This seminar will present an opportunity to share their
              knowledge in the area of nanoscale thermophysics and energy conversion, which
              is key to nanotechnology.  Examples of this include: transport and interactions
              between electrons, phonons, and photons in low-dimensional nanostructures
              (semiconductor superlattices, nanowires, quantum dots); novel thermoelectric
              and optoelectronic phenomena and devices on nanostructured; thin film growth
              and cluster formation; experimental techniques involving scanning probe
              microscopes; femtosecond laser diagnostics and probing of materials; and
              molecular dynamic and Monte Carlo simulations of energy conversion and
              transport of nanostructures.

Although a lot of effort in the past has been
              directed towards understanding the electronic and materials behavior of
              nanostructures, the thermophysics of nanostructures and nanodevices as well as
              biomolecular transport phenomena in micro/nanodevices have not been adequately
              addressed.  It must be recognized that although the nature of physical
              phenomena at nanometer scales can be quite diverse, they must all satisfy the
              basic laws of thermodynamics.  Hence thermophysics at nanometer scales provides
              a unique window to study a wide variety of phenomena.  For biomolecular
              analysis, there is tremendous opportunity to use the thermodynamics and
              fluidics of biomolecules such as DNA and proteins to understand their transport
              and transformations, which are both fundamental in biotechnology.  The project
              advances international human resources through the participation of many junior
              faculty, postdocs and graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas and
              technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
              international understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish
              results of the research in the Journal "Microscale Thermophysical
              Engineering."

