Title       : Online Ethics Center for Engineering and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0135585

Award Number: 0135585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230845             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline A. Whitbeck caw9@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, the Online Ethics Center for Engineering and Science at Case
              Western -. Reserve University (OEC) further realizes the potential of World
              Wide Web to be a major ". 
resource for learning and practice of responsible
              practice in science and engineering. The OEC, which is staffed primarily by
              students, has become the foremost Web site for science and 
engineering
              ethics. It serves a wide audience ranging from pre-college students to
              distinguished senior practitioners and research investigators This project
              builds on and advances the ease of navigation, accessibility, responsiveness to
              users, and organization of content for which it is already known. Through a
              multi-site collaboration, the OEC advances learning and understanding of
              science and engineering ethics in the following areas: .Social and Ethical
              Implications of Information and Communication Technology, led by Joseph
              Herkert, North Carolina State University.   Computer Ethics for Software
              Engineers and other Computing Professionals: led by Keith Miller, University of
              Illinois at Springfield.   Academic Integrity: Cases and Commentaries for
              Scientists and Engineers, led by Elizabeth Kiss, the Kenan Institute for
              Ethics, Duke University and Daisy Waryold, The Center for Academic Integrity,
              Duke University. .Ethical Issues in Genomics and Biotechnology: Cases and
              Commentaries,1ed by Elizabeth Kiss, the Kenan Institute for Ethics and Center
              for Genome Ethics, Law, and Policy, Duke University. .Ethics Education in
              Conjunction with Senior Design Projects or Thesis, led by Elysa Koppelman,
              Oakland University 

Through further indexing, organizing, and adding key
              words to materials on the site, the OEC will greatly aid those seeking to find
              information on the topics addressed on the OEC s pages. The organization of
              information extends to indexing of our introduction to materials maintained by
              others. 
This project sets the stage for still wider collaboration through the
              development of pilot collaborations between junior scholars in the U.S. and
              their colleagues in other countries. 

