Title       : Dissertation Research: The Machine 'qui permet a voir a l'interieur': Inventing
               Visual Culture in Colonial and Postcolonial Senegal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0135537

Award Number: 0135537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11912              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Kline rrk1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation project examines the history of roads in West-Central Africa
              from 1914 to 1980, analyzing this technology along its material, political and
              cultural dimensions. Over the course of the 20th century, roads of various
              sorts became increasingly important as a primary site or "contact zone" for
              encounters between westerners and Africans. But westerners and Africans each
              brought their own, sometimes widely differing, assumptions and expectations
              about roads to these encounters. Uncovering the ways both westerners and
              Africans perceived and used roads is thus crucial to understanding the nature
              and impact of encounters between Africa and the west, and to understanding the
              complex roles of technology in those encounters. The construction and
              maintenance of roads in west-central Africa during the 20th century posed
              significant challenges and entailed difficult (and revealing) decisions. The
              researcher draws out the rich technological, political, social, and symbolic
              aspects of roads both over the course of the colonial occupation and as
              post-independence African nations maintained, expanded, and found new uses for
              road systems inheried from colonial governments. She examines roads as material
              artifacts, political instruments, and the locus of cultural meanings, all built
              through the sometimes-clashing agency of Africans and Westerners. Political
              agendas and ideologies influenced decisions about which road technologies and
              what kinds of roads were preferable, where roads would be built, and how they
              were used and perceived by different groups. Goals for and support of
              infrastructure such as roads varied widely over the course of the 20th century.
               Administrators and technical experts debated the relative merits and costs of
              roads, railways, water transportation, and (especially after the 1930s) air
              transportation, and the advantages or disadvantages of building different kinds
              of roads (paved or earth, heavy-or light-duty). The researcher thus responds to
              a historiography that has examined roads in Africa almost entirely in economic
              and strategic terms by providing a more nuanced and complete study of the role
              and importance of roads. Her work also argues for the pervasive and
              transforming role of a particular technology, roads, not only on a policy level
              but also in the day-to-day lives of and encounters between westerners and
              Africans in twentieth-century Africa.
NSF funds will support trips to archival
              materials, published sources and oral histories, primarily in France and
              West-Central Africa, in order to shed light on roads as material artifacts,
              political instruments, and the locus of cultural meanings, all built through
              the sometimes-clashing agency of Africans and Westerners. 


