Title       : History of the Monsoon in Arabia, a Speleothem-based Paleoclimate Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0135542

Award Number: 0135542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244302             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Burns sburns@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award investigates the use of stalagmites and other speleothems from caves
              in northern Oman and Yemen as natural archives for information on the nature
              and cause of variations in the Indian Ocean monsoon system during interglacial
              and glacial periods of the last 75,000 years. The Indian Ocean Monsoon is an
              important weather system that affects both natural and managed resources (e.g.,
              through agriculture and fisheries) and hence the economy of one of the most
              densely populated areas of the world. Two questions guide the research
              strategy, namely: 1) How did monsoon precipitation vary between interglacial
              periods? and 2) How does the timing of the monsoon vary with latitude? The
              research strategy applied combines studies of modern caves and cave waters,
              Hydrogen isotope analyses of water from fluid inclusions in modern and ancient
              speleothems, high resolution Oxygen and Carbon stable isotopic analyses of
              recent and well-dated ancient speleothems, and spectral analyses of the
              isotopic time series. 

Stalagmites, deposits of calcium carbonate that are
              precipitated from groundwaters in caves, will be used to produce
              high-resolution records of variation in monsoon rainfall. Changes in the
              intensity of precipitation are recorded in stalagmites as variations in growth
              rate, thickness of annual growth layers (if present) and in carbon and oxygen
              stable isotope ratios.

Previous work using stalagmites and other speleothems
              from caves in Oman has shown that they are a rich source of climate
              information. The results demonstrate repeated pluvial (i.e., wet) periods in
              southern Arabia during each of the past four interglacial stages in Earth's
              climate. More detailed study of the early Holocene, at a resolution of
              approximately 4 years, shows a close correspondence between monsoon rainfall
              and solar forcing. Study of the past 800 years of the monsoon at annual
              resolution indicate a connection to the tropical Pacific El Nino-Southern
              Oscillation (ENSO) system on decadal and interannual timescales.

This
              project is multi-national in scope and involves collaborators in Switzerland,
              Germany, Oman, and Yemen.
