Title       : Exploring Approaches for Microarray Databases That Enable Flexible Design and
               Integrative Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0135442

Award Number: 0135442
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $479985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kei-Hoi Cheung kei.cheung@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark B. Gerstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal will explore a number of technologies for representing, storing,
              and processing microarray data, applied to development of the Yale Microarray
              Database (YMD). Microarray data sets, while providing information about gene
              expression or protein interactions, present one of the significant challenges
              in data management.  Three specific technologies are involved. Collectively
              these approaches will allow us to address a number of the important issues in
              microarray database design: (i) dealing with large-scale and diverse
              information; (ii) allowing data dissemination; (iii) facilitating
              interoperation and exchange of data among heterogeneous information resources;
              and (iv) supporting integrative data analysis.
1. The use of the flexible EAV
              data modeling approach. The entity-attribute-value (EAV) approach in modeling a
              wide variety of sparsely populated attributes in a flexible fashion will be
              utilized in YMD to represent heterogeneous data including experimental
              conditions and multi-level analysis results. 
2. XML-based interoperability.
              XML can facilitate the conversion and merging of heterogeneous (but related)
              data sets from different information sources into a common format so that
              integrated data access can be facilitated. MAGEML (an XML-based markup language
              for describing gene expression data) as a common data exchange mechanism
              between YMD and other MIAME-compliant microarray data repositories will be
              developed.
3. Parallel computing. A distributed, parallel computing approach
              to help speed up complex queries and analyses of large amounts of gene
              expression data will be used, providing users with integrated access to a
              variety of tools. 



