Title       : Indian Knowledge-Systems on the Eve of Colonialism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0135069

Award Number: 0135069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon Pollock s-pollock@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES Proposal 0135069
Indian Knowledge-Systems on the Eve of
              Colonialism
Sheldon Pollock, University of Chicago


Indian
              Knowledge-Systems (IKS) on the Eve of Colonialism is an internationa
              collaborative research project, which draws on the talents of ten scholars from
              five countries to examine the nature of scientific and scholarly knowledge and
              the social existence of scholars and scientists in South Asia during the period
              from 1550 (the approximate date of two innovative thinkers, one in north India,
              one in the south) to 1750
(the approximate date of the consolidation of
              British power in the region). This large problematic has been narrowed by three
              limits, each with its own particular logic: (1) Eight disciplines, chosen for
              their centrality to traditional scientific culture or for their uncommon
              popularity during the period in question, are targeted for study: language
              philosophy, logic-epistemology, hermeneutics, literary theory, law, astronomy,
              medicine, and ritual science; (2) In order to gain a better understanding of
              the variety of social
and political contexts for precolonial science,
              knowledge production in the eight disciplines are to be examined in four
              distinct regional centers: Delhi/Varanasi; Navadvip (Bengal)/Mithila;
              Thanjavur/Madurai; Maharashtra; (3) The science that found expression in
              Sanskrit, the premier language of learning outside the Persianate order, is
              considered. 

After conducting a systematic census of manuscripts and
              published works in the disciplines, team members select manuscripts preserved
              in South Asia (and to a lesser degree Europe and the U.S.) for collection and
              archival preservation. Prosopographical data from unpublished sources as well
              as from published editions and all relevant secondary scholarship is sifted and
              entered into a database. This is a version of  FileMaker Pro modified for
              networked data entry and for specific project needs.  A small number of major
              texts are chosen for study according to a uniform analytic matrix.  These
              address, among other things: key problematics; principal disciplinary
              positions; tenets of the author or school in question; dominant modes of
              argument, evidence, and method. On the basis of the census of texts, the
              bio-biographical database, and text-analyses, team members plan a book of
              essays on the character of Indian scientific and scholarly knowledge and its
              social
setting.  Both the database and the manuscript archives (with links to
              the database) are to be available to the public on the IKS Website, in hopes
              that the database can be enriched even beyond the limits of the IKS project, to
              become a key tool of Indian studies.  Comparative histories of Indo-Persian and
              eventually European science are initiatives built into the logic and structure
              of the IKS project. 

