Title       : The Pacific Northwest Ocean-Land Response to Millennial Scale Climate Change: An
               Integration of Model and Geologic Data Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0135294

Award Number: 0135294
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $478315             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicklas G. Pisias npisias@coas.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Duncan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award will integrate marine and terrestrial data from the Pacific Northwest
              with the National Center For Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Regional Climate Model
              2 (RegCM2) to investigate regional-scale climate variability over the last
              150,000 years.  The investigators will use the RegCM2 model because it offers
              an advantage in spatial resolution (i.e., tens of kilometers compared to
              hundreds of kilometers in global circulation models) that will provide rigorous
              data-model comparisons and the resolution of potentially important climate
              feedbacks in the Pacific Northwest region; a region where climate is strongly
              influenced by topographic complexity, coastlines, and proximity to the Pacific
              Ocean.

The investigators will test the following three scientific
              hypotheses:

"Hypothesis 1. On millennial time scales, local and regional
              changes in sea-surface temperatures in the Northeast Pacific, and perhaps
              changes in continental heating, are large enough to have influenced atmospheric
              pressure gradients that in turn substantially affected the intensity of coastal
              upwelling."

"Hypothesis 2. The marine pollen record faithfully reflects
              climate-induced changes in the distribution of terrestrial vegetation while
              changes in oceanic transport play a secondary role in the observed marine
              pollen records of the Northeast Pacific."

"Hypothesis 3. Changes in sediment
              provenance and terrigenous sediment accumulation in the Northeast Pacific
              reflect regional climate change and its effect on continental runoff and
              surface-ocean circulation."

Furthermore, this award will address several
              hypotheses of importance to the field of paleoclimatology in an integrative and
              holistic manner using marine and terrestrial data from the Pacific Northwest as
              inputs to climate models.  In addition to integrative scientific goals, the
              award will also provide unique training in integrative climate research for
              graduate and undergraduate students at Oregon State University.

