Title       : THEMATICS: Development and Application of a New Computational Tool for
               Functional Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a0135303

Award Number: 0135303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201840             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Jo Ondrechen mjo@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The THEMATIC (Theoretical Microscopic Titration Curves) method, a new tool for
              functional genomics and bioinformatics, will be further developed and applied. 
              With the sequencing of the human genome and the genomes of other species, a
              wealth of new information is becoming available about protein sequences and
              structures. This information holds tremendous potential and promise for many
              benefits to humankind.  However, first this genomic information must be
              interpreted and understood. From the structures of these newly discovered
              proteins their function must be determined.  The THEMATIC method has been used
              successfully to locate the active sites of a number of different kinds of
              proteins.  The project will develop statistical analyses to improve the method,
              enhance its accuracy, expand its capabilities, and render it amenable to
              automation for high-volume screening of protein structures.  This method will
              also be further developed using a dynamical averaging technique to attempt to
              expand the range of applicability of the method, analyze the sensitivity to
              structural changes and to reduce the number of false positive results.  

The
              THEMATIC method will be developed into a powerful, versatile tool for
              determining the function of a protein from its structure and for characterizing
              the residues in protein active sites.  Furthermore, the results of the THEMATIC
              method can be used to characterize the residues of the active site of an enzyme
              and thus provide insight into how the enzyme works.  The project will develop
              metrics to describe residues that are different from others of their type
              because they are perturbed by the protein environment.  These metrics will be
              used to create a new bioinformatics database that characterizes residues and
              provides information about their functional role in the protein.  This is an
              important step in the understanding, interpretation and application of the
              newly sequenced genome.  This project will train doctoral students in research
              in the field of bioinformatics and functional genomes.  The THEMATIC method
              will also be incorporated into an educational module for courses in molecular
              modeling and bioinformatics for graduate students and advanced undergraduates. 
              Aspects of the project will also be incorporated into the PI's outreach
              activities promoting diversity in the sciences.

