Title       : Dissertation Research Improvement Grants: Dissertation Research: Dynamics of
               Discourse about Abribiotechnology: Bt cotton in India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0135563

Award Number: 0135563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig K. Harris craig.harris@ssc.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The central theme of this dissertation project is to examine how democratic
              decision-making about science and technology occurs in a developing society
              where civil society is relatively well developed. Moreover, this study explores
              how ethics and values are brought into decisions concerning science and
              technology in a society which is trying to find ways to meet basic human needs
              of its population through development. The introduction of Bt cotton in India
              has been the source of ongoing controversy since the late 1990s. This
              controversy and the discourse surrounding issues of Bt cotton in India makes it
              possible to ask what are the processes of arriving at social understandings and
              collective decisions about newly available science-based agricultural
              technologies. How do ethics and values enter into the controversy surrounding
              agribiotechnology? How are the efforts of actors facilitated by using science
              or inhibited from participation in decision-making processes by not using
              science? In a democratic developing society, how do science and non-scientific
              considerations (ethics, beliefs, needs and preferences) play out in
              decision-making processes? Funds for this project support the collection of
              data through three methods: semi-structured and structured interviews,
              participant observation, and content analysis to analyze how science, ethics
              and values are used in discourse concerning agribiotechnology.
