Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Neutrino-Nucleus Interactions in the Few GeV Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a0135659

Award Number: 0135659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13308              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Casper dcasper@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
0135659
Casper

This award supports the participation of American
              scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on neutrino-nucleus interactions in the few
              GeV region to be held in Irvine, California from December 2-4, 2003.  The
              co-organizers are Professor David Casper of the University of California at
              Irvine and Dr. Makoto Sakuda of the High Energy Accelerator Research
              Organization (KEK) in Tsukuba, Japan.  The recent discovery of neutrino
              oscillation represents the first compelling evidence for physics beyond the
              Standard Model, and has triggered enormous interest in future experiments using
              intense neutrino sources.  Unfortunately, the increased statistical precision
              afforded by more powerful beams will be of little value without corresponding
              progress in reducing systematic uncertainties.  The very large target masses
              necessary to detect neutrinos are typically comprised of nuclei (Carbon, Oxygen
              or Iron), but data on neutrino-nucleus reactions are sparse and the effects of
              the nuclear target are poorly understood.  Moreover, the few-GeV energy regime
              corresponds to the boundary between quasi-elastic and resonant pion-production
              processes on one hand, and deep-inelastic scattering on the other, where two
              qualitatively different pictures of the reaction dynamics must be reconciled. 
              Searches for rare oscillation signals in the K2K, Mini-BOONE and MINOS
              experiments, as well as possible future studies aimed at probing leptonic CP
              violation, will rely on an accurate description of exclusive neutrino-nucleus
              cross-sections at these energies.  

As partners in these experiments the
              U.S. and Japan are at the forefront of the exciting and rapidly evolving field
              of neutrino physics.  This workshop will bring together theorists and
              experimentalists from the particle and nuclear physics communities to lay the
              groundwork for future progress in understanding neutrino interactions.  They
              will attempt to confront existing models of neutrino scattering and nuclear
              physics with available data and synthesize them into a coherent description,
              which can be applied to planned or proposed experiments.  Strategies for
              gleaning new information from near-term experiments will be explored, as well
              as the prospects for collaboration on future precision measurements.  The
              project advances international human resources through the participation of a
              number of graduate students. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
              project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation. The researchers plan to publish proceedings of
              the workshop on their web sites.

