Title       : RUI: Atranyl-Nucleosides as Ribozyme Probes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0135279

Award Number: 0135279
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward E. Fenlon fenlon@xu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Xavier University
	      3800 Victory Parkway
	      Cincinnati, OH  452071035    513/745-3000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Current models for the catalytic mechanisms of protein enzymes are far more
              advanced
than those for RNA enzymes (ribozymes). This project will contribute
              to understanding how the
catalytic mechanisms of ribozymes compare with those
              of protein enzymes. The specific
objectives of this project are to: (1)
              synthesize atranyl-nucleosides 1-3; (2) characterize and
determine the aqueous
              stability of atranyl-nucleosides; (3) use atranyl-nucleosides as
              transition
state analogues (TSAs) to study the hammerhead and lead-dependent
              (leadzyme) ribozymes via
collaborations; and (4) train undergraduate students
              in synthetic organic techniques in
preparation for graduate study and/or
              careers in science. TSAs are useful for enzyme studies;
however, suitable TSAs
              for phosphoryl transfer reactions are lacking. Compounds 1-3 have an
atrane
              moiety incorporated into a ribonucleoside. The atrane contains a trigonal
              bipyramidal
silicon, germanium, tin, or titanium atom; and thus, 1-3 mimic the
              oxyphosphorane transition
state of the ribozyme-catalyzed reaction. Compound 2
              is a protected phosphoramidite that
contains uridine and deoxyadenosine
              connected through the atrane moiety. Several syntheses of
2 starting from
              5'-O-DMT-2'-amino-2'-deoxyuridine will be evaluated. Prof. William G. Scott
              of
UC-Santa Cruz will incorporate 2 into the hammerhead substrate by
              solid-phase synthesis to
obtain a hammerhead ribozyme-TSA crystal structure.
              Prof. Arthur Pardi of the University of
Colorado-Boulder will similarly
              determine the structure in solution using NMR spectroscopy.
Analogous
              approaches will be taken for leadzyme structural studies following the
              synthesis of
phosphoramidite 3. These experiments will elucidate the magnitude
              of conformational
rearrangement required to reach the transition state in each
              of these small RNA catalysts. This
research will also help identify the role
              of specific RNA functional groups and metal cations in
catalysis. This
              knowledge is paramount for understanding the pre-biotic "RNA world" and
              how
our current life forms evolved from it.
