Title       : Collaborative Research: The Dimensions of Supreme Court Decision Making,
               1946-2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0135855

Award Number: 0135855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43528              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. Martin admartin@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              What factors best explain the legal decisions of U.S. Supreme Court justices? To
              what extent do the policy preferences of justices outweigh purely formal, legal
              concerns when deciding cases? How many policy dimensions structure the
              preferences of justices in the post-war era? Is the current Court more
              conservative than the Vinson and early Warren courts? Have the decisions of
              lower courts become more liberal over time? In what manner have the policy
              outputs of the Court changed over time? These are but a handful of the
              substantive questions the researchers will answer using statistical models
              customized to the peculiarities of the U.S. Supreme Court. More specifically,
              using a Bayesian inferential approach, the principal investigators develop
              variants of item response models that: 1) are suitable for multidimensional
              choice situations with small numbers of subjects; 2) explicitly model dynamics
              in ideal points and case-parameters; and 3) can be used to explain voting
              behavior with covariates (case facts, the court of origin, the arguments
              raised, the issues considered, etc.) while simultaneously controlling for and
              measuring policy preferences. To model the dynamics of ideal points and case
              parameters, the principal investigators use the dynamic linear model (DLM)
              machinery within the context of item response modeling. One of the goals of
              this proposal is to integrate these modeling strategies so that
              multidimensional models can be fit to longitudinal data in a computationally
              efficient manner. The second methodological goal of this proposal is to build
              and fit models that jointly measure policy preferences and account for the
              effects of measured covariates on voting decisions. This project lies at the
              intersection of several recent growth areas in social statistics: binary
              time-series and time-series cross-sectional data analysis, mixture modeling,
              hierarchical Bayesian modeling, and latent variable modeling. While the
              proposed class of models will be customized for work involving decision making
              on the U.S. Supreme Court, many of the proposed methods will be relevant to
              other applications in political science (such as behavior on lower courts,
              committee decision making, and legislative behavior) and other areas of social
              statistics (such as educational statistics, psychometrics, and econometrics). 
