Title       : SGER: Thermal Monitoring of Gut Ischemia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0135783

Award Number: 0135783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50679              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Frederick Bowman hfbowman@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0135783
Bowman
In this application, it is proposed to apply the Thermal
              Diffusion Probe (TDP) technique which quantifies perfusion to monitor gut
              ischemia by a proxy measurement of rectal wall blood flow. Feasibility will be
              demonstrated by the correlation of rectal wall blood flow with small bowel
              blood flow in a porcine model. Successful demonstration of this correlation
              will be followed by the bioengineering of a non-invasive probe system for the
              measurement of rectal wall perfusion. Shock occurs when arterial pressure and
              subsequently tissue blood flow (perfusion) drop so low that the delivered
              oxygen is not able to meet the metabolic needs of the tissue. During shock, the
              body directs blood to the heart and the brain, often at the expense of
              "sacrificial" organs such as the liver, skin, muscle, and gut. Prolonged shock
              may diminish blood flow to the gut such that the normal intestinal barrier
              function is disrupted and gut-derived bacteria and endotoxins are translocated
              to other organs via the blood. This, in turn, may lead to bacteremia, sepsis,
              inflammatory response and ultimately multi-organ failure - one of the major
              causes of patient mortality in the ICU. Conventional resuscitation therapy is
              directed toward first assuring that oxygen is being supplied to the patient and
              that it is being transported through the circulation to the organs to support
              life. Circulatory distress is addressed with the infusion of fluids and
              pharmacological agents (inotropes) to increase cardiac output. Therapy is
              typically titrated to attain a target heart rate (HR), systolic blood pressure,
              mean arterial blood pressure (MAP), urine output, and normal arterial pH.
              Cardiac output (CO) may also be monitored. While these conventional parameters
              are thought to give an indirect indication of tissue oxygenation, they
              correlate poorly with survival in critically ill patients (Astiz and Rackow,
              1993; Shoemaker et al., 1993). Techniques have been proposed to monitor
              parameters (pO2, pH, pCO2, lactate, etc.) in sacrificial tissues that are
              susceptible to hypoperfusion, hypoxia and ischemia to provide an optimal ipend
              pointll to guide resuscitation therapy. While these parameters are an attempt
              to assess the local tissue blood flow, and hence the oxygen delivery, they also
              depend on metabolism and their respective arterial blood concentrations. It is
              evident that a reliable monitor for gut ischemia could significantly impact the
              management of shock patients. 

