Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Political Economy of
               Subnational Industrial Promotion in India and Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0135674

Award Number: 0135674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9774               (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Remmer remmer@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral dissertation research moves beyond the existing literature on the
              politics of economic development by focusing on the political economy of
              industrial promotion programs at the subnational level. Market-oriented reforms
              in combination with administrative decentralization have increased the
              importance of subnational governments for promoting industrial development, yet
              we do not have adequate explanations for either the level or the type of
              subnational government action in industrial promotion. 
This Doctoral
              Dissertation Research combines in-depth qualitative comparison of industrial
              policy in 
three states in both India and Mexico with a large-n
              cross-sectional time-series analysis of sub national policy choice. Focusing
              upon variations both in the level and type of subnational development policy,
              the research  enhances our understanding of the ways in which institutional
              context shapes policy choices among policy alternatives. The Ph.D. student
              draws on a variety of types of evidence, including interviews with elected
              officials, political party leaders, ministry bureaucrats, domestic
              industrialists, 
labor union officials, leaders of industrial associations,
              and foreign investors; surveys of industrial development offices and private
              sector development organizations; examination of legislative records; and
              measures of institutional factors, including 
executive power, legislative
              professionalism, the competitive balance of the party system, and labor and
              business strength. Using these types of information, the study explores the
              factors guiding developmental policy choice on the basis of a comparative
              analysis of state-level politics in India and Mexico. 

By bridging the gap
              separating the study of development efforts that rely upon the statist
              promotional policies from those emphasizing market-oriented policies of
              deregulation, the current study  contributes to theoretical work on the
              
political economy of development, enhances our understanding of subnational
              politics in emerging market nations, and establishes a stronger theoretical
              basis for understanding the ways in which variations in institutional context
              shape choices among development strategies. 
0135674 

