Title       : Electron Propagator Theory and Anion Electronic Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a0135823

Award Number: 0135823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. V. Ortiz ortiz@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5922,9150,9162,9179,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of
              the Chemistry Division and the Americas Program in the Division of
              International Programs, Ortiz will interpret experimental results on several
              types of unusual anions using new quantum mechanical methodology.  This
              research effort combines the development of a new generation of electronic
              structure methods for theoretical modeling of electron attachment and
              detachment processes with calculations that aim at testing these approaches and
              at investigating chemical species of practical interest.  The computer codes
              developed will be used to address a wide range of chemical species, including
              "double Rydberg" anions, zwitterions, dianions, polyanions, and metal oxide
              clusters.  Study of these chemical systems requires the implementation and use
              of new electron propagator methods that can treat electron correlation in
              anionic states as well as large orbital relaxation effects that accompany
              electron detachment.  Quasiparticle self-consistent-field methods extend
              current techniques and satisfy the demands of the systems under study.  They
              also offer an alternative one-electron picture of electronic structure that is
              complementary to that provided by previously implemented theories.  This
              project involves a collaboration with Ana Martinez and her coworkers at UNAM in
              Mexico City.

The proposed research involves the development of new and
              improved algorithms for calculating ionization potentials and electron
              affinities.  The challenge to theory is not simply to reproduce a few measured
              experimental data, but rather to develop a theoretical model that is consistent
              with known data and capable of predicting consequences subject to subsequent
              measurement.  The propagator method used here, especially in the novel context
              of a quantitative independent-particle model, is admirably suited to the
              development of insight and understanding.  The resulting new formalisms
              developed in this project hold promise for enhanced accuracy, improved
              computational performance, and more straightforward interpretation of the
              computed data.  These methods will be applied to several systems of current
              experimental interest and will be available to the public for general use.  The
              students who will travel and work with the foreign collaborators in Mexico will
              gain experience with international collaboration that will enhance their
              scientific and educational training.

