Title       : Conflict Of Interest: Performance-Based Fire Safety Design and Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0135945

Award Number: 0135945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87440              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent Brannigan firelaw@wam.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Advances in engineering and scientific knowledge have generated a shift to
              "performance" codes, in which the building design is expected to satisfy broad
              social safety goals, rather than comply with "prescriptive" requirements. This
              project addresses conflict of interest that arises when performance codes
              address intrinsic hazards such as fire instead of extrinsic hazards such as
              earthquakes. In designing for intrinsic hazards, the same professional is both
              defining the hazard and designing the solution. Because these hazards are
              factually and technically very complex, there is no easy way to make sure that
              the social safety goals will be maintained. The regulatory systems adopted in
              fire engineering aggravate the problem by providing for piecemeal regulation of
              design objectives instead of an overall evaluation by regulators of the safety
              of the project. The multi disciplinary project proposes a careful examination
              of methods used in structural engineering to mitigate conflicts of interest and
              the evaluation of such methods for use in fire engineering. The methodology to
              be used is Regulatory Effectiveness analysis, a qualitative technique for
              comparing the Public policy, legal structure and technical tools in a technical
              regulatory program. Candidates for dealing with the conflict include regulatory
              responses; technological responses; sensitivity analysis and model
              verification; limiting analysis to technological factors; required Publication
              and disclosure or the utilization of other disciplines. 

