Title       : MCAA: Molecular Markers to Assess the Relative Importance of Sexual and Natural
               Selection in the Evolution of Paternal Care
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0135412

Award Number: 0135412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59259              (Estimated)
Investigator: Colette M. St. Mary stmary@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              MCAA: MOLECULAR MARKERS TO ASSESS THE RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF 
SEXUAL AND
              NATURAL SELECTION IN THE EVOLUTION OF PATERNAL CARE
COLETTE M. ST. MARY

Lay
              Summary


Life-history traits are potentially under both natural and sexual
              selection.  In systems with male parental care (exemplified by fishes and
              birds), benefits to males and females can accrue via both natural and sexual
              selection.  That is, care can increase offspring survivorship or quality (i.e.,
              via natural selection), and also increase mate attraction resulting from female
              preferences for paternal investment (i.e., via sexual selection).  Indeed, it
              is conceivable that care may first evolve in response to sexual and not natural
              selection under some circumstances.  If this is the case, then parental
              behavior and mating preferences should coevolve in a sexually selected process.
               Life history theory is focused on the role of natural selection and therefore,
              the integration of sexual selection should provide significant new
              understanding of life-history evolution.  My long-term research plan is to
              develop and formalize this hypothesis and to initiate a program to evaluate it
              experimentally.
This work is part of an international collaboration with Dr.
              Kai Lindstrom, University of Helsinki, and a local collaboration with Dr. Joel
              Trexler, Florida International University.  Dr. Lindstrom and I have recently
              recognized the Florida flagfish, Jordanella floridae, as an ideal species in
              which to explore the evolution of paternal care and the relative importance of
              natural and sexual selection and have been working together to pursue these
              ideas.  Dr. Trexler is involved in complementary work focused on life history
              variation and population genetic structure in Everglades populations of
              flagfish.
We recognize that the use of molecular markers, microsatellites
              (short repeat sequences of DNA) in particular, will greatly enhance our
              research program.  Indeed, the development of these markers will enable us to
              estimate the heritability of male traits (care behavior and secondary sexual
              characteristics), and therefore understand their potential to evolve. 
              Furthermore, we can use these markers to evaluate the population genetic
              structure of flagfish.  The essence of this career advancement proposal is to
              train members of my lab (myself, a technician, and an undergraduate) in the
              isolation and development of variable microsatellite markers for flagfish and
              then to use those markers to estimate the heritability of male traits and to
              ascertain that the markers will also be useful in future studies of population
              genetic structure.
This training will not only improve the probability of
              funding in the near term but will also enhance the quality of my future studies
              of natural and sexual selection in the evolution of life history by enabling me
              to use new approaches.  Enriched with this new tool, my long-term,
              collaborative research program will provide new understanding of the
              distribution of parental care and the factors influencing its evolution. 
              




