Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Core-Periphery Delineations in the
               Late-Prehistoric Greater Antilles: A Jamaican Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a0135324

Award Number: 0135324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Dillehay dilleha@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Ms. Betty Jo Stokes, under the direction of Dr. Tom D. Dillehay, will conduct an
              archaeological investigation to gather data for completion of her doctoral
              dissertation at the University of Kentucky. She will complete an archaeological
              survey in the White and Rio Nuevo River valleys on the island of Jamaica to
              determine the historical relationship between the prehistoric Native American
              groups (Taino) of the island compared to those found on other islands in the
              Greater Antilles. Differences in the social organization of the Taino people at
              the end of the 15th century A.D. on these islands has been oversimplified
              identifying some islands, such as Jamaica, as less culturally developed than
              others prior to European contact. Currently, Taino groups are labeled as either
              part of the cultural "core" of the Taino world as on Puerto Rico island where
              many of the characteristics of that culture are well understood and easily
              recognized or as a part of the cultural "periphery" where groups are often
              considered less developed. Jamaica is currently considered part of the Taino
              periphery, but that designation has been based on very little concrete
              evidence, and in fact, the historical accounts written by the first Spanish
              explorers into this region refutes this. Using the Jamaican Taino as a test
              case, this project seeks to provide a systematic study in one area of the Taino
              world where the identification of what constitutes a "core" region and what
              constitutes a "periphery" is unclear in order to elucidate the key factors
              involved in identifying core versus periphery culture areas. This study
              compliments other archaeological studies that have expanded the uses of
              core-periphery analysis beyond modern global interactions as used for social
              geographical analysis to draw out relationships in the prehistoric world.

By
              collecting data through an archaeological survey, various aspects of Jamaican
              Taino political, religious, and economic life can be identified and combined
              with existing historical information to directly address the nature of the
              social organization of Jamaican Taino. This project will clarify the culture
              history and cultural identity of the indigenous peoples once inhabiting this
              area. Additionally, it will give an indication how tribal chiefdom societies
              are maintained and developed, highlight how island landscapes can be used as
              productive cultural features, and provide a case example for comparison to
              other tribal chiefdoms around the world. 

This research is also important
              because it will help shed new light on the historical social context in which
              Europeans, and consequently African peoples, encountered the New World. The
              culture of the Taino was abruptly abbreviated by the introduction of European
              people into the Caribbean. However, remnants of this culture can still be found
              in modern Jamaican traditions and identity. This project seeks to recognize and
              embrace these components by providing an understanding of how Jamaican Taino
              fits into the broader social context of the pre-contact Caribbean and, thereby,
              a more accurate and complete picture of Jamaican history. It will also
              contribute to training a promising young scientist.

