Title       : Dissertation Research: Visualization and Representation in Magnetic Resonance
               Imaging (MRI): A Cross-Cultural Comparison of Scientific Research in the United
               States and India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0135300

Award Number: 0135300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew R. Pickering pickerin@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the last thirty years medical practice has undergone a profound technological
              change. Imaging technologies like MRI that emerged in this period are shifting
              medicine's vision to a domain in which the body seems to have lost its
              materiality and become a visual medium (Balsamo 1996). Apart from offering vast
              diagnostic possibilities, medical imaging technologies like MRI are also
              radically reconfiguring the human body and contributing to new enunciations of
              individual and social selves. This dissertation research grant attempts to
              contextualize this new visuality by analyzing the socio-economic and technical
              contexts of the development of MRI.  The study has two purposes. First, through
              a comparative cross-cultural study to highlight the social/cultural factors
              contributing to the making of this new digitalized visibility, the project will
              attempt to uncover the socio-technical network within which visualization by
              technologies like MRI is located and continues to develop.  Further, the
              project will attempt to show in what ways this computer-based visualization is
              re-mapping spaces and bodies in different societies in the present era of
              globalization. Second, MRI research since its birth in the 1970s has been
              located at the interface of different disciplines, institutions, and nations.
              The transnational cooperation has been further accelerated with the recent
              development of information/communication technologies. Yet these cooperations
              are not unhindered flows of information and technology. They are embedded in
              the social, political, and economic interests of nations, education/research
              institutions, multinational companies, and individuals. This study seeks to use
              MRI as a case study to explore the nature of interaction and exchange of a
              non-western country with the west in the development of sophisticated
              technologies.  Funding for this project supports research at two laboratories,
              one in the US and the other in India. The research at these laboratories will
              entail combining the "thick description" of the laboratory work through
              participant observation, and interviews of scientists with textual analysis of
              scientific papers, policy documents, lay articles, biographical, and
              autobiographical notes.

