Title       : Analyzing the Concept of Mental Disorder
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0135565

Award Number: 0135565
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Ross   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : P, Ross
	      4232 17th Avenue South
	      Minneapolis, MN  554073320    612/721-0154

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT
SES 0135565
Patricia Ross, Analyzing the Concept of Mental
              Disorder

This project is a philosophical examination of a very important
              concept in abnormal psychology and psychiatry -- that of a  mental disorder.  
              There is little agreement, in theory or practice, as to exactly what a mental
              disorder is. This is due, in large part, to fundamental disagreements about the
              basic concept of a disorder.  These disagreements about the nature of disorder
              are, in turn, based on differing positions on key issues in our general
              understanding of science: reductive explanation, objectivity and values, and
              functional accounts of behavior.

This project has three  objectives. The
              first is to provide a general taxonomy of the various recent accounts of
              disorder. This taxonomy is not limited to mental disorders, but includes
              accounts of physical disease, which are needed for a thorough understanding of
              mental disorder. Special attention is paid to the fundamental assumptions,
              sometimes unstated, that motivate the accounts. These involve such issues as
              the common, but mistaken, assumption that any fully acceptable account of
              disorder will involve a reduction to a purely physiological basis, and the
              question of whether scientific objectivity is possible in a domain that appears
              to contain an unavoidable inclusion of value-laden concepts. 

This leads to
              the second objective, an analysis of the special problems surrounding the
              concept of a mental disorder. Some of these problems are inherited from
              accounts of physical disease. Perhaps the most important of these is the status
              of functional accounts of disorder, for such functional accounts are among the
              most promising current candidates. But even within the context of functional
              accounts there are challenges peculiar to an adequate account of mental
              disorder, for it has not so far been clear how the function of the mental can
              be characterized without importing some values that undermine the objectivity
              of the account. 

The third objective is to point the way to an adequate
              functional account of mental disorder that can avoid the general criticisms
              leveled against such accounts. This is done by establishing a central role for
              empirical psychology in characterizing the goals and functions of the mental.
              This is coupled to reevaluations of the role of reduction in science and the
              way in which scientific objectivity need not be undermined by the appearance of
              values in the account. 

The project puts some standard philosophical issues
              (reduction, objectivity, functionalism) in a new context, thereby acting as a
              testing ground for recent treatments of them. It also points the way out of a
              current stalemate in psychology and psychiatry, a stalemate that is due, in
              large part, to unnecessary allegiances to outmoded ideas about what an adequate
              account of disorder must look like.

