Title       : Informatics of Human and Monkey Brain Atlases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0135396

Award Number: 0135396
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Koslow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NIH
	      6001 Executive Blvd.
	      Bethesda, MD  208929613    /   -

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1332,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jones, Edward G.
0135396

This Human Brain Project will extend our previous
              efforts in developing an information system that can store, manipulate and
              retrieve large datasets compiled by the collaborating investigators. The
              project is built around and designed to manage data obtained from high
              resolution human and monkey brain atlases, molecular and cellular mapping
              studies, morphometry and physiology of retinal and thalamic cells, and studies
              of brain connections. There is an Administrative Core responsible for
              oversight, evaluation and dissemination and 4 Research Projects that will
              collect data and interact in visualization and databasing. Project 1 will
              design and integrate informational methods that integrate graphical and
              non-graphical datasets derived from Projects 2-4 and, using the lateral
              geniculate nucleus as a model, will develop software tools for building and
              maintaining neuroscience specific databases, for linking the diverse
              information sets derived from Projects 2--4 to one another, and for network
              retrieval and interchange of information from these and other neuroscience
              datasets. Project 2 will use computer assisted microscopy to build high
              resolution digital atlases of human and monkey brains, extending
              cytoarchitecture to quantify neuronal populations in the major nuclei of the
              thalamus (including in normal, schizophrenic and manic depressive human
              brains), and their profile of receptors and chemically defined cells and
              afferent fiber systems. This project incorporates a strong Visualization
              Component made up of computer scientists who have expertise in storage,
              manipulation and display of large datasets. It will populate a central
              NeuroImage Repository and, working in close conjunction with the other
              projects, will develop software tools for manipulating, graphically displaying
              and browsing the high resolution histological and neurochemical brain atlases,
              starting with the lateral geniculate database, and for distributing simplified
              images using Internet methodologies. Project 3 will expand a database of
              retinal cells characterized by morphology, chemistry, physiology and
              connectivity that provides the model for, and input to the lateral geniculate
              database. Project 4 will develop a database of monkey visual thalamo- and
              cortico-cortical connections for integration with the lateral geniculate
              database, using a newly developed pulvinar database as a model.


