Title       : Biocomplexity: Collaborative Research: Oceanic N2 Fixation and Global Climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0323332

Award Number: 0323332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232339             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott C. Doney doney@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1366,1389,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Oceanic N2 fixation has recently been identified as a significant part of the
              oceanic nitrogen (N) cycle and may directly influence the sequestration of
              atmospheric C02 in the oceans by providing a new source of N to the upper water
              column. The prokaryotic microorganisms that convert N2 gas to reactive N are an
              unique subcomponent of planktonic ecosystems and exhibit a variety of complex
              dynamics including the formation of microbial consortia and symbioses and, at
              times, massive blooms. Accumulating evidence indicates that iron (Fe)
              availability may be a key controlling factor for these planktonic marine
              diazotrophs. The primary pathway of Fe delivery to the upper oceans is through
              dust deposition.

N2 fixers may therefore be directly involved in global
              feedbacks with the climate system and these feedbacks may also exhibit complex
              dynamics on many different time?scales. The hypothesized feedback mechanisms
              will have the following component parts: The rate Of N2 fixation in the world's
              oceans can have an impact on the concentration of the greenhouse gas, carbon
              dioxide (C02), in the atmosphere on time?scales of decades (variability in
              surface biogeochemistry) to millennia (changes in the total N03 ? stock from
              the balance of N2 fixation and denitrification). C02 concentrations in the
              atmosphere influence the climate. The climate system, in turn, can influence
              the rate Of N2 fixation in the oceans by controlling the supply of Fe on dust
              and by influencing the stratification of the upper ocean. Humans also have a
              direct role in the current manifestation of this feedback cycle by their
              influence on dust production, through agriculture at the margins of deserts,
              and by our own production Of C02 into the atmosphere. The circular nature of
              these influences can lead to a feedback system, particularly on longer
              timescales.

This project involves studying each of the components of this
              system and then modeling the hypothesized feedback processes. Because of the
              interaction of the various parts of this system, keyed around the unique
              behavior and biogeochemistry of the prokaryotic microorganisms that can fix N2,
              this feedback loop should exhibit complex behaviors on a variety of
              time?scales. The research will be conducted through a targeted series of
              experiments and field observations to understand and parameterize each of the
              pieces of this global process including the direct control of marine N2
              fixation by dust deposition. This understanding will then feed a modeling
              process that examines the complex dynamics of this system on time?scales of
              years to millennia. The modeling process will be evaluated by comparison with
              data on the time?dependent behavior of ocean biogeochemistry as available from
              ocean time?series studies and sediment cores.

