Title       : SGER: Recognition of a New Brown Algal Order with Resolution of the Taxonomic
               Position of Punctaria Glacialis Rosenvinge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0323015

Award Number: 0323015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51293              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Wilce rwilce@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	In this Small Grant for Exploratory Research, Dr. Robert Wilce of the
              University of Massachusetts will work with his Canadian colleague Dr. Gary
              Saunders of the University of New Brunswick to study the ecology, life history,
              and reproduction of two enigmatic brown algae of high arctic waters. Currently
              known as Punctaria glacialis and Platysiphon verticillatus, these benthic
              browns of the sublittoral occur in scattered locations in the high arctic, and
              will be sampled from known localities on Baffin Island. Reproduction and
              complete life history stages are not known for them, but preliminary evidence
              from Wilce's prior work suggests that the algae form endosporic gametophytes
              which grow very slowly under the ice over the long winter season, giving rise
              to filamentous microthalli either directly or perhaps through small motile
              cells (these however not observed). No currently recognized family of browns
              would accommodate such a strange life history, and reclassification may prove
              warranted. Material will be collected to initiate cultures in the laboratory to
              follow reproductive stages, to provide sections for electron microscopy of
              cellular details, and to extract DNA for sequencing of nuclear and plastid
              genes for phylogenetic comparison with other brown algae.
	Support will also
              be provided to graduate student Christopher Lane to work in Prof. Wilce's
              laboratory learning culturing and EM techniques, while continuing his molecular
              phylogenetic studies of brown algae with Prof. Saunders. 

