Title       : Workshop: Human-Computer Interaction Doctoral Research Consortium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0323991

Award Number: 0323991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Olson gmo@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is funding to support this year's HCI doctoral research consortium
              (workshop) of approximately 14 promising doctoral students from the United
              States and abroad, along with distinguished research faculty.  The event will
              take place in conjunction with the ACM 2003 Conference on Human Factors in
              Computing Systems (CHI 2003), to be held April 5-10 in Fort Lauderdale,
              Florida, and sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's Special
              Interest Group on Human Computer Interaction (SIGCHI).  Goals of the workshop
              include building a cohort group of new researchers who will then have a network
              of colleagues spread out across the world, guiding the work of new researchers
              by having experts in the research field give them advice, and making it
              possible for promising new entrants to the field to attend their research
              conference.  Student participants will make formal presentations of their work
              during the workshop, and will receive feedback from the faculty panel.  The
              feedback is geared to helping students understand and articulate how their work
              is positioned relative to other human-computer interaction research, whether
              their topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
              methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
              appropriately analyzed and presented.  Student participants will present their
              work to the doctoral consortium on April 6-7, with follow up activities to be
              held during the technical program of the CHI 2003 conference.  Extended
              abstracts of the students' work will be published in the CHI 2003 Extended
              Abstracts, which has wide print and electronic distribution.  SIGCHI's
              conference management committee will evaluate the doctoral consortium, and the
              results made available to the organizers of future consortia.  The CHI doctoral
              consortia, which began in 1986, have been highly successful in providing a
              forum for the initial socialization into the field of young doctoral scholars,
              and many of today's leading HCI researchers participated as students in earlier
              consortia. 

Broader Impacts:  The annual CHI doctoral consortia
              traditionally bring together the best of the next generation of HCI
              researchers, allowing them to create a social network both among themselves and
              with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional development. 
              Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across a variety of
              dimensions, including nationality/cultural and scientific discipline, the
              students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the field.

