Title       : Molecular Modeling of Environmentally Benign Solute-Solvent Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0319062

Award Number: 0319062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99076              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clare M. McCabe cmccabe@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9223,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              McCabe, Clare M
Colorado School of Mines

"Molecular Modeling of
              Environmentally Benign Solute-Solvent Systems" 
  
As current solvents have
              become banned or discouraged from use, solvent replacement - i.e., replacing a
              hazardous and/or carcinogenic solvent in reaction, separation, and
              dissolution/cleaning operations with an environmentally acceptable one - is one
              of the key methods for turning an existing process into an environmentally
              benign one. In the pursuit of environmentally benign processes, the application
              of neoteric solvents, including supercritical carbon dioxide and ionic liquids,
              show enormous potential for industrial application and it is these fluids that
              we focus our proposed research on.

The future focus on the design of
              environmentally benign processes - whether achieved by solvent replacement or
              by the development of fundamentally new environmentally benign chemical
              processes - parallels a crucial emerging need for an accurate comprehensive
              methodology for calculating the thermodynamic properties (especially phase
              equilibria) of mixtures containing novel solvents at operating conditions
              relevant to the application of these solvents. For the wide range of conditions
              and systems expected to be encountered in environmentally benign processes, the
              method for predicting thermodynamic properties (including phase equilibria)
              should be robust, rapid and versatile. The PI proposes to address this need by
              undertaking a sustained research program whose goal is to apply molecular
              theory and simulation to the development, modification and deployment of a
              predictive molecular-based methodology based on the molecular-level statistical
              associating fluid theory (SAFT) integrated with other molecular modeling
              techniques. The PI believes that the resulting methodology will be the modeling
              platform of choice for the design of environmentally benign processes. A
              combination of theoretical developments to enhance the predictive capabilities
              of SAFT in key areas relevant to EB systems - ab initio methods to facilitate
              potential model development and testing, and computer simulations to provide
              both a rigorous test of the theory and aid in potential model development -
              will enable a true predictive platform to be realized. In pursuit of this goal
              two broad application areas relevant to EB processes will be the long-term
              focus of the PI's research activities. The first area is the accurate modeling
              of polar polymer-solvent, and co-polymer-solvent systems through the
              incorporation of the underlying molecular interactions in these systems into
              the theoretical approach. Secondly the PI will concentrate efforts on
              developing much need models and molecular theory for describing the
              thermodynamic properties of ionic liquids and their mixtures. In this proposal,
              the PI will focus on the first of these two areas.

The proposed research is
              the first step towards achieving the PI's long-term goals. The lessons learned
              from this project will facilitate similar advances in other application areas.
              Strong ties with industry and experimental groups will be maintained throughout
              the project which will provide students with the opportunity to experience both
              the theoretical and experimental sides of research, a means to validate our
              methods and models, and provide guidance towards key problems faced by industry
              in adopting environmentally benign alternatives to existing, and new processes.
              

The results of this research will be incorporated into an
              active-learning-based molecular modeling course, under development by the PI.
              The course will be suitable for both graduates and undergraduate students,
              which will ensure that students at CSM will be exposed to and participate in
              the frontiers of molecular modeling and the molecular thermodynamics of EB
              processes. Undergraduate participation in the project will be strongly
              encouraged through research projects and women and minorities actively
              recruited through the PI's participation in the Science Related Degrees project
              at CSM, which offers mentored research projects for undergraduate students in
              these underrepresented groups.


