Title       : Analytical-Experimental Approach to Verified Cohesive Zone Fracture Models in
               Engineering Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0319038

Award Number: 0319038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83911              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sunil Saigal saigal@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,9231,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: CMS-9820912
PI: S. Saigal
Carnegie Mellon University

Title:
              Analytical-Experimental Approach to Verified Cohesive Zone
Fracture Models in
              Engineering Applications

Abstract: The chipping of coatings is studied using
              the cohesive 
zonebased cohesive finite elements formulation. An integrated
              
analytical/experimental/numerical approach is followed. The cohesive 
zone
              models are postulated to include irreversibility, rate-dependence, 
and the
              effect of environmental factors. These postulations are both 
guided by and
              validated by a set of experiments designed to highlight 
various phenomenon
              occurring in the fracture of materials systems. The 
developments are applied
              to the industrial application of chipping of 
paint systems. For this
              application, multiple, interacting cracks 
propagating along unknown
              trajectories need to be accounted for. The 
cohesive finite elements approach
              provides a natural vehicle for such 
cracks. Additional applications of
              cohesive elements include layered 
constructions found in numerous engineering
              applications such as 
composites, laminated sheets, coated metal, and
              microelectronic 
devices. The proposed research is carried out in close
              cooperation with 
the DuPont Company. The experiments for validation as well
              as for the 
industrial application are carried out at DuPont.  The cohesive
              models 
are developed under the guidance of DuPont researchers to ensure that
              
these elements have full industry validity. The project serves as a 
unique
              training mechanism for graduate students, introducing them to
              
university-industry interactions as well as to the effectiveness of
              
combined analytical/numerical/experimental approaches in solving 
real-world
              problems.





