Title       : Genetic Transmission in Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1992        
File        : a9006984

Award Number: 9006984
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Clegg michael.clegg@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The factors that control genetic transmission in populations              
              determine the course of evolutionary change.  This research                    
              project is concerned with the transmission of a series of genes                
              that control flower color variants in the common morning glory.                
              The project is also concerned with the molecular events that                   
              produce different flower color types.  Previous work has shown                 
              that several ecological factors interact with morning glory                    
              reproductive biology to cause the differential transmission of                 
              white and pigmented color variants.  Counter balancing these                   
              selective forces are high rates of mutation at the gene loci                   
              that determine white color.  Dr. Clegg has shown that these high               
              mutation rates are most probably the result of transposable                    
              elements that disrupt gene function at the white locus.                        
                   The proposed work seeks to further investigate the molecular              
              bases of flower color variation.  To accomplish this goal the                  
              investigators have begun a molecular analysis of variation at the              
              locus that encodes CHS, a key enzyme in pigment biosynthesis.                  
              Earlier work indicates that the white type is the result of a                  
              mutation at the CHS locus.  Several copies of the CHS gene have                
              been cloned using the methods of recombinant DNA technology.  Dr.              
              Clegg now seeks to build on this foundation through genetic and                
              molecular analyses.                                                            
                   The proposed research should fill in a void in basic                      
              knowledge of the dynamics of gene transfer.  From an applied                   
              agricultural perspective, it is important to have a detailed                   
              understanding of the nature of mutational diversity in plant                   
              species.  The proposed work will contribute to this understanding              
              by characterizing the nature of molecular diversity in plant                   
              genes.***
