Title       : "The Role of the Oxide Support in Supported Vanadium Oxide Catalyst"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1992   
File        : a9006258

Award Number: 9006258
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Israel E. Wachs iew0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to determine the origin of                    
              the support effect for supported vanadium oxide catalysts.                     
              Deposition of a two-dimensional vanadium-oxide overlayer on                    
              various oxide supports dramatically affects the reducibility,                  
              catalytic activity, and selectivity of the resultant surface                   
              phases.  The cause of this is not understood; possibilities                    
              include structural changes in the surface overlayer and                        
              electronic effects of the oxide support ligands.  Molecular                    
              structures of the surface vanadium-oxide overlayers are                        
              determined with a combination of laser Raman spectroscopy and                  
              solid-state vanadium-51 nuclear magnetic resonance.  Oxide                     
              supports chosen for this work are silica, niobia, zirconia,                    
              and magnesia; these display a wide range of acidity/basicity,                  
              electronegativity, and potential for ligand effects.  The                      
              reactivity of the catalysts is probed by temperature-                          
              programmed reduction and the structure-sensitive methanol                      
              oxidation reaction.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The improved understanding of this system should lead to                       
              better control and design of vanadia catalysts and of reactor                  
              systems employing such catalysts, or in which they may be                      
              formed inadvertently.  Such systems are receiving great                        
              attention as the method of choice for removal of nitrogen                      
              oxides (precursors of acid rain) from stationary sources.                      
              Other relevant processes include production of monomers for                    
              condensation polymers (polyesters, polyamides, etc.) synthetic                 
              sugars, and cracking and hydrotreating of petroleum.
