Title       : EcoRI Structure and Function Assessed Through Site Directed Mutagenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1990     
File        : a9006624

Award Number: 9006624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert W. Boyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The major long term objective of this research is to understand                
              the detailed molecular mechanisms by which proteins discriminate               
              and interact with specific DNA sequences.  This problem is being               
              approached through a detailed structural and functional analysis               
              of the restriction endonuclease, EcoRI.  Collaboration is taking               
              place with John Rosenberg, U. of Pittsburgh, who has                           
              determined the structure of the EcoRI-DNA complex to 3A                        
              resolution.  The primary aim of this proposal is a mutational                  
              analysis of EcoRI.  The investigation concerns the contribution                
              of individual amino acids in sequence discrimination and                       
              catalysis.  Hydrogen bonds between the endonuclease and the major              
              groove of the DNA and ionic contacts with the phosphodiester                   
              backbone are critical  components of these functions.  Structural              
              models will be used to target for mutagenesis those amino acids                
              which appear to be involved in these interactions.  Altered                    
              proteins will be generated by cassette mutagenesis and mismatch                
              oligonucleotide mutagenesis. A vector system has been developed                
              so that mutants of this potentially lethal enzyme can be                       
              recovered and screened for altered phenotype.  The most                        
              interesting mutant enzymes will be purified and characterized in               
              order to determine the effects of individual amino acid                        
              substitutions on structure and on various functional parameters.               
              Selected mutants will be subjected to reversion analysis.                      
              Crystallographic analysis of mutants will be carried out by                    
              Rosenberg.
