Title       : Atomic-Scale Structure of DX Centers in Gallium-Aluminum- Arsenide
               Semiconducting Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1994      
File        : a9006956

Award Number: 9006956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Hayes thayes@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The goal of the research is to perform a systematic study of              
              the deep level defects in compound semiconductors known as "DX                 
              Centers".  The thrust of the research is to determine the atomic               
              nature of the defects and to obtain information on the local                   
              electronic nature, so as to formulate a detailed microscopic                   
              model.  X-ray absorption spectroscopy and Mossbauer effect                     
              spectroscopy are used to study gallium aluminum arsenide doped to              
              various levels with tin and tellurium so as to produce shallow                 
              donor states, neutral "DX Centers" and ionized "DX Centers".                   
              High quality, single crystal gallium aluminum arsenide are being               
              prepared by metallorganic chemical vapor deposition at the                     
              Laboratory for Solid State Physics and Solar Energy in Valbonne,               
              France.  The electrical behavior of the materials is                           
              characterized using Hall effect measurements.  Photoemission,                  
              quantitative Auger electron spectroscopy and secondary ion mass                
              spectroscopy are used to characterize the chemical composition                 
              and doping levels.                                                             
                                                                                             
                   The development of many promising devices using gallium                   
              aluminum arsenide compound semiconductors has been impeded                     
              substantially by difficulties in producing highly-conductive                   
              wide-band gap materials.  Dopants that are commonly used cause                 
              deep level "DX Center" defects which are associated with                       
              deleterious properties such as persistent photoluminescence,                   
              reduced minority carrier lifetimes and recombination                           
              efficiencies.
