Title       : Reproductive Behavior of Polyphemus Limulus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9006392

Award Number: 9006392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207527             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Jane Brockmann hjb@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Every spring large numbers of horseshoe crabs migrate to beaches               
              along the Atlantic coast.  Females, with males attached, bury in               
              the sand, laying eggs which the male fertilizes externally.                    
              Unattached males aggregate around nesting pairs and evidence                   
              suggests that they also fertilize eggs.  The proposed field study              
              will characterize the unusual reproductive behavior of this                    
              species.  The proportion of offspring fathered by attached and                 
              unattached males will be determined using DNA fingerprinting.                  
              Descriptive observations, measurements of marked populations and               
              experimental manipulations will quantify nesting and mating                    
              behavior, and differences between populations. Limulus is unique.              
              The Xiphosurida are the only extant arthropods with the primitive              
              pattern of external fertilization and aquatic, free-swimming                   
              sperm.  A study of their breeding will provide insight into the                
              ancestors of modern arthropods.  Furthermore, although Limulus is              
              one of the best-studied species on the planet, little is known                 
              about their reproduction.  This field study will provide a                     
              valuable context for, and will take advantage of, research on                  
              other aspects of their biology.  Finally, because of their                     
              synchronized, semi-lunar breeding and external fertilization,                  
              Limulus mating shows profound similarities to explosively                      
              breeding amphibians.  Therefore, the study of Limulus may provide              
              an independent test of theories on the evolution of mating                     
              systems.
