Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Electrochemical Profiler/Photovoltage
               Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9006989

Award Number: 9006989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary W. Wicks wicks@optics.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis G. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan N. Houde-Walter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The requested electrochemical                                                  
              profiler/photovoltage spectroscopy                                             
              unit brings new capabilities to the                                            
              recently established optoelectronics                                           
              facility at the Institute of Optics,                                           
              for epitaxial growth,                                                          
              characterization and fabrication of                                            
              III-V heterstructure optoelectronics                                           
              devices.  The profile/photovoltage                                             
              instrumentation is required for many                                           
              aspects of an extensive research                                               
              program that includes the                                                      
              investigation of quantum well lasers                                           
              and modulators grown on (111)                                                  
              substrates (for low threshold and                                              
              higher modulation frequency lasers,                                            
              and larger electro-optic effect),                                              
              quantum well lasers with doped                                                 
              active regions (for higher gain),                                              
              novel circularly symmetric surface                                             
              emitting laser structures,                                                     
              pseudomorphic GaInAs quantum well                                              
              lasers (for lasing in the wavelength                                           
              range of 860 to 110 nm., a region                                              
              previously inaccessible to high                                                
              efficiency diode lasers), quantum                                              
              well lasers structures with dry                                                
              etched facets (to enable integration                                           
              of diode lasers), fast electro-optic                                           
              modulators (for high speed phase and                                           
              intensity  modulation of light), an                                            
              innovative approach to the                                                     
              disordering of superlattices by                                                
              impurity diffusions (using applied                                             
              electric fields during annealing)                                              
              and the use of such selectively                                                
              disordered structures in planar                                                
              optical structures (lasers,                                                    
              waveguides, gratings electro-optic                                             
              modulators).  These research                                                   
              programs compliment the ongoing                                                
              effort in indirect bandgap                                                     
              semiconductors (isoelectronic                                                  
              impurity complexes in indirect                                                 
              bandgap semiconductors, low noise                                              
              avalanche photodiodes and nonlinear                                            
              optical interactions in silicon on                                             
              insulator structures), also at the                                             
              Institute of Optics.  The facility                                             
              for growth, characterization and                                               
              device fabrication of optoelectronic                                           
              III-V semiconductors presently                                                 
              includes a molecular beam epitaxy                                              
              machine, Raman, photoluminescence                                              
              and excitation spectroscopy,                                                   
              photolithography, chemically                                                   
              assisted ion beam etching and rapid                                            
              thermal annealing.  The                                                        
              electrochemical profiler and                                                   
              photovoltage spectroscopy unit will                                            
              be used to measure carrier                                                     
              concentration and bandgap profiles                                             
              in III-V and Si state of the art                                               
              optoelectronic materials and                                                   
              devices.
