Title       : Manual to the Plants of Costa Rica - Phase 2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9006449

Award Number: 9006449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364188             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry E. Hammel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael H. Grayum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
                   In collaboration with scientists of Costa Rica's National                 
              Biodiversity Institute, Drs. Barry Hammel and Michael Grayum of                
              the Missouri Botanical Garden are beginning the second phase of                
              an extensive inventory of the ca. 12,000 species of ferns,                     
              conifers, and flowering plants of that tropical country.  This                 
              second phase is transitional, with continued field collecting in               
              targeted regions throughout the country and with increasing                    
              development of computerized databases and of selected                          
              publications.  One eventual goal is a comprehensive                            
              identification guide, or manual, in both Spanish and English                   
              versions, to the plant resources of Costa Rica.                                
                   Training of host-country students to serve as field                       
              collectors and "parataxonomists" is a novel aspect of the                      
              enterprise; these individuals usually work in Costa Rica's                     
              extensive system of national parks and refuges, where they gain                
              first-hand knowledge of the flora and fauna.  Reciprocal visits                
              between U.S. and Costa Rican botanists, as well as visits by                   
              contributing European scientists, make this an international                   
              effort; the parallel exchange of herbarium specimens is helping                
              to develop Costa Rica's natural history collections.  The                      
              current taxonomic inventory and the resulting computer databases               
              will be of lasting utility to conservation and resource                        
              management interests, in a country with proven ability to put                  
              such information to effective use.  The Manual Project, in                     
              becoming fully integrated with and contributing significantly to               
              the development of Costa Rica's new Instituto Nacional de                      
              Biodiversidad, answers the need for urgency in collecting,                     
              maintaining and distributing biodiversity information.
