Title       : Theory of Electrical Activity and Insulin Release for the Pancreatic Beta-Cell
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9006104

Award Number: 9006104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter W. Arzberger                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364072             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel E. Keizer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
              The long-term objective of this project is to understand the                   
              molecular mechanisms that control secretion of insulin from the                
              pancreatic B-cell.  These mechanisms are complex, and quantitative             
              theoretical methods, including the kinetic-molecular theory of                 
              nonequilibrium thermodynamics, will be used to formulate the                   
              appropriate mathematical description.  Our approach is based on                
              experimental schemes of molecular processes involved in insulin                
              granule formation, Ca2+ handling, phosphorylation, and insulin                 
              granule exocytosis.  Translating these schemes into elementary                 
              processes, and thence into rate equations, we will explore the                 
              effect of the following mechanisms on rate of insulin release:                 
              1) Complex electrical activity of the plasma membrane related to               
              Ca2+ and pH;  2) electrical coupling between B-cells in islets;                
              3) Ca2+ handling mechanisms;  4) phospholipid-based biochemical                
              mechanisms involved in the control of insulin secretion.  These                
              mechanisms will be explored using mathematical analysis and                    
              computer simulations of the corresponding ordinary differential                
              equations.  Sufficient experimental information regarding the rates            
              of the processes is available to justify these calculations, which             
              will be interfaced closely with ongoing experimental work.  The                
              work will provide insight into the cellular-molecular mechanisms               
              involved in type II (noninsulin dependent) diabetes.  More                     
              generally, this work will help provide a basis for a theoretical               
              cell biology and cell physiology.  The complexity of the cell                  
              requires a good analytical foundation to complement experimental               
              studies in order to develop a good theoretical basis for                       
              understanding the mechanism of cellular function.
