Title       : Mathematical Sciences Research Equipment 1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1990     
File        : a9006043

Award Number: 9006043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: JANICE L ALEXANDER                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel M. Rankin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dalin Tang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mei-Hui Guo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Farr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederic Dias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This is a grant under the Scientific Computing Research                   
              Equipment for the Mathematical Sciences program of the Division                
              of Mathematical Sciences of the National Sciences Foundation.                  
              This program supports the purchase of special purpose computing                
              equipment dedicated to the conduct of research in the                          
              mathematical sciences.  This equipment is required for several                 
              research projects and would be difficult to justify for one                    
              project alone.  Support from the National Science Foundation is                
              coupled with discounts and contributions from manufacturers and                
              with substantial cost-sharing from the institutions submitting                 
              the proposal.  This program is an example of academic,                         
              corporate, and government cooperation in the support of the basic              
              research in the mathematical sciences.                                         
                   This equipment will be used to support four research                      
              projects in the Department of Mathematical Sciences of Worcester               
              Polytechnic Institute: numerical computation of free surface                   
              flows, the investigator is F. Dias; mathematical studies of                    
              peristaltic motions, the investigator is D. Tang; numerical                    
              normal form reduction for bifurcation with symmetry, the                       
              investigator is B. Farr; a bootstrap-like method for estimation                
              and prediction in nonlinear autoregressive models, the                         
              investigator is M. Guo.
