Title       : Household Archeology at Ceren, El Salvador
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1990       
File        : a9006482

Award Number: 9006482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94549              (Estimated)
Investigator: Payson Sheets sheetsp@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In ca. AD 600 a catastrophic eruption by the Laguna Caldera                    
              volcano in El Salvador completely buried a Mayan homestead and                 
              the fields which surrounded it.  Preliminary excavations at this               
              site of Ceren in 1978 indicated that the volcanic ash packed                   
              around and thoroughly preserved structures, wooden artifacts,                  
              trees, corn plants, a field with footprints, and human bodies.                 
              Subsequent geophysical prospection in 1979 confirmed the                       
              existence of intact houses which remain buried under five meters               
              of ash.  NSF funded research in 1989 revealed extremely well                   
              preserved remains.  Dr. Sheets and his colleagues will return to               
              this site and continue their extensive excavation.  Through                    
              judicious use of heavy equipment, a transect will be cut and                   
              overburden removed to allow easy hand excavation of features.                  
              Floral and faunal materials will be recovered and analyzed to                  
              reconstruct household subsistence, and expected skeletal                       
              materials will provide insight into family composition.  Field                 
              excavation will allow reconstruction of agricultural techniques.               
                                                                                             
              Ceren is unique, even in comparison to Old World sites such as                 
              Pompeii, because the volcanic ash matrix is so fine that it                    
              preserves organic materials down to the cellular level.  This                  
              virtually complete material culture record will allow for a                    
              detailed reconstruction of functioning households and important                
              insights to human behavior, demography, nutrition, agriculture,                
              and economics.  Anthropologists have come to realize that in many              
              societies the "household" - a group of individuals who live                    
              together in one place and closely cooperate on a daily basis -                 
              form an essential unit.  However, archaeologically households are              
              usually difficult to isolate and study.  At Ceren it appears that              
              just such a unit exists.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will shed a new and                      
              important light on the development of complex Mayan society and                
              help us to understand how complexity develops and is maintained.
