Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships within the Phocoid Pinniped Clade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9006535

Award Number: 9006535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64839              (Estimated)
Investigator: Annalisa Berta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Pinnipeds are an important group of marine mammals,                       
              comprising the walruses, sea lions, and seals.  Nevertheless,                  
              their evolutionary relationships to each other and to other                    
              mammals remain unclear.  Dr. Annalisa Berta is a vertebrate                    
              paleontologist studying the anatomy of fossil and living                       
              pinnipeds for the purpose of reconstructing their evolutionary                 
              history.  Her research also considers the functional capabilities              
              of fossilized species, providing unique insight into the                       
              evolution of behavior in the group, and its transformation from                
              terrestrial ancestors.  Dr. Berta proposes to continue her                     
              investigations into the evolutionary relationships among                       
              pinnipeds using morphological data from fossils.  The present                  
              project will focus on the phocids, a possible sister-group to the              
              walruses.  Cranial and post-cranial material from the Oligocene-               
              Miocene of coastal Oregon will be examined, and locomotor                      
              capabilities (principally forelimb versus hindlimb propulsion)                 
              estimated.  This project represents a logical extension of a                   
              previous award that supported study of the otarioid pinnipeds                  
              (walruses, sea lions, but not seals).                                          
                   The proposed research has implications for a wide scientific              
              audience.  Comparative anatomists and vertebrate zoologists will               
              welcome the new data derived from early Tertiary fossils, along                
              with new reconstructions of evolutionary relationships of major                
              mammalian groups.  Functional morphologists will look to this                  
              study for critical information on alternative adaptations to                   
              life in aquatic habitats.  Evolutionary biologists will integrate              
              these findings with recent results based on DNA sequence data,                 
              resulting in an unusually detailed understanding of this                       
              noteworthy group.
