Title       : Phylogeny of the Lamiales and Origin of the Labiatae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1990    
File        : a9006209

Award Number: 9006209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip D. Cantino   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Labiatae (mint family), one of the largest families of                
              flowering plants, is of considerable medical and commercial                    
              importance because of the aromatic oils (terpenoids) that occur                
              in the foliage of many species.  The ongoing search for useful                 
              plant products in this and other related families is greatly                   
              facilitated by an understanding of evolutionary relationships                  
              among the species.  A taxonomic classification that reflects                   
              evolutionary (that is, genealogical) history is likely to help                 
              researchers predict the occurrence of attributes (including                    
              useful chemical compounds) on the basis of the known distribution              
              of similar attributes elsewhere in the family.                                 
                   The current classification of the mint family is based                    
              heavily on work done over a century ago and is founded on the                  
              assumption that the family is a natural group that likely evolved              
              from a single source in the Verbenaceae (teak) family.  This                   
              long-standing premise is contradicted by recent research by Dr.                
              Philip Cantino at Ohio University, which suggests that the mints               
              have evolved from several different subgroups of the tropical                  
              Verbenaceae alliance.  A primary objective of the proposed                     
              research is to test this hypothesis using a computer analysis of               
              the distribution of a wide variety of morphological                            
              characteristics in both families, with special emphasis on new                 
              pollen data derived from light- and scanning electron microscopy.              
                                                                                             
              Integration of the pollen data with evidence from leaf, stem,                  
              flower, and fruit morphology will make it possible to resolve                  
              the evolutionary relationships among the major groups of genera                
              of Labiatae and Verbenaceae.  This will represent a major step                 
              toward a more predictive and useful classification of both                     
              families, which in turn will facilitate the search for new,                    
              terpenoid characters.
