Title       : Collaboration with scientists in the FSU and Support for Evergreen International
               Bacteriophage T4 Meeting, Evergreen State College, July 29-August 3, 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9006084

Award Number: 9006084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth M. Kutter kutterb@evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Burton S. Guttman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              We will continue on-going research on the conversion from host to              
              bacteriophage macromolecular synthesis after infection of E. coli              
              by phage T4.  Our work still centers on the alc gene, which                    
              directs the host RNA polymerase away from dC-DNA to the HMdC-DNA               
              of the phage, but also goes on to explore other aspects of the                 
              transition.  We will continue in-vivo studies of the interaction               
              of gpalc with the B subunit of RNA polymerase by using various                 
              polymerase mutants.  A major project will be purification of                   
              gpalc from clones carrying the gene.  The protein will then be                 
              used in several in vitro studies, including: (a) effects of                    
              purified gpalc on transcription of T7 DNA in vitro; (b) use of                 
              other templates to study the generality and specificity of                     
              alc-mediated inhibition; (c) interaction of gpalc with                         
              termination factors; (d) analysis of proteins bound to DNA or to               
              transcription complexes; (e) footprinting analysis of gpalc                    
              binding to DNA alone and in the presence of polymerase.  We will               
              continue our studies on the effects of gpalc on the host nucleoid              
              structure, using psoralen binding in vivo.  We will investigate                
              other phage-encoded proteins that may be involved in the                       
              transition from host to phage metabolism, particularly looking                 
              for alterations in the functional or chemical stability of host                
              messenger RNA and factors that change initiation factors or that               
              bind to host ribosomes, altering translational specificity.  By                
              cloning otherwise uncharacterized T4 immediate-early genes in                  
              tightly-regulated expression vectors, we will look for genes                   
              affecting host physiology.  We will continue to update the T4                  
              genomic map, to assemble T4 DNA sequences, and to host the                     
              semiannual international T4 meeting.
