Title       : Phenotypic, Genotypic, and Ecological Determinants of Reproductive Success in
               Natural Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1990      
File        : a9006589

Award Number: 9006589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter E. Smouse smouse@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Meagher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The genetic history and current structure of any population               
              can be represented in terms of its genealogy.  Genealogical                    
              analysis has become an increasingly important component of                     
              studies of mating behavior and genetic dispersal in natural                    
              populations and in the management of captive animal reproductive               
              performance of different genotypes, in examining the impact of                 
              parental imprinting on foraging behavior, or in measuring the                  
              effects of interactions among relatives on the inclusive fitness               
              of individuals.  Most such efforts to date have maternal descent               
              through chloroplast and mitochondria genomes, an approach that                 
              ignores paternal descent, a substantial part of the overall                    
              pedigree.  The investigators have developed an alternative                     
              approach that uses nuclear markers to make statistical inferences              
              about both maternal and paternal lineages.  Their strategy is to               
              employ enough genetic markers to exclude all but one make from                 
              consideration for each offspring.                                              
                   Previous work has shown, however, that a very large number                
              of polymorphic markers is required to assign paternity                         
              categorically for each and every offspring.  A strictly                        
              exclusionary solution to the problem of parentage assessment is                
              not attainable in many interesting applications.  The objective                
              is to develop statistical/genetic estimation procedures and then               
              to use them to analyze male reproductive contributions for                     
              Chamaelirium luteum and Silene alba.  More interesting than the                
              parentage spectrum are the phenotypic, genotypic, and ecological               
              determinants of reproductive contributions.  The investigators                 
              will develop statistical methods to elucidate such factors.
