Title       : Evolutionary Studies of Morphological Diversity in Salamander Limbs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1991  
File        : a9006800

Award Number: 9006800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil H. Shubin   (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Wake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The vertebrate limb arose approximately five hundred million              
              years ago from the fins of advanced fish.  Despite this enormous               
              amount of time, the evolution of the limbs of vertebrate animals               
              has been extremely regular--certain patterns frequently recur,                 
              other patterns are never encountered.  Many workers have suggested             
              that the mechanisms of development may limit the amount of                     
              evolutionary change possible in different species.  This proposal              
              focuses on the relationships between development and evolutionary              
              diversity in the most primitive living group of limbed                         
              animals--salamanders.    Comparative and experimental studies will             
              enlighten the extent to which the evolutionary history of the                  
              salamander limb has been limited by developmental mechanisms.  In              
              particular, the relationship between body size, the timing of key              
              developmental events, and evolutionary diversity will be analyzed.             
                   Comparative studies of developing and adult limbs will reveal             
              the regularities seen in the evolution of the pattern of bony                  
              elements of the hands and feet of salamanders.  Experimental                   
              studies will reveal the manner in which developmental mechanisms               
              are responsible for these regularities.  Many of the regularities              
              seen on limb evolution may be related to the size of the developing            
              embryo and larva.  Changes in body size are an important trend in              
              salamander evolution.  Body size will be experimentally manipulated            
              through both chemical and surgical treatments to explore the role              
              of body size and the pattern of bones in salamander limbs.  These              
              studies will elucidate the role of an important constraint, body               
              size, on salamander limb evolution.
