Title       : Equipment Grant: Symbolic Computing Equipment for NonlinearPlasma and
               Semiconductor Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1991  
File        : a9006977

Award Number: 9006977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10190              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Abraham-Shrauner bas@ee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1455,
Abstract    :
              This Research Equipment Grant will enable acquisition of a Macintosh           
              IIci computer and the program Mathematica as essential aides in the            
              Principal Investigator's research activities.  The research projects           
              encompass diverse topics which share two common attributes:  the               
              collective motion of charged particles, chiefly in plasmas, and                
              nonlinear processes.  The research is theoretical with a mixture of            
              analytical and numerical approaches where symbolic computation will be         
              increasingly important in the analytical portions.  The investigation          
              of ion beams, used in neutral beam heating and sputtering, attempts to         
              derive analytical expressions for the ion distribution functions, the          
              electric fields, potentials, etc. with a model for the measured beam           
              density as the starting point.  Finding more realistic and stable              
              distribution functions is possible.  Analytical expressions for the            
              carrier speed in collisional semiconductors are useful in the                  
              investigation of possible spatially periodic space charge and device           
              applications.  The research of the nonlinear Vlasov-Maxwell equations          
              on integrable systems will become an investigation of the boundaries           
              of chaotic behavior for time-dependent electric fields.  Chaotic               
              solutions may exist for the carrier speed in semiconductors also.  In          
              all projects nonlinear solutions found by using Lie group symmetries           
              of differential equations have given results either not known before           
              or found much more efficiently.
