Title       : The Processing and Properties of Hardware Description Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1992   
File        : a9006396

Award Number: 9006396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108703             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Rosenkrantz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Several hardware description mechanisms and computational problems             
              involved in the analysis and design of digital circuits are                    
              investigated.  The goals are to obtain a deeper, theoretical                   
              understanding of how the description mechanism affects these                   
              computational problems, and to devise more efficient algorithms for            
              specific problems of interest.  New models are being formulated where          
              appropriate, the effects of varying the form of certain description            
              mechanisms are being clarified, new algorithms and construction                
              schemes are being developed, and the complexity of many problems is            
              studied.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              There is a focus on hierarchical descriptions, with attention paid to          
              which problems can be solved more efficiently than is possible when            
              the flattened circuit specified by the given hierarchical description          
              is constructed.  Issues associated with the tree corresponding to a            
              given hierarchical description, and attributed values on this tree are         
              being addressed.  The effect of algebraic specification and the effect         
              of the underlying algebraic system are also studied.                           
                                                                                             
              Problems considered include analysis, simulation, testing, and                 
              synthesis.  The construction and analysis of test schemes for                  
              algorithm-based fault tolerance is studied.  Certain hardware                  
              synthesis problems are investigated, from the perspective of                   
              exploitability of algebraic or hierarchical specifications.
