Title       : Collaborative Research: Community Mechanisms for Ecosystem Variability in Castle
               Lake, California.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1993    
File        : a9006623

Award Number: 9006623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Goldman crgoldman@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Richerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This proposal is designed to evaluate how community                       
              interactions (predation, competition) produce changes in                       
              ecosystem dynamics during a series of whole-lake food web                      
              manipulations.  The work proposed capitalizes on a program of                  
              fish stocking manipulations funded by an LTREB grant from the                  
              National Science Foundation, as well as on the long-term record                
              of data collection at this site.  Detailed study of resource-and               
              predator-relations of the  dominant components of the food web                 
              will allow the investigators the mechanisms responsible for                    
              changes in each tropic level and ultimately in the ecosystem                   
              itself.  Fish populations will be monitored by acoustics and                   
              video observation, as well as by more conventional fisheries                   
              techniques, and changes in abundances, growth, diets,                          
              recruitment, and degree of plankivory evaluated as major changes               
              in external fish stocking intensity are imposed.  Changes in                   
              zooplankton dynamics (especially of Daphnia) will also be                      
              examines using techniques of zooplankton population biology (egg               
              ratios, estimates of birth and death rates) as well as                         
              physiological measures of food status (lipid content).  The PI's               
              will also evaluate the degree to which trout planktivory                       
              accounts for observed Daphnia mortality.  Phytoplankton-predator               
              relationship will be assessed by measuring grazing rates by                    
              zooplankton dominants on the major algal taxa and determining                  
              whether changes in situ algal dynamics are attributable to                     
              grazing impacts.  Phytoplankton-resource relations will be                     
              evaluated by monitoring algal nutritional conditions and using                 
              dilution bioassays to determine species-specific growth kinetics               
              for major limiting nutrients.  In addition, the roles of                       
              externally-supplied N vs. internally-supplied N (i.e. within the               
              food web) in supporting algal productivity will be evaluated                   
              using 15 N isotope  techniques.                                                
                   The roles of planktivory and nutrient/food supply in                      
              altering plankton dynamics will be assessed in controlled                      
              settings by experiments in large mesocosms.  These experiments                 
              will determine plankton responses to: 1. a gradient of                         
              lanktivory pressure which will bracket the intensity of trout                  
              redation to be encompassed by the 4-year LTREB fish                            
              anipulations, and, 2. a factorial manipulation of trout                        
              lanktivory and NO3 loading designed to simulate the combination                
              of high and low external nutrient loading and high and low fish                
              stocking.  These experiments also provide additional arenas                    
              within which to test the predications of simulations models of                 
              food web dynamics and phytoplankton community structure.                       
                   A functional group model of the Castle Lake food web and a                
              multi-species model of the Castle Lake food web and a multi-                   
              species model of the phytoplankton community (following Powell                 
              and Richerson 1985) will be developed as means of synthesizing                 
              the observations obtained during our mechanism-based                           
              observational and experimental program and to generalize the                   
              insights obtained.  Parameters and simulation conditions will be               
              obtained from specific experiments and from the long-term data                 
              set and used to further explore the interactions between                       
              community processes (predation, resource-based competition) and                
              ecosystem properties (patterns of inter-and intra-annual                       
              productivity, the role of NO3 and NH4, etc.)
