Title       : Species Diversity and Distribution of Trichomycete Gut Fungi in Their Arthropod
               Hosts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1990     
File        : a9006368

Award Number: 9006368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Lichtwardt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Trichomycetes are fungi that live obligately within the guts              
              of many kinds of arthropods such as crustaceans, millipedes, and               
              insects.  The nature of the relationship with their hosts is not               
              known in most cases although there is evidence that some of these              
              fungi can kill their hosts whereas others may benefit them by                  
              synthesizing sterol nutrients required by the host.  Dr. Robert                
              Lichtwardt of the University of Kansas is one of the few                       
              specialists in the world working on the taxonomy and biology of                
              these commensalistic fungi, and it is his efforts over the years               
              that have led to the present stage of knowledge about them.                    
                   In continuing studies of Trichomycetes, Dr. Lichtwardt is                 
              surveying their occurrence in aquatic hosts in two widely                      
              separated regions, Australia and New Zealand and in Costa Rica.                
              Preliminary work by him has indicated that new species of fungi,               
              and possibly new genera, occur in both regions, and with varying               
              levels of specificity toward their hosts.  Efforts to culture the              
              fungi under controlled laboratory conditions will continue, along              
              with studies to determine their complete life history, including               
              processes by which fungal spores are dispersed and come to infect              
              appropriate host arthropods.  Dr. Lichtwardt's studies also                    
              contribute to the inventory of microbial organisms in the world,               
              especially of tropical regions, an inventory at present very                   
              incomplete.
