Title       : Ecological Energetics of Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1990      
File        : a9006265

Award Number: 9006265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Feener feener@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Lighton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                   The objective of the proposed research is to develop an                   
              understanding of the factors that affect the energy costs of                   
              existence and costs of transport in six species of ants.  These                
              insects have served as an empirical basis for economic models of               
              foraging and territorial defense; however quantitative tests of                
              such models have been limited by the absence of comparative data               
              on actual energy costs.                                                        
                   Using sensitive computer-assisted sampling techniques                     
              developed in the laboratory, the investigators plan to measure                 
              the metabolic rate of individual ants at rest and actively                     
              exercising.  They will examine the effects on energy cost of such              
              ecologically relevant variables as 1) body mass, 2) ambient                    
              temperature, 3) running speed, and 4) load mass and mode of                    
              carriage.  The first comparative data on ventilation patterns in               
              exercising insects will be gathered.  The goal is to provide, for              
              the first time, a comprehensive body of data on the energy                     
              transactions of an ecologically important group of small insects.              
              Results of the study will allow ecologists to accurately estimate              
              energy costs from a few easily measured environmental variables.               
              Such an ability should encourage more quantitative tests of                    
              ecological theory based on economic models.                                    
                   In addition to these contributions to basic science, the                  
              proposed research should have several practical applications,                  
              The work to date has made several technical advances in the                    
              analysis of gas exchange in small insects, including the                       
              development of software and instrumentation.  The detailed                     
              analysis of gaits in ants may prove useful in small machine                    
              robotics.  In addition, data from the study will help applied                  
              ecologists estimate changes in energy flow due to habitat                      
              alteration in desert ecosystems.
