Title       : U.S.-Philippines Cooperative Research: Investigation into the Populational
               Structure of the Philippines Seagrasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1990  
File        : a9006105

Award Number: 9006105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44404              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald C. Phillips   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Seattle Pacific University
	      3307 3rd Avenue West
	      Seattle, WA  981191997    206/281-2000

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Ronald C.                           
              Phillips, Professor of Biology, Seattle Pacific University,                    
              to pursue with Dr. Hilconida P. Calumpong, Director, and                       
              Ms. Janet Estacion, Marine Laboratory, Silliman University,                    
              Republic of the Philippines, for a period of 24 months, a                      
              program of cooperative research to assess the adaptive                         
              tolerances, growth rates, morphometric responses, and                          
              transplant success of 5 species of Philippine seagrasses in                    
              a variety of nearshore coastal environments.  Reciprocal                       
              and common garden transplants of seagrasses across                             
              gradients of water depth, water salinity, substrate                            
              textures, and seagrass species compositions will be                            
              conducted.  Monitoring of these experiments to determine                       
              areal extent of the initial planting unit, changes in leaf                     
              width, mean number of leaves/shoots, leaf area index,                          
              reproductive phenology, and chlorophyll content will be                        
              conducted monthly for two years.  In addition, laboratory                      
              experiments will be conducted on all 5 species of                              
              seagrasses to assess ranges of heat and cold tolerances                        
              from donor sites, as well as from control, common, and                         
              reciprocal transplant gardens.  Data from these experiments                    
              should allow the researchers to predict the effects of                         
              human activity and natural phenomena on Philippine                             
              seagrasses and to initiate effective mitigation along                          
              coastlines that have become adversely impacted.                                
                                                                                             
              Seagrass communities in the Philippines serve as habitats                      
              and breeding grounds for various marine organisms that are                     
              economically important to the local people.  About 60% of                      
              the Filipinos' protein intake consists of fish and                             
              shellfish, much of which comes from seagrass meadows.                          
              Continuing increased activity (dredging, untreated sewage,                     
              industrial waste disposal, etc.) in the shallow coastal                        
              environment has impaired, reduced, and even decimated large                    
              portions of locally established seagrass stocks.                               
              Hopefully, the present project will contribute to a program                    
              of marine conservation and coastal management in the                           
              Philippines and reduce that country's dependence on foreign                    
              assistance.  The collaborators are highly respected                            
              scientists in the field of this research.  They will be                        
              assisted by Dr. Ernani G. Menez, Smithsonian Institution,                      
              who will serve as consultant.  The present project will                        
              allow these scientists to combine their talents and                            
              interests for mutual benefit.  This project is relevant to                     
              the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries                          
              Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation                       
              between U.S. scientists and engineers and their                                
              counterparts in developing countries through the exchange                      
              of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques                       
              and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
