Title       : The Role and Mechanism of Gene 12 Product in the T4 Phage Infection Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1992      
File        : a9006253

Award Number: 9006253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward B. Goldberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1132,5939,5973,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this US/USSR collaborative research project is                
              to clarify the structure and function of the short baseplate                   
              fiber, P12, of T4 bacteriophage.  P12 is the organelle by which                
              phage T4 irreversibly attaches to its host, E. coli.  P12 will be              
              studied both in isolation and as an organelle on the phage                     
              particle.  An assay will be developed and gp12 monomer as well as              
              the P12 trimer unit will be purified, and a combination of                     
              physiological, bioenergetic, structural and genetic studies will               
              be undertaken.   This proposal for a US/USSR collaborative                     
              research project will combine the technical strengths of three                 
              investigators: E. Goldberg, of Tufts University, the US                        
              scientist, is an expert in the physiology and genetics of                      
              bacterophage host recognition, attachment, and injection. Two                  
              investigators from the USSR will participate.  V. Mesyanzhinov,                
              of the Ivanovsky Institute of Virology, Moscow, whose expertise                
              is biochemistry has subcloned and sequenced gp12 and the genes                 
              surrounding it, and has developed a method for purification of                 
              the gp12 monomer and the P12 trimer.  L. Grinius, of Vilnius                   
              University, an expert in bioenergetics, has recently worked on                 
              the depolarizaton of the host bacterium during phage attachment.               
              His laboratory has developed a specific electrode form membrane                
              potential measurements which can accurately measure changes in                 
              real time.  This collaboration will provide the combination of                 
              approaches necessary to characterize the composition, assembly,                
              physiological role and mechanism of action of P12.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              This US/USSR collaborative project should lead to a better                     
              understanding of the structure and mechanism(s) of action of a                 
              fibrous protein responsible for the attachment of the bacterial                
              virus, "T4", to its host bacterium, E. coli.  During attachment                
              of this protein to the bacterium the protein changes its                       
              configuration and promotes changes in the permeability of the                  
              bacterial membrane.  The isolated protein also has the ability to              
              kill the bacteria.  The results of this project will contribute                
              to basic knowledge of some of the most fundamental problems of                 
              biology:  recognition at the molecular level, the mechanism of                 
              formation and structure of channels controlling the permeability               
              of membranes, and the mechanism of bacterial killing by a virus.
