Title       : Collaborative Research: Studies of Binaural Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9815056

Award Number: 9815056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don H. Johnson dhj@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-15056 JOHNSON.  Compared to listening with one ear,  listening with two
              ears provides significant advantages to hearing  in quiet and noisy rooms. 
              Individuals who are deaf in one ear  perform significantly more poorly than
              normal listeners on tasks  such as locating sound sources and identifying
              spoken words  presented in noise.  Experiments have shown that differences 
              between the sounds at the two ears (i.e., interaural differences)  are used by
              our brains to provide this "binaural" advantage.  Two  important brain centers
              involved  in comparing these interaural  differences are the lateral superior
              olive (LSO) and the medial  nucleus of the trapezoid body (MNTB).  MNTB neurons
              provide the  LSO with information about sounds coming from one ear, while 
              cochlear nuclear neurons provide information about sounds coming  from the
              opposite ear.    The studies of Dr. Tsuchitani and her  collaborators have
              shown that LSO neurons use this information to  compute interaural differences
              in loudness (ILD) and time-varying  ILDs produced by the sound-shadowing effect
              of the head and ear.  Dr. Johnson and collaborators developed a computational
              model of  LSO neurons that permits simulation of LSO responses, and 
              statistical models that provide descriptions and predictions of  how the LSO
              system responds to different types of binaural  stimuli.    The studies to be
              undertaken will explore the role of the LSO and  MNTB in the neural processing
              of complex signals akin to those  encountered naturally by employing methods
              developed for virtual  acoustics. Transient complex stimuli will be used,
              presented alone  and in background noise.  The apparent location of the signal 
              source will be manipulated by applying cat head-related transfer  functions
              supplied by Dr. Joseph Hind and Dr. John Brugge of the  University of
              Wisconsin. Dr. Tsuchitani, an auditory  neurophysiologist, will conduct the
              experiments manipulating the  stimuli and recording the electrical responses of
              single and  multiple neurons in the  LSO and MNTB to these stimuli.  Dr. 
              Johnson, a communication/signal processing theorist, will be  applying advanced
              signal analysis techniques to the recorded data  to determine how the ensemble
              of LSO neurons responding to complex  stimuli processes binaural information. 
              This technique will be  used to determine what perceptual cues, ILD, time
              varying ILDs,  interaural time differences, and interaural spectral
              differences,  the LSO ensemble response provides.  The results of this project 
              will reveal how the brain uses interaural differences to produce  the binaural
              advantage in hearing in quiet and noisy rooms.
