Title       : Pilot Study on Diet Nutrition and Digestive Strategies Among Gorillas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1999    
File        : a9815841

Award Number: 9815841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa J. Remis remism@sri.soc.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a pilot study  on the nutritional aspects of diet and food preferences
              of western lowland gorillas (Gorilla gorilla gorilla) and chimpanzees (Pan
              troglodytes troglodytes).  The primary objective is to conduct experimental
              observational research on gorillas and chimpanzees in laboratory and zoological
              park settings. This research will contribute to broader efforts to understand
              the relationships of body size and digestive physiology to ecology, the
              diversification and evolution of variation in body size, feeding ecology and
              social organization among the African apes, humans and their ancestors. 
              

Gorillas and chimpanzees are very different sizes, and consequently, have
              been traditionally viewed as ecologically distinct. Western lowland gorillas
              have proved difficult to study in the wild and limited field data has provided
              conflicting information about whether gorillas are fundamentally different from
              chimpanzees in their diet and behavior.  Fruit eating shapes the behavior of
              most of the apes, but it remains unclear whether the large-bodied gorillas are
              an exception to this rule, specifically whether they are less selective and
              more opportunistic fruit eaters than chimpanzees.  This research will provide
              much needed laboratory data to complement field data and assist efforts to
              better characterize diets and food preferences of the African apes. During
              laboratory research, species, sex and individual differences in food
              preferences, taste perception and rates of digestion of captive chimpanzees and
              gorillas will be evaluated. This pilot study will refine methods for
              experimental observational research on primate feeding strategies while
              providing preliminary data to expand our understanding of dietary differences
              and ecological adaptations of chimpanzees and gorillas. 

