Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships and Evolution of Function in Labrid Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9815614

Award Number: 9815614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Westneat mwestneat@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815614
 Westneat

Fishes of the family Labridae are a diverse group of over
              600 species that live on coral reefs throughout the world. The abundance of
              labrids makes them an integral part of the ecology of reef systems as well as
              an important economic resource.  Although the biology of labrids has been the
              subject of intensive research, little is known about their ancestor-descendant
              relationships.  This proposal requests support for a study of the historical
              relationships among the Labridae using both structural and molecular
              characters.  The central objectives of this study are (1) to resolve
              relationships among major groups of fishes in the family Labridae; and (2) to
              integrate patterns of relatedness among species with information on locomotor
              and feeding mechanisms.
	This study focuses on anatomical study of new fish
              species and anatomical regions. The sequence of nucleotides in DNA is a popular
              and now easily obtained set of characters that can be used for genealogical
              analysis, and complete sequence data from the genes cytochrome b and 12S rRNA
              will be obtained. This project will provide a comparison of anatomical and
              molecular data for a theory of species relationships using multiple data
              sets.
	This research will use the phylogeny of the Labridae to understand
              major features of the feeding and locomotor systems of these fishes. The
              biodiversity found within this group is reflected in their exploitation of a
              wide range of feeding and locomotor behaviors.  The structure and function of
              the jaws in labrids mirrors the ecological diversity of feeding on many types
              of prey.  Locomotion is accomplished by using the pectoral fins to row or fly
              through the water with a wide range of fin structures and swimming performance.
              Phylogenetic studies proposed here provide the framework for interpretation of
              function and ecology in one of the largest, most diverse fish families in the
              world.
	This project is significant to the field of biology due to its
              contribution of new phylogenetic information on a large group of important
              fishes.  The research provides a starting point for the study of genealogy
              among more than 10% of living fishes. Of broader significance is the use of
              phylogenetic trees to interpret patterns of change in structural and functional
              characters.  The movement toward an integrated understanding of biological
              structure and function, from tissues to whole organisms, is one of the major
              frontiers of biology. This work contributes to that goal by providing a
              phylogenetic framework for studies of labrid ecology, biomechanics, behavior,
              and evolution.  Finally, this study makes a significant educational
              contribution as it involves students in research at the undergraduate,
              graduate, and postdoctoral levels.

