Title       : Molecular and Morphological Systematics of The Subtribe Oncidiinae (Orchidaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2001   
File        : a9815821

Award Number: 9815821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norris H. Williams orchid@flmnh.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815821
Williams
	The taxonomic classification of the orchid family, with an
              estimated 20,000 species or more (the largest family of flowering plants), has
              depended heavily upon features of the orchid flower. Many aspects of floral
              form in orchids appear to be adaptations to animal pollinators, to facilitate
              or ensure within-species transfer of pollen, and are less likely to signify
              close genealogical relationship than previously assumed. As data have
              accumulated on other morphological and anatomical features, these cases of
              suspected convergence or parallelism in floral form have become more numerous
              and troublesome for a stable classification of the group. Modern DNA sequencing
              technologies now provide sources of independent genetic data for use in
              assessing phylogenetic or genealogical relationships among species, genera, and
              tribes within the family. Dr. Norris Williams of the University of Florida is
              studying the neotropical subtribe Oncidiinae for DNA sequences from nuclear
              ribosomal genes and from chloroplast gene regions, to amass data bearing on
              mutational differences among this large array of orchids. The group comprises
              about 80 genera and 1500 species, and sampling will cover all the genera and
              ca. 500 of the species, with particular attention to the large genera Oncidium,
              Odontoglossum, and Cyrtochilum.
	The subtribe Oncidiinae includes orchids with
              a wide spectrum of pollination relationships, including pollen transfer by male
              euglossine bees (collecting floral fragrance compounds), by other species of
              bees and insects collecting nectar or pollen, and by hummingbirds.
              Controversial cases of pollination by insects where no apparent food reward is
              discernible have been described under the rubric of pseudocopulation. In
              addition, the subtribe includes numerous small orchids that are "twig
              epiphytes," growing literally on the ends of twigs in neotropical rainforests,
              and including some of the smallest known orchid plants. A stable classification
              of these and other orchids, based on substantial gene sequence data from both
              nuclear and plastid sources, will establish a solid framework for the study of
              evolution of pollination relationships and of growth form and function in
              tropical forests.

