Title       : Quantifying Epistasis for Fitness in the Native Legume, Chamaecrista Fasciculata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a9815780

Award Number: 9815780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241654             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Fenster cf25@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Zimmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815780
Fenster & Zimmer	

This research concerns the type of gene action
              responsible for genetic differences among populations of Chamaecrista
              fasciculata. Genes may act independently of one another so that genetic
              divergence may simply reflect the accumulated effects of selection acting on
              single genes. However, important differences among organisms may reflect
              selection on combinations of genes implying that gene interaction or epistasis
              is important. The type of gene action can be determined by following the
              survivorship and reproduction of progeny derived from crosses between
              populations. If  populations are adapted to their environment because selection
              has acted on combinations of genes, then mixing genes from different
              populations will result in a disruption of favorable gene interactions and
              decreased survivorship and reproduction in the hybrid progeny. This study will
              use traditional biometrical techniques along with molecular analyses to
              quantify the nature of gene action responsible for adaptation of a population
              to its environment.  

This project has important implications for evolution,
              crop and animal breeding, and conservation biology. If organisms are adapted to
              their environment because of interactions among genes, then our models of
              evolution will need to be more complex. Detection of important gene interaction
              will provide us with a microevolutionary equivalent of macroevolutionary
              processes such as speciation. Gene interactions imply that different breeding
              strategies than those presently employed may have greater efficacy for crop and
              animal improvement. Strategies for maintaining or preserving genetic diversity
              in endangered species will be influenced by whether gene interaction determines
              traits associated with survivorship and reproduction.

