Title       : Ecological Mechanisms of Diversification in Hyalella Amphipods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9815059

Award Number: 9815059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Wellborn gwellborn@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815059
Wellborn
	Research by Dr. Gary Wellborn at the University of Oklahoma
              will examine the ecological and behavioral bases of evolutionary
              diversification within the freshwater amphipod Hyallela azteca complex, to
              determine the role of adaptation to predators and the mechanism of collateral
              evolution of reproductive isolation. Hyallela is a widespread, phenotypically
              variable, and taxonomically problematic group of freshwater crustaceans, that
              exhibits substantial ecotypic variation in morphology and in life history
              across New World habitats. A salient pattern in Hyallela is that small-bodied,
              early-reproducing ecotypes occur in habitats that contain size-selective
              predatory fish, and large-bodied, late-reproducing ecotypes occur in habitats
              lacking predatory fish. These phenotypic differences are genetic, and the body
              size and life history differences among natural populations are consistent with
              the hypothesis of adaptation to habitat-specific predation regimes. In
              preliminary studies on interfertility, individuals of the different ecotypes
              were found to be reproductively isolated. Genetic diversity, however, as
              revealed in preliminary allozyme analyses, did not correlate with ecotypic
              differences; still, genetic diversity appears to be moderate to high overall in
              populations of this species complex. The hypothesis under test is that the
              amphipods have diversified into large and small ecotypes repeatedly, and that
              reproductive isolation (hence, speciation) has evolved collaterally with
              ecotypic divergence. Predation-related selection on body size or on
              age-to-maturation may induce, as an accidental or collateral effect,
              differences in mating behaviors that reinforce reproductive isolation, and
              hence speciation. Observational work in North America and laboratory
              experiments will test various genetic, behavioral, and life-history aspects of
              the hypothesis. This diversification mode, termed replicate adaptive radiation
              or parallel speciation, may be common in freshwater taxa, although little
              appreciated until now.

