Title       : Theory of Quantization and Synchronization with Timing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9815006

Award Number: 9815006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340155             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Neuhoff neuhoff@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Though the cost of storing and transmitting information continues to decrease,
              such reductions seem only to stimulate demand for information and,
              consequently, for further developments in data compression.  The first goal of
              this research is to advance the theory and practice of quantization as a lossy
              data compression methodology, for sources such as speech, images, video and
              music.  Synchronization is a key issue in data compression systems that operate
              in environments where decoding may begin at an arbitrary point in the
              compressed stream of bits, or where the compressed stream may be corrupted by
              insertion, deletion or substitution errors.  The second goal of this research
              is to develop a theory of data synchronization
that takes into account the
              users need to know the time indices of the data, as well as its values.

The
              quantization theory to be developed will increase the qualitative and
              quantitative understanding of how the performance of lossy compression systems
              relates to their complexity, with the goal of enabling better systems to be
              designed.  The methodology is largely, but not exclusively, based on high
              resolution theory techniques and concepts.  The focus is primarily on vector
              quantization, both as a practical technique and as a paradigm for studying
              fundamental issues.
Though synchronization methods have been much developed,
              there is no theory for the analysis and design of synchronization codes that,
              in addition to permitting the decoder to synchronize with the encoder, enable
              it to produce estimates of the time indices of the data it decodes.  This
              research will develop such a theory.  It will focus on optimizing the tradeoffs
              among coding efficiency (rate), resynchronization delay, and the production of
              timing information.  The application of such methods to coding for channels
              with insertion, deletion and substitution errors will also be investigated.


