Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Effects of Environmental Agents on Reproductive
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1999       
File        : a9815819

Award Number: 9815819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Terranova pterrano@kumc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjoy K. Das  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sudhansu K. Dey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine F. Roby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Med Center
	      3901 Rainbow Boulevard
	      Kansas City, KS  66160    913/588-5238

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815819
Terranova

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Paul Terranova of the University of Kansas Medical
              Center and Professor Kazuyoshi Taya of the Tokyo University of Agriculture and
              Technology in Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study of the
              effects of environmental agents on reproductive processes.  The researchers
              plan to analyze the effects of several environmentally relevant toxic compounds
              on various aspects of reproductive function.  They hope to provide new insights
              into the mechanisms by which reproductive function is compromised.  The
              problems to be explored are:  1) the effects of the environmental contaminant,
              dioxin (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin), on ovarian function and early
              pregnancy; and  2) the effects of xenoestrogens [chlordecone (Kepone), and
              O-P'-DDT], and a natural estrogen, estradiol, on uterine gene expression of
              immediate early protooncogenes and several relevant uterine growth factors such
              as heparin binding EGF-like growth factor and lactoferrin.

This project
              brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
              expertise and research capabilities. The U.S. researchers' expertise is in the
              area of molecular methods of signal transduction and the Japanese have
              expertise in the endocrinological area. Results of this research would provide
              a significant advancement to the field of endocrine disruptors.  This research
              advances international human resources through the participation of a younger
              scientist and graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology,
              this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.
***

