Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Post Peak Shear Failure of RC Piers Subjected to
               Cyclic Loading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9815558

Award Number: 9815558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Benson Shing shing@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1058,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9815558
Shing

This award supports the participation of American scientists
              in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Post Peak Shear Failure of RC Piers Subjected to
              Cyclic Loading, to be held in Yamanashi, Japan, in October, l999.  The
              co-organizers are Professors Pui-Shum Shing at the University of Colorado,
              Boulder and Tada-aki Tanabe at Nagoya University in Japan.  The seminar will
              focus on the shear behavior of reinforced concrete (RC) bridge piers, which is
              an important issue pertaining to the performance and safety of bridge
              structures during earthquakes.  The seminar will provide a forum to discuss
              theory and experiments on the post-peak shear behavior of RC columns, to review
              and summarize the state-of-the-art concrete material models and analytic
              methods that can be used to simulate and understand the shear behavior of RC
              columns, and to identify future research needs and possible cooperative
              research topics on this subject. 

Rational and reliable analytic models are
              needed to enhance our understanding of the shear behavior of RC piers, to
              improve current seismic design and retrofit methods, and to permit a realistic
              assessment of the seismic safety of existing bridges.  Discussion at the
              seminar will be structured around the following topics:  1) theory,
              experimental and field observations of the shear behavior of RC piers, and the
              needs in engineering practice;  2) mechanical behavior and modeling of concrete
              materials and recent developments in finite element analysis methods;  and  3)
              structural component models system analysis and behavior of RC bridges. Seminar
              organizers have made a special effort to involve younger researchers as both
              participants and observers.  The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese
              experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work,
              and will set the stage for future collaborative projects.  Following the
              seminar, it is anticipated that the presentations will be prepared and
              published.  The availability of this report will then be advertised in the
              Newsletter of the Earthquake Engineering Research Institute.
***


