Title       : Influence of Soil-Structure Interation on Motions Recorded at the Jensen
               Filtration Plant during Northridge Earthquake & Aftershocks & its Implications
               for Nonlinear Site Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9815053

Award Number: 9815053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29796              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. B. Crouse   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dames & Moore Los Angeles
	      911 Wilshire Blvd Suite 700
	      Los Angeles, CA  900173436    213/683-1560

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
The strong ground motions recorded at the Jensen Filtration Plant (JFP) during
              the 1994 Northridge earthquake sequence (mainshock and aftershocks) provide an
              opportunity to study soil nonlinearity.  Two stations close together at the JFP
              recorded the earthquake motions; one station was situated over moderately stiff
              soil, the other on very stiff soil.  The characters of the two recordings,
              which were quite different, suggest nonlinear soil response at the moderately
              stiff soil site.  Unfortunately the two buildings where the motions were
              recorded were not identical in construction; this raises the issue whether
              soil-structure interaction (SSI) affected the motions at one or both
              stations.

The United States Geological Survey (USGS) maintains, retrieves,
              processes and disseminates the strong motion data recorded at JFP.  USGS
              researchers have studied these records for nonlinear site response, and their
              findings suggest that SSI effects may be affecting the results.  The principal
              investigator recently concluded a research program involving dynamic SSI
              investigations of both JFP buildings: the 3-story main administrative building
              (JMB) and the much smaller 1-story generator building (JGB).

This action is
              to continue the program with the following tasks: (1) analyze the dynamic test
              data for inertial SSI effects, (2) analyze kinematic interaction (high
              frequency filtering by the building foundation) based on data recorded at other
              sites during the Northridge and other earthquakes, (3) analyze motions recorded
              simultaneously at the JMB and JGB stations and at new JMB and JGB free-field
              stations recently installed by the USGS, (4) construct SSI analytical models
              for the JMB and JGB stations, (5) correct the JMB and JGB strong motion records
              for SSI, (6) reassess nonlinear site response (in cooperation with USGS
              researchers), and (7) prepare a technical report followed by journal
              publications.

The ultimate objective of this investigation is to further the
              understanding of nonlinear site response during weak, moderate, and very strong
              ground shaking.  The results are expected to provide additional insights into
              nonlinear site response, and its consideration in future refinements of
              attenuation and site-response models of earthquake strong ground motions.

