Title       : Nitrite Inhibition of Carbon Monoxide Dehydrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9815924

Award Number: 9815924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Madeline E. Rasche mrasche@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1227,9179,9183,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Acetate fermentation to methane accounts for two-thirds of the methane produced
              biologically in the environment. The central enzyme in the pathway of acetate
              utilization by methane-producing microorganisms is carbon monoxide
              dehydrogenase (CODH), a complex metalloenzyme that plays a critical role in
              both the synthesis and fermentation of acetate in anaerobic environments. In
              the methanogenic archaeon Methanosarcina thermophila, CODH catalyzes the
              cleavage of acetyl coenzyme A to produce free coenzyme A, a methyl group, and
              an enzyme-bound carbonyl that is subsequently oxidized to carbon dioxide.
              Despite the importance of CODH in biological methane production and in the
              anaerobic metabolism of acetate, the relationships between the structure and
              function of this complex metalloenzyme are only beginning to be
              elucidated.
One strategy for investigating the mechanism of substrate binding
              and oxidation by CODH is examining the interaction of the enzyme with substrate
              analogs and inhibitors. Preliminary results in this laboratory have
              demonstrated that nitrite (NO2-) inhibits the catalytic activity of CODH from
              M. thermophila. This research project will utilize kinetic analysis and
              electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy to investigate the mechanism
              by which nitrite inhibits CODH. The project has three specific
              objectives:

1.  To analyze the kinetics of nitrite inhibition of CODH in
              terms of type of inhibition, extent of reversibility, effects of pH and enzyme
              oxidation state, and effects of substrates and substrate analogs;


2.  To
              utilize EPR spectroscopy to identify which of the five known metal centers of
              CODH are affected by nitrite; and


3.  To determine if nitrite can be
              reduced as a novel substrate for CODH, possibly producing a reduced nitrogen
              compound such as nitric oxide (NO).

The results of these experiments will
              define nitrite as a new inhibitor of CODH and will provide insight into the
              nature of nitrogen oxide interactions with the metal centers of the enzyme.
              Analysis of the kinetics of inhibition and the EPR properties of the inhibited
              enzyme will enable the investigators to (i) propose a likely mechanism for
              nitrite inhibition of CODH and (ii) test the possibility that nitrite is
              reduced as a substrate for CODH from M. thermophila. Information derived from
              these studies will serve as a foundation for future research focusing on the
              elucidation of the structure and mechanism of CODH from M. thermophila and the
              characterization of novel interactions of nitrogen oxides with
              metalloenzymes.

