Title       : Pressure Dependence of Reaction Selectivity in Supercritical Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1998    
File        : a9815320

Award Number: 9815320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip G. Jessop jessop@chem.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1238,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award is made to Dr. Philip G. Jessop of the Chemistry Department,  
              University of California, Davis, for investigation of the dependence of   the
              selectivity of some organic reactions on the pressure of   near-critical
              supercritical fluids (SCFs).   The award is in the   Technology for Sustainable
              Environment component of the EPA/NSF   Partnership for Environmental Research,
              and support is provided by the   MPS Organic Dynamics Chemistry Program and
              Office of Multidisciplinary   Activities.  Homogeneously catalyzed asymmetric
              syntheses, such as   cyclopropanation, deprotonation, and alkylation reactions,
              will be   studied.  The pressure dependence of enantio- or diastereo-
              selectivity   will be tested as the critical point of the solution is
              approached.  For   each system that shows a pressure dependence, the effect of
              several   additional parameters will be determined, including temperature,
              choice   of SCF (carbon dioxide, xenon or fluoroform), side groups on the
              ligands,   choice of substrate, and use of binary supercritical fluid mixtures
              as   reaction media.  Activation volumes will be calculated from the effect of 
               pressure on reaction rates.  Many organic compounds are asymmetric, that is,
              can be present in right-   or left-handed forms.  Particularly in
              pharmaceutical applications, it is   important to synthesize the specific form
              that has the desired biological   effectiveness.   If the correct form can be
              made with high selectivity,   then the industrial process is more efficient,
              both economically and   environmentally.   In this project, supercritical
              fluids, some of which   have low environmental impact, will be tested for their
              suitability as   solvents for a variety of asymmetric organic reactions.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
