Title       : Collaborative Research: Late Cretaceous and Cenozoic Reconstructions of the
               Southwest Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2001    
File        : a9815283

Award Number: 9815283
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Cande scande@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided jointly by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of
              the Office of Polar Programs and the Marine Geology and Geophysics Program of
              the Division of Ocean Sciences, supports research to develop improved plate
              rotation models for the Southwest Pacific region (between the Pacific,
              Antarctic, and Australian plates, and the continental fragments of New Zealand,
              West Antarctica, Iselin Bank, East Antarctica, and Australia). The improved
              rotation parameters will be used to address tectonic problems related to motion
              between East and West Antarctica, and in particular, the questions of relative
              drift between major hotspot groups and the controversy regarding a possible
              missing plate boundary in this region. Previous work has documented
              NNW-striking mid-Tertiary seafloor spreading magnetic anomalies between East
              and West Antarctica, representing about 150 km of opening of the Adare Trough,
              north of the Ross Sea. This is not enough motion to resolve the apparent
              discrepancy between the plate motions and motions inferred from assuming
              hotspot fixity. Because this motion between East and West Antarctica
              corresponds to a very small rotation, it points to the need for determination
              of finite rotations describing motions of the various plates here with a high
              degree of accuracy, particularly for older times. This is now possible with the
              datasets that will be used in this project. 

The work will be accomplished
              by integrating existing data with analysis and interpretation of other data
              sets recently made available by Japanese and Italian scientists from their
              cruises in the region.  It will be further augmented by acquisition of new
              marine geophysical data on selected transits of the R/VIB Nathaniel B. Palmer. 
              Specific objectives of the project include the following:

1) improve the
              rotation model for mid-Tertiary extension between East and West Antarctica by
              including the plate boundary between the Pacific and Australia plates directly
              when calculating Australia-West Antarctica motion,
2) improve the
              reconstructions for the Late Cretaceous and Early Tertiary times by including
              new constraints on several boundaries not previously used in the
              reconstructions,
3) address the implications of new rotation models for the
              question of the fixity of global hotspots,
4) re-examine the geophysical data
              from the Western Ross Sea embayment in light of a model for substantial
              mid-Cenozoic extension.


