Title       : RUI: Arrows of Time in Infancy III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2001   
File        : a9815791

Award Number: 9815791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121673             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Friedman friedman@oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5941,5978,8888,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will help psychologists and educators better understand the early
              development of temporal knowledge in normal human infants and children. Adults
              are highly attuned to forward vs. backward presentations of transformations
              that can only happen in one temporal direction. For example, a film of liquid
              pouring, when viewed in reverse, is strikingly anomalous.  Adults must have
              internalized temporally organized representations of how thousands of such
              transformations normally unfold.  However, very little is known about the
              origins and nature of this sensitivity.  The principle investigator's research
              over the past 7 years has suggested that expectations about the temporal
              direction of several transformations, such as pouring a liquid or breaking an
              object, develop between 4 and 17 months.  The proposed experiments are intended
              to add to these findings in a number of ways.  First, two studies using special
              training will shed light on the role of experience in the development of
              temporal-directional sensitivity.  Second, a study with new gravity
              transformations will test the generality of previously demonstrated
              preferences.  A third issue is the importance of dynamic perceptual features in
              infants' preferences.  By comparing directional preferences to fully visible
              and partially screened versions of stimuli, we can learn whether infants of a
              given age can mentally represent these changes or whether it is only the
              combination of perceptual features that is recognized.  Fourth, a study of the
              judgments of children of about 3 years of age will help us interpret the late
              developmental trends seen in past studies. Basic information about how children
              adapt to the temporal features of their world is an important part of
              understanding their perceptual and cognitive abilities.  It is expected to have
              implication for practitioners who design preschool curricula and early
              childhood intervention programs.



