Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Endrocrinological and Physiological Studies of
               Water Absorption Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9815804

Award Number: 9815804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28125              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley D. Hillyard hillyard@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karin V. Hoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815804
Hillyard

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Stanley Hillyard of the University of Nevada in Las
              Vegas and Professor Takatoshi Nagai of the Teiyko University School of Medicine
              in Tokyo, Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study of
              endrocrinological and physiological studies of water absorption behavior in
              toads.  Unlike other classes of vertebrates, amphibians obtain water by osmotic
              flow across their skin rather than by oral drinking.  It has been demostrated
              that the toad skin serves a chemosensory function that is analogous to the
              tongue of vertebrates that drink orally and that this function allows animals
              to detect and avoid solutions that are hyperosmotic to their body fluids.  The
              primary goal of the research is to clarify the role of ion channels in the
              sensory function of epithelial cells in the amphibian skin and how this role is
              influenced by a hormone that is known to stimulate cutaneous drinking behavior.
               Selected toads of the genus Bufo will be studied with a three-tiered approach
              that will correlate behavioral observations, epithelial cell function and the
              activity of sensory neurons.

This project brings together the efforts of two
              laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
              U.S. researchers' expertise is in the area of environmental physiology and
              behavior and the Japanese have expertise in cell physiology and microscopy.
              This research advances international human resources through the participation
              of graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
              project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.
***

