Title       : Dry Habitat Chimpanzee Ecology and Behavior: Implications for Human Bipedalism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a9815991

Award Number: 9815991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Hunt KDHUNT@UCS.INDIANA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Most human paleontologists recognize striding bipedalism as the defining
              attribute of the Hominidae, but there is little agreement as to how and why
              this primary adaptation evolved.  As our closest relatives, chimpanzees can
              provide behavioral and ecological clues that will help us understand the early
              evolution of our lineage.  Here, the PI  proposes to habituate and study a
              particularly appropriate chimpanzee community in order to test a number of
              bipedalism origin hypotheses.  

Early hominids display a mix of human and
              ape-like characteristics.  They can be described crudely as chimpanzee-like
              from the waist up, and human-like from the waist down.  One explanation for
              this curious mosaic of traits derives from research on Gombe and Mahale
              chimpanzees.  At these sites bipedalism was most common when chimpanzees fed on
              small fruits in short trees.  Such trees were mostly located in the driest part
              of the chimpanzee range.  On the ground chimpanzees stood up to pick these
              fruits from the lowest branches.  When they gathered fruits in the trees they
              fed partly standing bipedally and partly hanging by one arm. The fact that
              trees that elicit bipedalism in chimpanzees were found in the driest part of
              their range is intruiging, since early hominids lived in similar dry habitats. 
              Bipedalism is unlikely to have evolved for feeding on such fruits unless they
              were abundant.  We might therefore expect that small fruits are more abundant
              in present-day dry habitats than in wetter habitats.  The PI proposes to study
              chimpanzees in a dry forest in the Semliki Valley Wildlife Reserve, Uganda in
              order to determine whether Semliki has significantly more small-diameter fruits
              than wet habitats, and whether dry-forest chimpanzees are more bipedal than
              other chimpanzees.

