Title       : Joint Transmitter and Receiver Optimization for Fast Fading Mobile Radio
               Channels Using Deterministic Channel Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9815002

Award Number: 9815002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra Duel-Hallen sasha@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hans D. Hallen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian L. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The tremendous growth in demand for wireless communications capacity has created
              a need for new modulation, coding and detection methods that more efficiently
              use the multipath fading channels encountered in mobile radio.  Since the
              channel changes rapidly, the transmitter and receiver are not generally
              optimized for current channel conditions, and thus fail to
exploit the full
              potential of the wireless channel.  The shorter
wavelengths proposed for
              future mobile radio will only serve to aggravate these problems.  This research
              focuses on joint utilization of adaptive modulation and coding techniques,
              transmitter diversity methods and fading prediction algorithms suitable for
              rapidly varying multipath fading channels.

In this research, a new approach
              to communication over fast-fading channels is exploited. The unifying idea is
              to predict future fading conditions at the receiver, and to feed these
              predictions to the transmitter for the optimization of the transmitted signal.
              This research is an interdisciplinary effort in communication theory, physics,
              and signal processing that encompasses novel physical models for multipath
              fading,
channel prediction and tracking methods, and adaptive modulation,
              coding and power-control algorithms. The ultimate goal of this work is to more
              fully exploit the potential capacity of wireless communication channels, and in
              the process reduce the associated power and bandwidth requirements.

