Title       : The Role of Increasing CO2 Levels and Ocean and Vegetation Feedbacks in Periam
               Global Warming, and Comparisons of Simulations with Observations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2001    
File        : a9815980

Award Number: 9815980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Kutzbach jek@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
ATM-9815980
Kutzbach, John E.
University of Wisconsin

Title: The
              Role of  Increasing CO2 Levels and Ocean and Vegetation Feedbacks in Permian
              Global Warming, and Comparisons of Simulations with Observations

Studies of
              the Earth's history show that the large climate changes of the past have been
              associated with equally large changes in the biosphere, the deep ocean, the
              large continental ice sheets, and the Earth's carbon cycle.  This award
              supports a project designed to study climate changes of the past using
              numerical models of the atmosphere, the land surface, terrestrial ecosystems,
              oceans, ice-sheets, and components of the carbon cycle.  Specifically, the
              project will focus on the most recent period of major deglaciation and major
              global warming in the geologic record, which occurred during the Permian, about
              280 million years ago.  In the Permian, large climate changes were probably
              initiated by tectonically-related changes in land-ocean distribution and
              topography.  By prescribing changes in these "external" forcings of climate, it
              is possible to use models to simulate the climate's direct response, and to
              study potential feedback mechanisms involving the biosphere, the hydrosphere,
              or the cryosphere that might amplify or dampen the direct response.  The great
              advantage of using the past as a "testing ground" for studies of large climate
              change is that geological records from terrestrial and marine environments can
              be compared with the results of the simulations to evaluate the accuracy of the
              models under very different boundary conditions, as well as to test our
              understanding of fundamental climate processes.  Large changes in the
              atmospheric concentration of the CO2 probably played a role in the Permian
              global warming event and will be an important focus of the project.  Equally
              important will be the use of climate system/earth systems models to evaluate
              the role that major changes in ocean currents, ocean heat transport, and
              vegetation may have played in amplifying the warming trend.  The data sets of
              Permian climate indicators already developed at the University of Chicago will
              be used to evaluate the results. The results of this work will lead to improved
              understanding of the mechanisms involved in large climate changes of the past
              and will help assess the accuracy of models being developed to estimate
              possible large 

