Title       : Petrochemical Studies of Fe-Oxide (-Cu-Au-REE) Hydrothermal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1998  
File        : a9815032

Award Number: 9815032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Barton barton@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815032
Barton
Fe-oxide(-Cu-Au-REE)-rich hydrothermal systems have been of
              economic importance for centuries,
and enigmatic in their origin for nearly as
              long.  Recent work, stimulated by the discovery of the giant Olympic Dam
              deposit in Australia, has focused on three possible origins: (1) these deposits
              are fundamentally magmatic, formed by an immiscible oxide-rich melt separated
              from geochemically distinctive magmas; (2) the deposits are hydrothermal,
              formed from magmatic-sourced brines and can be considered as broadly analogous
              to porphyry Cu-Mo type deposits, and (3) the deposits are hydrothermal driven
              by magmatic heat, but generated from distinctive high-salinity surface or near
              surface, non-magmatic brines. The implications of these hypotheses are
              significant. Both magmatic hypotheses imply a correlation with particular types
              of magmatism and tectonic environments. In contrast the non-magmatic fluid
              hypothesis predicts a correlation with saline surface or ground waters thus a
              common direct link to the climate. This project builds on earlier work to test
              the importance of non-magmatic fluids versus the magmatic connection. A
              combination of field-based geochemical, petrological and theoretical approaches
              will be used to investigate the sources of fluids, the sources of metals, and
              the mechanisms whereby the metals may or may not be concentrated in
              economically significant quantities. Most field and analytical work will be
              done on U.S. and Mexican occurrences in combination with a global synthesis of
              Archean to Modern examples. One of the broader implications of this research is
              that these saline hydrothermal systems may provide direct evidence for ancient
              arid climates. This could be important where an independent record, for example
              from sedimentary rocks, is not preserved.

