Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Molecular and Microscale Thermophysical Phenomena in
               Nanotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9815245

Award Number: 9815245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arunava Majumdar majumdar@newton.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chang-Lin Tien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815245
Majumdar

This award supports the participation of American
              scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Molecular and Microscale Thermophysical
              Phenomena in Nanotechnology, to be held in Sendai, Japan, from August 8-11,
              l999.  The co-organizers are Professors Arun Majumdar at the University of
              California, Berkeley and Susumu Kotake at Toyo University in Japan.  The
              seminar will provide a cross-disciplinary and international forum for
              discussion and presentation of the latest results in the area of molecular and
              microscale thermophysical phenomena related to nanotechnology.  Seminar
              discussion will be held in the following five areas:  1) transport phenomena in
              micro- and nanostructures;  2) new experimental techniques, sensors, detectors
              and devices;  3) interfacial and surface phenomena;  4) molecular clustering
              and phase transformation; and  5)  highly non-equilibrium and complex transport
              phenomena. 

Exploration, understanding, and control of physical phenomena at
              the nanometer scales have received intense attention in recent years.  In the
              past, most of this effort has been directed towards understanding the
              electronic and materials behavior of nanostructures.  
However, the
              thermophysics of nanostructures and nanodevices have not been adequately
              addressed.  It must be recognized that although the nature of physical
              phenomena at nanometer scales can be quite diverse, they must all satisfy the
              basic laws of thermodynamics.  Hence, thermophysics at nanometer scales
              provides a unique window to study a wide variety of phenomena.  Only recently
              have researchers started working on microscale thermophysics to study short
              time scale and small length scale phenomena.  These studies have led to key
              insight and promising prospects of research in this area.  Seminar organizers
              have made a special effort to involve younger researchers as both participants
              and observers.  The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in this
              field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work, and will set the
              stage for future collaborative projects.  Following the seminar, it is
              anticipated that the presentations will be prepared and, if accepted, published
              in Microscale Thermophysical Engineering.
***



