Title       : Pattern and Process in a Mosaic Hybrid Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9815380

Award Number: 9815380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Harrison rgh4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT
(HARRISON, DEB-9815380)


	In nature, hybrid zones are regions
              where distinct species or races occur together and hybridize, resulting in some
              offspring of mixed ancestry.  This project focuses on understanding the factors
              that limit genetic exchange in a well-studied insect hybrid zone.  One
              possibility is that incompatibility between two cricket species is induced by
              the bacterium Wolbachia, which is known to infect the reproductive tissues of
              many insect species.  The work involves surveys of presence/absence of
              Wolbachia in crickets of two hybridizing species, and molecular analyses to
              determine whether different bacterial strains are present.  Incompatibility
              occurs when males are infected and females are not or when they are infected
              with different strains.  A second component of the research takes advantage of
              recently developed molecular markers to determine, through laboratory
              hybridization experiments, whether barriers to gene exchange in nature are also
              the result of behavioral differences or differences in sperm viability.
              
	Studies of hybrid zones and of barriers that limit gene exchange between
              species provide important insights into how new species arise and what
              maintains species differences in natural systems.  Insects are important models
              for such studies, both because they are a remarkably diverse group and because
              they are easy to work with in experimental situations.  The present study
              focuses on barriers to gene exchange that are thought to be of general
              importance in insect speciation.  However, additional case studies like this
              one are needed to confirm or reject this generalization.
	

