Title       : Contaminant Transport Through a Field-Scale Earthen Liner
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9815242

Award Number: 9815242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251474             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Daniel dedaniel@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ivan G. Krapac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles J. Werth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy D. Stark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert J. Valocchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9815242 

PI:  David E. Daniel 
Institution:  University of Illinois at
              Urbana-Champaign 

Title:  Contaminant Transport Through a Field-scale
              Earthen Liner 

ABSTRACT 

Compacted fine-grained geologic materials are
              widely used to restrain leachate generated at waste containment facilities. 
              The predictions of analytical contaminant transport models have been widely
              evaluated using laboratory column tests because data from field-scale compacted
              soil liners is extremely limited.  This project will provide field-scale data
              on chemical transport through compacted soil liners, a comparison between
              contaminant transport model predictions and field-scale data, and
              recommendations for conducting chemical transport analyses for waste
              containment facilities.   

This project will utilize the long-term
              field-scale study that the Illinois State Geological Survey (ISGS) started in
              1985.  The ISGS constructed and heavily instrumented a compacted soil liner,
              with plan dimensions of 8 m x 15 m and a thickness of 0.9 m.  The ISGS liner
              has been monitored for approximately ten years, and the resulting data provides
              a unique opportunity to study the long-term chemical transport through a
              compacted soil liner and the performance of existing contaminant transport
              models.  The main components of the research are: (a) sampling and excavation
              of the compacted soil liner, (b) chemical analysis of the soil samples to
              determine the variation of chemical concentration versus depth, (c)
              geostatistical analysis to quantify the spatial variability of chemical
              transport through the liner, (d) measurement of diffusion coefficient,
              saturated hydraulic conductivity, effective porosity, and other parameters
              required by existing chemical transport models using the original soil liner
              material, (e) state-of-the-art contaminant transport analyses and comparison of
              the results to field-scale measurements to investigate the performance/accuracy
              of existing transport models, (f) quantify the importance of advection and
              diffusion on contaminant migration through the compacted soil liner, and (g)
              develop recommendations for conducting chemical transport analyses for waste
              containment facilities.  The Illinois Office of Solid Waste Research has
              provided matching funds for the proposed research. 


