Title       : U.S.-Polish Research on Structural Health Monitoring Using Piezo-Generated
               Elastic Waves: Feasibility Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9815060

Award Number: 9815060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Grzegorz Kawiecki gmk@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5953,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              INT-9815060
Kawiecki

This U.S.-Poland Cooperative Research award is for
              "Structural Health Monitoring Using Piezo-Generated Elastic Waves: Feasibility
              Study."  The principal investigators are Grzegorz Kawiecki of the University of
              Tennessee for the U.S. side, and, for the Polish side, Dr. Adam Wysokowski of
              the Bridge, Concrete and Aggregate Research Center of the Road and Bridge
              Research Institute of Zmigrod-Weglewo, and Professor Jan Holnicki-Szulc of the
              Division of Computational Mechanics of the Institute of Fundamental
              Technological Research of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw.  The
              objective is to show the feasibility of a new structural monitoring method by
              demonstrating its performance in realistic conditions.  The system under
              considerations designed to monitor the structural health of civil engineering
              structures such as bridges, highway overpasses, dams, &c., in real time. 
              Experiments with proof-of-concept specimens indicate that the proposed approach
              will make it possible not only to detect a damage but also to estimate its
              location and size. The system is based on measurements and analyses of
              anomalies in elastic wave propagation through the monitored structure.  Elastic
              waves are generated and sensed by an array of transducers embedded in the
              structure or distributed over its surface.  The signals transmitted among the
              elements of the transducer network are processed by a neural network-based
              system designed to detect anomalies associated with structural failures.  The
              proposed project will follow three parallel paths: experimental, theoretical,
              and numerical.

This research in civil engineering fulfills the program
              objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and Poland to
              combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual
              interest and competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of
              benefit.

***

