Title       : Evolution of Dioecy from Gynodioecy: Artificial Selection for Sex Allocation
               Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a9815878

Award Number: 9815878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann K. Sakai aksakai@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane R. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen G. Weller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Project Summary. Knowledge of plant reproductive systems is critical for
              agriculture and management of endangered species as well as for an
              understanding of basic evolutionary processes.  Plants are usually
              hermaphroditic, with both male and female function in the same flowers.  In
              many different plant groups, however, evolution has led to sexually dimorphic
              breeding systems including gynodioecy (females and hermaphrodites in
              populations) and dioecy (populations with separate male and female plants). 
              This separation has been associated with changes in allocation of resources to
              male and female function.  Few studies examine the genetic potential for shifts
              in allocation patterns to male and female function, and have taken into account
              known evolutionary relationships of species with various reproductive systems. 
              The proposed study will examine the genetic potential for sex allocation shifts
              with artificial selection on allocation to male and female function in two
              closely related Hawaiian species of Schiedea (Caryophyllaceae).  Given the
              range of allocation patterns within the genus, an artificial selection program
              for greater allocation to male function in hermaphrodites and to female
              function in females should demonstrate significant genetic potential for
              change. In the first experiment, additive genetic variances of sex allocation
              traits and their genetic covariances with other reproductive characters will be
              estimated.  In the second experiment, artificial selection will be performed
              for increased biomass of stamens in hermaphrodites and increased carpel and
              fruit biomass in females.  Both direct responses of these traits and indirect
              responses of correlated traits will be measured, as trait correlations may
              enhance or impede selection for specialization in male and female function. S.
              salicaria is predicted to become more male-like and therefore more similar to
              the sexually dimorphic S. adamantis hermaphrodites.
	Comparative studies have
              often been used to predict the course of evolution.  The proposed research
              takes this approach forward, by determining whether evolutionary trends
              hypothesized on the basis of comparative studies can be produced using
              artificial selection. 

