Title       : SGER: Preliminary Assessment of Extinction of Crickets by Ants in Hawaii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9815919

Award Number: 9815919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Otte otte@say.acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1673,9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0TTE  9815919   The goal of this proposal is to assess the effect of the ant,
              Pheidole megacephala (the big-headed ant) which has been introduced into Hawaii
              from Africa and now appears to threaten the diversity of crickets and other
              insects directly, and other components of the fauna indirectly (crickets are a
              major component of bird diet).  Although the exact date of introduction remains
              uncertain; reports suggests the presence of this ant early in the century and
              its particularly devastating effect on arthropods.   Evidence of ant predation
              is still indirect, but it is strong.  Recent observations on the prevalence of
              crickets (October 1997 and January 1998) indicate a sudden and severe reduction
              of crickets in formerly rich areas.  The baseline data upon which this
              pessimistic assessment is based was collected over a 19 year period.  Otte
              studied the biogeography and systematics of crickets on all Hawaiian Island,
              collected at 644 geographic points, recorded more than 11,000 cricket songs,
              and described approximately 190 new species.   Over a 9 year period Shaw has
              researched the phylogeny, species boundaries and behavior of the genus Laupola,
              with the goal of understanding how new species arise in this island laboratory.
               During that time she visited many of the cricket rich areas described by Otte
              (1994).  In October 1997 areas previously having huge cricket populations were
              found to have virtually no crickets at all.  Examination of the habitat
              revealed large numbers of big-headed ants.  Observations were conducted again
              in January 1998 at which time no crickets were heard.  Otte recorded crickets
              at 207 sites on the Island of Kauai.  The majority of these sites included
              members of the genus Laupala.  October and January surveys included only one
              long transect.     The goal of this proposal is to assess the impact of ants at
              a number of lowland and highland habitats.  The effect of El Nino must be kept
              in mind.  Because an earlier El Nino in the 1980's had no visible effect on
              crickets (d espite considerable drought ) the current population decline may
              not be weather related.  The effect of introduced plants must also be kept in
              mind.  The presence of certain weedy plants in the affected transect is
              noticeable.  but, because crickets are not host specific on plants and survive
              in areas with a high density of exotic plants, vegetational changes are not the
              likely cause of populations crashes.    The possibility that a natural
              predator-prey cycle is occurring must be considered.    Since the ants have
              been present in Hawaii for over 90 years, the current surge is baffling.  Is
              this classical predator prey cycle?  Have these areas been invaded by ants in
              the past?  Will there be any populations crash and subsequent revival of
              crickets?   The possibility that ants will exterminate cricket species is a
              high possibility.  Surveys in Tahiti show that there is now no upland cricket
              fauna on Moorea-an area known to have had an endemic fauna in the past. 
              Introduced ants are so abundant that the setting of cricket traps is
              impossible-baits are removed by ants within minutes of setting.     The current
              distribution of six species of Laupala will be determined and compared to
              baseline data from past studies.  Population levels will be assessed and
              correlated with presence or absence of ants.  Crickets and ant colonies will be
              established at Harvard and Rutgers Universities to assess the effect of ants on
              crickets in various developmental stages.  Cricket colonies will also be kept
              in several laboratories until the fate of field populations can be assessed.
