Title       : Fossil Reptiles from the Late Cretaceous (Campanian-Maestrichtian) of Vega
               Island, Antarctic Peninsula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9815231

Award Number: 9815231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91599              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Martin jmartin@msmailgw.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports paleontological research on dinosaur and
              marine reptile fossils from Vega Island in the Antarctic Peninsula region.
              Field work during the 1997-98 austral summer field season yielded substantial
              numbers vertebrate and invertebrate fossils from the late Cretaceous deposits
              of Vega Island on the Antarctic Peninsula. The fossils represent a wide
              diversity of Late Cretaceous fauna. Not only was the first hadrosaur dinosaur
              from Antarctica discovered, but several specimens of marine reptiles
              (plesiosaurs and mosasaurs) were found and many were recovered. Heretofore,
              marine reptiles had been poorly known from Antarctica, with only one species
              having been described. This award supports the preparation, conservation, and
              research concerning the reptilian portion of the paleofaunal assemblages of the
              Lopez de Bertodano Formation on Vega Island.

The fossil reptile specimens,
              including numerous juveniles, were an unexpected discovery during field
              research on late Cretaceous mammals on Vega Island (see NSF awards OPP-9615236
              to M. O. Woodburne and OPP-9615933 to J. A. Case). At least two different
              mosasaurs were found, two plesiosaurs, and the first evidence of a hadrosaurian
              dinosaur.  The hadrosaur indicates that a dispersal route at least by the
              latest Maastrichtian (the Maastrichtian encompasses the period from about 74 to
              66 million years ago) provided an avenue for dispersal of terrestrial creatures
              from North America through South America to at least Antarctica, and aids in
              the postulated route to Australia. The marine reptiles also demonstrate
              previously unrecognized paleogeographic relationships, and the pursuit of these
              relationships forms the basis for continued field work under this award. At
              least one mosasaur taxon appears to persist longer in Gondwana, whereas the
              other may have closer affinities with northern taxa. The plesiosaurs from
              Antarctica also appear to have relict distribution among the Gondwanan
              continents, as most northern relatives are extinct by the Cretaceous. At this
              point, these paleogeographic relationships are working hypotheses which must be
              tested by the recovery of additional specimens and by study of the history and
              distribution of Gondwanan marine reptiles. Because of Antarctica's position at
              the center of Gondwana during the Late Cretaceous, its study is crucial to the
              understanding of the distribution of marine reptiles. This awards supports
              further work on the existing collections as well as new field work for recovery
              of the dinosaur and marine reptile fossils located last field season.

