Title       : Collaborative Research: Solar Radiation Processes in the East Antarctic Sea Ice
               Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a9815155

Award Number: 9815155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Collin Roesler CRoesler@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is a three-year study of what happens to solar energy at the
              interface between the antarctic sea ice and the atmosphere in late Spring and
              early Summer, specifically how the energy is apportioned among the ocean, the
              ice, and the lowest air layers.  It will be carried out in cooperation with the
              Australian Antarctic Program, with field work on board the Australian ship
              Aurora Australis.
	
The very high reflectivity of the seasonal antarctic sea
              ice cover reduces the input of solar energy at the surface, and the low thermal
              conductivity of the ice reduces the loss of heat from the ocean to the
              atmosphere, significantly affecting the climate of the Southern Ocean.  As the
              sea ice decays in early summer the reflectivity is reduced and melting process
              is accelerated.   Information about how these processes work is needed in order
              to develop appropriate and realistic sea ice models, and to integrate these
              into general circulation and climate change models.
	
Three topics will be
              investigated:  the distribution and types of snow and ice cover and their
              reflectance in the solar spectrum, the effect of clouds in transmitting
              incident solar radiation, and the distribution and absorption properties of
              organic material within the snow and ice.

Calibrated downward and reflected
              upward irradiance observations will be used to infer the radiation balance at
              the surface and will be used to model the surface energy forcing for the
              antarctic sea ice region.  The concentration and distribution of major organic
              absorbers will be determined from core samples within the ice, and their effect
              on the transmittance of energy within the visible and ultraviolet bands will be
              studied.  Algal layers are frequently found within the antarctic sea ice, and
              have been proposed as a likely mechanism for initiating seasonal plankton
              blooms in the Southern Ocean.

