Title       : RUI: Phylogenetic Analysis of Begoniaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2000     
File        : a9815816

Award Number: 9815816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Swensen SSWENSEN@ITHACA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark C. Tebbitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ithaca College
	      Danby Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/274-3111

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815816
Swensen
	Working with collaborators at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden
              (Dr. Mark Tebbitt) and the Royal Botanic Gardens, Edinburgh (Dr. Richard
              Bateman and others), Dr. Susan Swensen at Ithaca College is studying the
              taxonomy and phylogeny of the tropical plant family Begoniaceae. With over a
              thousand named species published for the genus Begonia itself, the group is
              taxonomically complex and challenging. Horticultural interest in these tropical
              plants has led to large living collections at several major botanical gardens,
              but the classification of the numerous species has usually relied upon a
              restricted set of floral and vegetative features, and similarities among many
              of the forms are suspected to have evolved convergently or in parallel in many
              subgroups. Currently, about 80 sections (the rank between species and genus)
              are recognized in Begonia, but mostly on the basis of a few "key" characters
              used for herbarium identification. Dr. Swensen is emphasizing the acquisition
              of DNA sequence data from samples of several hundred species, from either
              nuclear or plastid gene regions, to be complemented by plastid or nuclear data
              from her collaborators for the same exemplar taxa. Undergraduate students will
              be active participants in all aspects of the research. Work will also start on
              morphological and anatomical characters, eventually for integration with the
              molecular database.
	Although recognized as a diverse component of tropical
              vegetation, the Begoniaceae are not well known, and the current classification
              provides little insight into their historical biogeography or into such
              interesting features of evolution as dioecy and associated pollination
              (separate staminate and pistillate plants within a species). The basal position
              of the single-species genus Hillebrandia in recent molecularly based
              phylogenies is particularly perplexing; this Hawaiian endemic may be a
              geologically recent introduction to the islands, or a more ancient relict.
              These and other biological questions will be answered when a framework
              phylogeny or family tree is established for the group, based on the new DNA
              sequence data and integrated with traditional morphological and chromosomal
              data.

