Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Functional Significance of GnRH Multiplicity in
               Teleost Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1999       
File        : a9815869

Award Number: 9815869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30160              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yonathan Zohar zohar@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9815869
Zohar

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Yohathan Zohar of the University of Maryland
              Biotechnology Institute and Professor Akihisa Urano of Hokkaido University in
              Sapporo, Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study of functional
              significance of GnRH multiplicity in teleost fish.  Gonadotropin releasing
              hormone (GnRH) is a decapeptide, produced in the brain, which is essential for
              the control of reproduction in vertebrates.  However, it has been discovered
              that in all vertebrates multiple forms of GnRH coexist in the brain of a single
              species. This indicates that during evolution GnRHs may have acquired
              additional functions that are not related to reproduction.  The differential
              roles of the multiple GnRHs are not yet fully understood, and their relative
              involvement in reproduction has yet to be defined.  One of the primary research
              objectives is to elucidate the relative role each form contributes to the
              complex process of reproduction.  The research is aimed at a detailed study of
              the physiological significance of the two forms of GnRH present in salmonids,
              and the three forms present in perciforms.  The experimental design includes
              both an integrative physiologic approach (in vivo studies on intact animals)
              and a molecular approach (e.g., recombinant GnRH receptor binding
              assay).

This project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that
              have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The U.S. researchers'
              expertise is in the area of molecular science and the Japanese have expertise
              in the physiological area. Results of this research will provide valuable
              information that can be used by both experimentalists and aquaculturists, and
              should have an important (and positive) economic impact in providing additional
              animal protein for human consumption.  This research advances international
              human resources through the participation of a younger scientist and graduate
              students.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.
***

