Title       : Development of a Laboratory Instrument for In-situ Measurement,
               Characterization, and Optimization of Batch Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1998 
File        : a9815569

Award Number: 9815569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlene A. Garrison agarrison@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dwight S. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0400000   Industry University - Co-op             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815569
Garrison

This project is carried out as a part of the NSF Research
              Centers - Small Firms Collaborative R&D initiative, under the leadership of the
              Center for Measurement and Control Engineering, an IUCRC established by the
              National Science Foundation.  Headquartered at the University of Tennessee, the
              Center has several collaborating institutions, including East Carolina
              University.  

In this project, a prototype instrument will be developed and
              used that integrated self-modeling curve resolution (SMCR) software with
              fiber-optic UV/visible spectrograph an and  an automated four station
              mini-reactor/calorimeter into one package.  The prototype instrument for making
              lab-scale and pilot-scale measurements of synthetic organic reactions. 
              Commercial transmission and reflectance probes will be used for in-situ
              measurements.  A small business partner, H&A Scientific, will design and
              produce the prototype instrument by integrating, OEM components with SMCR
              software produced with technology transfer support from East Carolina
              University (ECU).  One of the main goals of this project is to develop a user
              interface that reduces the complexity of the SMCR problem as perceived by the
              instrument user.  A small development team at H&A Scientific will undertake
              this aspect of the project.  A second prototype instrument will be assembled
              with funds provided by Glaxo Wellcome, Inc (GWI) to H&A Scientific.  The two
              prototype instruments will serve as test beds for user interface design and
              ease of use at ECU, and by non-chemometricians and research scientists at GWI. 
              Both business partners (H&A Scientific and GWI) are expected to make
              significant contributions in this area.  

