Title       : GOALI: Polymerization Catalysis, Block Copolymers, and Nuclear Magnetic
               Resonance Characterization of Polylactide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2001   
File        : a9815854

Award Number: 9815854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc A. Hillmyer hillmyer@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Munson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert T. Kean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9161,9181,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815854
Hillmyer

This joint project between the University of Minnesota (UM)
              and Cargill Dow Polymers LLC (CDP) is funded by the Division of Materials
              Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences.  The research effort will be focused on
              three interconnected areas related to the preparation and analysis of
              biodegradable polylactide (PLA) homopolymers, copolymers, and blends.  The
              first area of research will center on the commercially relevant tincatalyzed
              polymerization of lactide.  Currently, the precise mechanism of polymerization
              in many tin-based systems is unclear, and control of the polymerization
              processes can be difficult.  New tin catalysts will be designed, synthesized,
              and examined with the aim of producing a controlled polymerization of lactide. 
              Novel tin catalysts with well-defined ligand environments and predictable
              reactivities will be prepared and characterized.  These complexes will
              ultimately be useful for the preparation of macromolecules with controlled
              chemical and morphological characteristics.  Secondly, PLA-containing block
              copolymers and blends will be examined with emphasis on rubber toughening and
              crystallization phenomena in hybrid composites of PLA and rubbers such as
              polyisoprene.  These new copolymers and blends will be designed to unveil
              critical structure/property relationships that can ultimately be used to
              enhance the mechanical properties of commercial PLA while retaining its
              biodegradation characteristics.  In the final area of research, solid-state and
              solution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy will be employed for the
              characterization of PLA and novel PLA-containing materials.  The research will
              focus on a detailed understanding of the PLA crystal structure and environment
              through the use of specifically labeled. PLA materials.  Experiments that
              definitively correlate PLA tacticity with the corresponding resonances in the
              NMR spectra will also be performed.  The NMR assignments that result will be
              used to correlate the selectivity of various catalysts to the tacticity of the
              polymer.
%%%
The research described in this proposal is focused on PLA, a
              commercially viable biodegradable polymer.  Research and development in the
              field of biodegradable polymers are extremely important endeavors due to the
              nation's problems with waste disposal and to environmental pressures associated
              with traditional commodity plastics.  Currently, most biodegradable polymers do
              not compete effectively with commercially useful polymers from a mechanical
              performance perspective.  A clear need exists for new polymers that possess
              biodegradable properties as well as mechanical, thermal, and processing
              characteristics comparable to conventional polyolefins, such as polypropylene,
              or other thermoplastics like polystyrene.  In an effort to meet these
              challenges, CDP (a joint venture between Cargill Incorporated and the Dow
              Chemical Company) has developed technology to produce PLA at a cost competitive
              with traditional plastics.  The manufacturing process begins with cornstarch
              and ends with high-molecular-weight polymer that is fully degradable in a
              compost environment and has physical properties similar to those of
              polystyrene.  However, PLA suffers from mechanical property deficiencies that
              have hindered its wide spread use.  Fundamental investigations of the chemistry
              and materials science of PLA are of paramount importance to address these
              deficiencies and will ultimately result in polymers with superior properties
              compared to existing PLA.  These advances will lead to a broader scope of
              applications for biodegradable polymers and will lessen the need for
              environmentally unfriendly materials.  This joint project between industry and
              academia is poised to impact future generations of PLA-based materials.  In
              addition, the collaboration includes graduate student internships in industry
              that will allow students to appreciate the importance of biodegradable
              materials from an industrial perspective.
***

