Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Logical Methods for Formal Verification of
               Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9815731

Award Number: 9815731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67670              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andre Scedrov scedrov@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5921,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9815731
Scedrov

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Andre Scedrov of the University of Pennsylvania and
              Professor Mitsuhiro Okada of KeioUniversity in Tokyo, Japan.  The researchers
              will undertake a study of the logical methods for formal verification of
              software, with an emphasis on logical methods.  The research effort will
              involve applying logical notions and methods to various aspects of software
              specification and verification.  The main research themes are:  1) linear logic
              as a specification language and the related automated environments;  2)
              protocols, games, security and logic;  3) program analysis, security and logic;
              and  4) concurrent constraint programming.  Planned research topics include: 
              1) proposed proof-based state exploration and verification techniques and
              decision procedures with applications to real-time and hybrid system
              specification and verification;  2) applications to protocol analysis and
              threat analysis;  3) Java bytecode verification and array-bound checking; 
4)
              extensions of proof-carrying code methodology for safety and security
              properties of untrusted code to properties involving state;  5) type systems
              for mobile computation and communication; and  6) the design and implementation
              of programming languages for the domain of software systems that include
              concurrency and distribution.

This project brings together the efforts of
              two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities.
              Results of this research would provide for more predictable, reliable software.
              This, in turn, would provide for more reliable computing systems.  This
              research advances international human resources through the participation of
              younger scientists.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project
              will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.  
***

