Title       : Studies in First-Passage Percolation and Random Walks with Scenery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9815226

Award Number: 9815226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77394              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Douglas Howard dhoward@baruch.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Baruch College
	      One Bernard Baruch Way
	      New York, NY  100105526    646/312-2205

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9815226  Howard   The work under this grant comprises two areas of investigation
              in the general   category of probability theory.  The first concerns rates of
              convergence (to an associated   asymptotic shape) and related properties of
              infinite geodesics in the context of certain   Euclidean first-passage
              percolation models (Euclidean FPP). Rigorous unconditional   results about
              infinite geodesics (time-minimizing paths) in the context of standard FPP are  
              quite sparse, largely due to technical difficulties associated with lattice
              effects.  Models of   Euclidean FPP take place on graphs constructed from a
              homogeneous Poisson process   and their statistical properties enjoy complete
              invariance under all rigid motions.  In this   sense, Euclidean models are a
              natural setting in which to study FPP geodesics.  The   second area concerns a
              host of problems arising from random walks on the integers where   some fixed
              but possibly random coloring, or "scenery", is assigned to the integers.  In
              this   context, a random walk on the integers produces a record of scenery
              "observed" along the   walk.  The issues under investigation concern, loosely
              speaking, what can be inferred   about the scenery by observing one such
              scenery record.  The difficulty stems from the   fact that one does not know
              the steps taken by the walk, only the scenery observed along   the walk.   Both
              areas of investigation involve stochastic processes associated with some type  
              of spatial structure.  While the focus of this research is the mathematical
              aspects of these   models, models of this general sort arise quite naturally in
              connection with a number of   interesting physical phenomena.  For example, the
              standard FPP model was first   introduced as a representation of fluid flow
              through a random porous medium such as an   aquifer or, on a smaller physical
              scale, a membrane.  There are also connections to other   aspects of materials
              science, including the formation and propagation of cracks.
