Title       : Regional Cooperative Activities to Support Global Change Research in IAI
               Countries - Jamaica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1998 
File        : a9815922

Award Number: 9815922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Chen achen@uwimona.edu.jm  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of the West Indies
	      
	      Kingston, JM  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will support several areas of global change  research in the
              Caribbean.  An existing precipitation data  base for the Caribbean will be
              expanded.  This precipitation  data set currently consists of monthly average
              station data,  and was compiled from the Climate Prediction Center CAMS 
              station precipitation data for January 1851 through  September 1994 and CDIAC
              Global Historical Climatology  Network data base for precipitation for October
              1832 through  October 1990, with duplicate data ignored. Precipitation  data
              and other data will be augmented by the use of NCEP and  ECMWF re-analysis data
              and TRMM data if available.  CDIAC  monthly temperature, sea level pressure and
              station pressure  data will be added. SST data will also be incorporated by 
              using the GISST 2.3 data set from the Hadley Centre.  Other  data sets,
              including upper air data and soil moisture, from  relevant world-wide and
              Caribbean institutes, including the  Caribbean Meteorological Institute (CMI),
              which have been  checked for quality control will also be incorporated.  The 
              combined data set will be gridded using an area weighting  average in the GrADS
              R40 format.  A preliminary version of  this data set has already been used for
              analyses, but the  full version will be checked for validity over the ocean by 
              comparing it with the Xie-Arkin data which has a shorter  time span (1997
              onward), but includes observed data over the  ocean.  Satellite imagery and
              data will be obtained from the  University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez (UPRM). The
              regional  climate model MM5, in collaboration with the Department of 
              Meteorology, University of Maryland, will be used to study  climate variability
              in the Caribbean.  The University of the  West Indies has created a 2 year post
              in Climate Modeling  for this purpose, and a student presently completing his 
              Ph.D. at the University of Maryland will return to continue  the work of the
              climate modeling at the end of 2 years.  The  project will provide part of the
              backbone for a data and  information system for the exchange of global change
              data  resulting from IAI-sponsored research between members of  research teams
              in the Americas, including the USA and  Canada.  This project will specifically
              give US researchers  access to data sets from the rest of the Americas that
              have  previously been inaccessible.  The National Science  Foundation is the
              designated U.S. Government agency to carry  out U.S. responsibilities within
              the IAI.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
