Title       : The Role of Monitoring in Acquiring Complex Skills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9815307

Award Number: 9815307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Widner rwidner@brain.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9283,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Monitoring one's performance plays a critical role in the self-regulation of
              cognition and behavior.  Recently there has been a substantial amount of
              research examining the role of monitoring in cognitive performance.  For
              example, in terms of memory performance, inefficient monitoring results in poor
              assessments of the contents of our memories (i.e., deciding whether we know
              some information) and poor assessments of the amount of time required to learn
              some specified material.  Surprisingly, there has been little research
              examining the role of monitoring in acquiring skills; more specifically, in
              acquiring complex skills.    There are three goals to this project.  The first
              is to identify psycho-physiological, as well as neuro-psychological, correlates
              of monitoring performance.  This will be accomplished by obtaining measures
              from several psycho-physiological measures as well as several
              neuro-psychological tests.  These measures will be correlated with three
              monitoring stages: (a) assessments or predictions of how one will do when
              acquiring a complex skill; (b) assessments of how one is doing when acquiring
              the skill; and (c) assessments of how well one did upon completion of the task,
              and (d) assessments of how one will do in similar situations.  The second goal
              is to identify the role played by monitoring in acquiring complex skills.  This
              will be accomplished by assessing how well individuals monitor their
              performance at each of the acquisition stages.  The third goal is to develop a
              rehabilitation program for individuals with less-than-optimal monitoring
              performance (e.g., older adults as well as individuals with neuro-degenerative
              diseases such as Alzheimer's and Huntington's).  It is argued that monitoring
              one's performance, be it the monitoring of one's cognitive processes or the
              monitoring of one's behavior, requires substantial amounts of working memory
              resources.  Thus, monitoring one's performance reduces the amount of working
              memory resources that are available for other tasks, such as acquiring complex
              skills.  If monitoring interferes with the acquisition process then it may be
              possible to develop techniques that can aid individuals in acquiring complex
              skills by `bypassing` the use of monitoring processes.  The effectiveness of
              several techniques will be examined such as the Procedural Reinstatement
              Hypothesis which states that skill performance will be optimal when the same
              procedures that were used in acquiring the skill match those that are used to
              carry out the skill at some later point in time.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
