Title       : Development of a Classification Scheme for Species/Habitat Associations and
               Biodiversity in Antarctic Benthic Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9815251

Award Number: 9815251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50021              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rikk G. Kvitek rikk_kvitek@csumb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Gary Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Monterey Bay Fdn
	      100 Campus Drive, Bldg. 86C
	      Seaside, CA  939558001    /   -

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              OPP-9815251 
P.I.s R.G. Kvitek and H.G. Green
This collaborative project with
              the Italian Antarctic program seeks to develop a species/habitat classification
              scheme for Antarctic benthic communities at Terra Nova Bay.  The P.I.s will
              employ an acoustic seafloor mapping system to produce a detailed and spatially
              accurate Geographic Information System (GIS) map of physical habitat diversity
              and develop an appropriate scheme for classifying this diversity.  The P.I.s
              will work with Italian biologists to make use of their georeferenced Remotely
              Operated Vehicle (ROV) video imagery taken of Terra Nova Bay biotic communities
              and attempt to relate spatial patterning of epifaunal biodiversity with
              variation in habitat types from 20-200 meters water depth.  This product will
              provide the first step toward developing a classification scheme for
              species/habitat associations in nearshore Antarctic marine environments.  The
              work will test the hypothesis that acoustic habitat classification techniques
              can be used to accurately predict epifaunal species distributions and
              biodiversity in the nearshore systems.  If successful, the approach and
              associated geophysical classification scheme would provide a cost-effective
              tool for screening and initial assessment of marine areas proposed as Antarctic
              Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs).   A byproduct of this work will be the
              establishment of a physical baseline map of the proposed Terra Nova Bay ASPA
              that can be used for assessing or monitoring habitat change due to natural or
              anthropogenic disturbance.  Follow-up surveys could be done on an as-needed
              basis after episodic events or as part of a regular, acoustic mapping program
              to assess rates and changes characteristic to the area.

