Title       : Dissertation Research: Prehispanic Subsistence Patterns in the Middle Orinoco
               Basin, Venezuela
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2000      
File        : a9815941

Award Number: 9815941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Izumi Shimada ishimada@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan D. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Drs. Izumi Shimada and Jonathan Hill, MS Linda Perry will
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will develop a technique to
              test for the presence of bitter manioc (Manihot esculenta Crantz) in
              archaeological deposits and then apply it to stone artifacts excavated from a
              series of sites from the Amazonian Middle Orinoco region of Venezuela. Bitter
              manioc is an important traditional Amazonian food and, based on indirect
              evidence, is believed to have been domesticated in this region. A major
              transformation in human social organization is associated with the "Neolithic
              Revolution", the shift from subsistence based on hunted and gathered foods to
              reliance on domesticated plants and animals. Archaeologists wish to understand
              the process that led independently to the domestication of a variety of species
              in many parts of the world. Because animal bones are often well preserved in
              archaeological sites, a great deal is known about domestication of mammalian
              species. However plants, especially root crops in tropical environments, are
              subject to rapid destruction and their history is less well understood.
              Botanists have long recognized that many such plants produce starch grains
              which are can serve as unique species markers and which are well preserved in
              archaeological situations. These grains often adhere to stone implements used
              to process the plants and examination of these lithics can provide unequivocal
              information on the presence of specific species. The technique however has not
              yet been applied to bitter manioc.

MS Perry will analyze samples of bitter
              manioc to determine the configuration of bitter manioc starch grains and then
              adapt available techniques and develop an appropriate analytic protocol. She
              will then test it on a well excavated collection currently housed in the United
              States. When successfully completed she will then travel to Venezuela and
              examine materials from a series of Middle Orinoco sites. Several major cultural
              traditions were present in the region and together the sites trace each over a
              period of ca. 3,000 years. The research will relate this complex culture
              history to bitter manioc domestication and utilization.

This project is
              important for several reasons. It will develop an analytic technique of wide
              archaeological applicability and value in the tropical New World. It will shed
              new light on the domestication of an important traditional domesticate and help
              to elucidate South American culture history. It will also help to train a
              promising young scientist.

