Title       : Development of Improved Fiber and Web Charateristics in Selected Critical
               Nonwoven Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1998 
File        : a9815568

Award Number: 9815568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subhash K. Batra sbatra@tx.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tushar K. Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohan Srinivasarao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0400000   Industry University - Co-op             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9815568
Batra

This project is carried out as a part of the NSF Research
              Centers -Small Firms Collaborative R&D initiative, under the leadership of the
              Nonwovens Cooperative Research Center (NCRC) at North Carolina State
              University.  NCRC is a S/IUCRC established by the National Science
              Foundation.

This study seeks to develop collaborative research projects with
              small businesses.  A full member and an affiliate of NCRC has joined
              investigators to carry out two separate projects.

One of them (Goulston
              Technologies, Inc.) seeks to understand the fundamental mechanisms involved in
              application of spin-finishes to fibers and its eventual distribution of the
              fibers.  Inasmuch as staple fibers cannot be processed into fabrics without
              suitable spin-finishes, this is a very critical issue and has substantial
              impact on the economics of the industry.

The other project relates to melt
              blowing, a fast growing technology for making a wide variety of nonwoven
              fabrics,.  The research here (Blax Fiberfilm, Inc.) seeks to optimize the
              design of melt-blowing dies capable of producing a range of course-to-fine
              fibers with minimal diametric variations, for the selected degree of fineness,
              at high throughputs (low energy costs).  Such dies have the potential of
              permitting engineering of melt-blown structures with varying levels of porosity
              across the thickness of the final fabric.  Such control of porosity
              distribution leads to highly efficient and economical fabrics useful for oil
              and gas filtration, and filtration/fractionation of biological materials.

