Title       : RUI: Structure of a Cave Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a9815925

Award Number: 9815925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299410             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Moore jcmoore@bentley.unco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elisabeth Andrews  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Northern Colorado
	      SPARC
	      Greeley, CO  80639    970/351-1910

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815925
Moore
This project has two goals. The first is to explore the
              relationships among productivity, diversity and trophic structure in a low
              production detritus-based cave community. The second is to provide rich
              educational and research experience for undergraduate students. Communities are
              shaped by the level of productivity and by the regulation afforded by
              consumers. An extensive survey of the sediments in Wind Cave and Jewel Cave,
              South Dakota, revealed patterns in species diversity and trophic structure that
              could be explained by the rate of input of organic matter, the diversity of
              organic inputs, and/or the colonization rates and potentials of consumers.
              Sediments close to the cave entrance possess a diverse assemblage of microbes
              and invertebrates. Further into the caves, inputs are restricted to artificial
              light, lint and water droplets. Beyond the tour route in these caves, inputs
              are reduced to windblown dust and water drops. Hence, there is a steep gradient
              of input rate that is coincident with declines in the diversity of inputs,
              species diversity and trophic complexity. To meet the first of the project
              goals, types and rates of organic input into different regions of the cave will
              be manipulated and the diversity and trophic structure of the communities will
              be followed. Colonization abilities and natural histories of the organisms will
              be determined. Particular attention will be given to both taxonomic and
              functional diversity of microbes. From a pedagogical perspective, caves are
              exotic and ideal of working with undergraduates. There is an allure about caves
              that makes them model classrooms to teach and study basic ecological
              principles. Students will be integrated into all aspects of the research,
              including setting up manipulative experiments, data collection, design and
              implementation of laboratory experiments, modeling, data analysis and
              publication. Overall, the cave ecosystem is represents the best type of system
              in which to investigate how energy inputs may affect diversity and trophic
              structure in communities. While there is a wealth of descriptive natural
              history on cave communities, few studies have focused on community structure
              and dynamics in these low productivity systems.

