Title       : Photorefractive Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  2000   
File        : a9815955

Award Number: 9815955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luping Yu lupingyu@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9815955
Yu

In this proposal, the principles of designing novel, high
              performance photorefractive materials are sought.  Two classes of
              photorefractive materials are proposed:  1) high and or low Tg, fully
              functionalized photorefractive polymers and 2) multifunctional small molecular
              systems.  These are presented to test the idea that conjugated polymer
              backbones will play the role of charge transport agent and the neutral
              transition metal complexes (which exhibit interesting metal-to-ligand charge
              transfer (MLCT) processes) will play the role of charge generating species.  In
              this way, the quantum efficiency of the
charge generation process can be
              enhanced and the dark current and local ionic dipole field can be minimized. 
              Thus, the PR performance of resulting polymers will be enhanced.  The glass
              transition temperatures of proposed polymer system can be fine-tuned so that PR
              polymers with either dominating Pockel contribution or Kerr contribution can be
              synthesized and their physical properties compared.  Different parameters which
              affect the PR performance, such as variations of NLO chromophores, sensitizers
              and alkyl chains spacers, will be systematically investigated and their
              structure/property correlations defined.  The second class of materials are
              amorphous, low Tg small molecular systems.  They are single multifunctional
              molecules containing all of the functionality necessary for PR effect.  One of
              such systems is the oligothiophene-NLO molecules:  amorphous materials where
              the oligothiophene is the photoconductive component.  These materials are
              designed to test the idea that a multifunctional small molecular system,
              instead of polymers, may exhibit comparable PR performances.  These are
              structurally well defined, and simple systems for detailed physical studies. 
              An extra bonus is that they are also very easily processed into thick films. 
              Coupled with the proposed synthetic work, the detailed physical
              characterization of these materials will be carried out, including e-o
              measurements, photoconductivity studies, mobility measurements, two beam
              coupling and four wave mixing experiments and holographic imaging.  
%%%
The
              significance of the proposed work is that it provides novel thinking in new
              material design and synthesis.  The idea of introducing metal complexes into
              functional polymers may prove vital for future material development other than
              the photorefractive polymer system.  The idea of a multifunctional small
              molecular system for photorefractive effect is also important both for
              fundamental understanding of the PR mechanism and for practical applications. 
              The novel chemistry developed in the synthesis of these materials will impact
              the polymer synthetic community.
***
 

