Title       : Collaborative Research: Plant Tolerance of Herbivory: A Test for Constraints on
               Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a9815550

Award Number: 9815550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen L. Simms esimms@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815550
Simms

Humans have long been concerned about the impact of insect
              pests on plant performance.  To date ecologists and agronomists have
              concentrated on plant resistance to attack, that is, the plant's ability to
              deter potential enemies.  However, insect attack is rarely fatal and so plants
              have the opportunity for a second way to deal with enemy attack, to recover and
              regrow.  The ability to survive and prosper after attack is called tolerance. 
              Compared to the research progress in understanding the genetics and ecology of
              resistance, very little is known about plant recovery.  This knowledge void
              hampers understanding of the total plant defense system.  Not only is it
              important to study the cost-benefit structure of tolerance in it own right, we
              also need to understand tolerance to understand the adaptive value of
              resistance.  The interdependence of resistance and tolerance emerges from two
              considerations.  First, resistance and tolerance can be redundant-if a plant
              can completely recover from attack, there is little profit in also resisting
              attack.  The second consideration arises from optimal defense theory.  It is
              widely hypothesized that resistance factors are costly since resources devoted
              to resistance cannot also be allocated to growth.  Numerous experiments have
              tested this hypothesis, but with mixed results.  Recent models suggest that
              resistance costs are hard to detect because they are obscured by tolerance
              costs.  But because little is known about tolerance, little is known about
              tolerance costs.  Thus, there is little basis for evaluating these important
              theoretical predictions.  These experiments will look for tolerance costs using
              a wild mustard species, Brassica campestris, which is the wild progenitor of
              canola, the important oil seed crop. 

Artificial selection will be perform
              to determine if genetic trade-offs impose a fitness cost that constrains the
              ability of B. campestris to tolerate defoliation.  This experiment involves
              selecting for performance in plant lines that experience sever damage every
              generation, lines that never experience damage, and lines that experience both.
               Selection will be by sib-selection.  Following several generations of
              selection, tolerance differences among the lines will be measured by growing
              them across all damage environments.  These experiments, thus, will test
              several major hypotheses about genetic constraints on tolerance, and will
              initiate a long-term effort to identify the physiological traits, and the
              underlying genetic loci, that contribute to plant recovery.  In addition, by
              examining selection response across two environments, these experiments will
              offer insights on the more general problem of constraints on selection for
              phenotypic plasticity.









H:\popbio\abstracts\fy1999\9815550
              (Simms abstract)

