Title       : Antarctic Pack Ice Seals: Nutritional Physiology and Body Condition of Seals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a9815176

Award Number: 9815176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231225             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Castellini mikec@ims.uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815176
CASTELLINI
The pack ice region surrounding Antarctica contains at
              least fifty percent of the world's population of seals, comprising about eighty
              percent of the world's total pinniped biomass. As a group, these seals are
              among the dominant top predators in Southern Ocean ecosystems, and the
              fluctuation in their abundance, growth patterns, life histories, and behavior
              provide a potential source of information about environmental variability
              integrated over a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. This proposal was
              developed as part of the international Antarctic Pack Ice Seals (APIS) program,
              which is aimed to better understand the ecological relationships between the
              distribution of pack ice seals and their environment. During January-February,
              2000, a research cruise through the pack ice zone of the eastern Ross Sea and
              western Amundsen Sea will be conducted to survey and sample along six transects
              perpendicular to the continental shelf. Each of these transects will pass
              through five environmental sampling strata:  continental shelf zone, Antarctic
              slope front, pelagic zone, the ice edge front, and the open water outside the
              pack ice zone. All zones but open water will be ice-covered to some degree.
              This component of the APIS program will examine seal nutritional physiology,
              using a suite of biomarkers and morphometric indices that reflect the health,
              body condition and nutritional status of seal populations. Measurements include
              blood and clinical markers, nutrition indices, lipid signatures and stable
              isotope signatures as well an array of protein markers. Comparisons will be
              made within and between species. This study will complement others on the
              health status of Antarctic ice seals. Better insight into the interplay among
              pack ice seals and biological and physical features of Antarctic marine
              ecosystems will allow for a better prediction of fluctuation in seal population
              in the context of environmental change.


