Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Phylogeny of Brain/Pituitary Hormones of
               Agnathans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9815258

Award Number: 9815258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22813              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stacia A. Sower sasower@cisunix.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815258
Sower

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Stacie Sower of the University of New Hampshire and
              Professor Hiroshi Kawauchi of the Kitasato University in Iwate, Japan.  The
              researchers will be undertaking a study of  phylogeny of brain/pituitary
              hormones of agnathans.  The goal is to develop new techniques and insight on
              the molecular isolation of pituitary hormones (in particular, gonadotropins,
              GTH) in lampreys and hagfish.  Lampreys of the class agnathans are of
              particular importance in understanding endocrinological relationships since
              they represent one of the oldest lineages of extant  vertebrates which evolved
              over 550 million years ago.  In this project, agnathans are considered to be
              paraphyletic in origin with the modern agnathans classified into two groups,
              myxinoids (hagfish) and petromyzonids (lamprey).  The gonadotropins, prolactin
              or growth hormones have not yet been identified in lampreys and no anterior
              pituitary hormones have been identified in hagfish.    

This project brings
              together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and
              research capabilities. The U.S. researchers' expertise is in the area of
              neuroendocrinology and the Japanese have expertise in biochemistry. Results of
              this research should provide further information for the evolution of the
              hormones, prediction of gene duplication during the early development of
              vertebrates and also provide information that may help in resolving the
              phylogenetic relationships between hagfish, lampreys and jawed vertebrates.
              This research advances international human resources through the participation
              of a younger scientist.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
              project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.
***

