Title       : SGER: Bridging the Gap between Theory and Experiment in Scanning Force
               Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1998   
File        : a9815436

Award Number: 9815436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48699              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaoyi Jiang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9815436
Shaoyi, Jiang
Kansas State University

Advances in
              atomic force microscopy/friction force microscopy/surface apparatus
              (AFM/FFM/SFA) and molecular simulation have allowed one to investigate
              interfacial and surface problems with high resolution and measure nano-scale
              forces  [1, 2, 3].  However, the interpretation of AFM/FFM results is sometimes
              difficult due to a lack of understanding of  the fundamental processes involved
              in these techniques.  Molecular simulation should be able to play a key role in
              guiding the interpretation of experimental data and design of new experiments,
              providing insights into atomic-scale interactions in AFM/FFM systems, and
              enabling the prediction of new phenomena not accessible to current laboratory
              experiments.  At present, however, there is no direct comparison between
              molecular simulations and AFM/FFM data because few quantitative AFM/FFM data
              are available and few simulations have been carried out under experimental
              conditions.  Significant progress in the area of molecular approaches to
              dynamic interfaces (the PI's major research interests) can be expected after
              this gap between theory and experiment is bridged).  

The proposed work will
              provide the first rigorous comparison between accurate molecular simulation and
              quantitative AFM/FFM data.  Due to their research values and potential
              applications, self-assembled monolayers (SAMS) will be our model systems and
              lateral (friction) vs. normal force curve and AFM images of thin films on
              surfaces will be properties for comparison.  The purpose is not simply to
              reproduce the specific properties, but rather to show the feasibility of
              correlating simulations to experiments quantitatively and of interpreting
              AFM/FFM experimental results using molecular simulations.  The success of this
              work will greatly accelerate the PI's research in this emerging field, advance
              our understanding of the nature of interactions at interfaces in AFM/FFM
              systems, establish the PI's reputation, and attract external funding both
              government and industry. 





