Title       : Effects of Lactation and Weaning on Autonomic Nervous System Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1998 
File        : a9815478

Award Number: 9815478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth S. Mezzacappa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Res Found For Mental Hyg
	      1051 Riverside Drive
	      New York, NY  10032    212/543-5801

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                              LAY ABSTRACT  IBN-9815478  Lactation and Weaning Effects on
              Autonomic Nervous System Function         This application proposes preliminary
              studies of the effects of  lactation on autonomic nervous system (ANS)
              function. Human and animal  research suggests that during lactation, responses
              to stress are  diminished. Specifically, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical
              and  sympathetic-adrenal medullary responses to stressors are blunted under 
              lactation. Human work from our laboratory indicate that lactational  status
              affects sympathetic (SNS) and parasympathetic (PNS) nervous system  measures
              during rest and in response to stress. Lactators showed a  relatively high
              baseline SNS activity compared with Non-Lactators;  however Non-Lactators
              showed more SNS responsivity to stressors. Weaning  may alter ANS function as
              well. Lactators had a high coactivation of the  SNS and PNS systems, with the
              latter predominating, while Weaning-  Lactators showed coinhibition of the SNS
              and PNS systems. In addition,  Weaning-Lactators showed relatively greater SNS
              responses to laboratory  stressors.       An investigation of these alterations
              in neuroendocrine regulation  during lactation require procedures that are not
              possible in human  mothers; therefore, it is necessary to develop an animal
              model to  investigate the effects of lactation and weaning on cardiac autonomic
               function during baseline and in response to stressors. The hypotheses are 
              that compared with lactating animals, weaning animals will have greater 
              baseline heart rates and lower baseline heart period variability and will 
              react to stressors with greater heart rate increases and greater  decrements in
              heart rate variability.       First and foremost, the proposed experiments will
              determine whether  rats show ANS alterations as they do HPA changes in
              lactation and  weaning. Secondly, the experiments will determine whether rats
              show ANS  alterations similar to those found in human mothers, and therefore, 
              whether rats are a suitab le model for normal function in health humans. 
              Furthermore, procedural parameters must be investigated, e.g., at what  day
              postpartum and postweaning are there maximal lactational effects on  ANS. The
              proposed studies address these questions about feasibility and  inform
              subsequent, more comprehensive studies of mechanisms underlying  lactational
              effects on ANS function. If this rat model is suitable,  future experiments
              proposals to NSF will address the underlying  physiology of these effects using
              pharmacological blockade and surgical  techniques to determine SNS and PNS
              contributions, hormonal assay and  administration of agonists and antagonists
              to determine the role of  oxytocin and prolactin in mediating the ANS effects
              of lactation, and  bioenergetic issues.
