Title       : Catalytic Oxidations in Supercritical Carbon Dioxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a9815321

Award Number: 9815321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daryle H. Busch dhbusch@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bala Subramaniam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1238,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Daryle H. Busch
CHE-9815321

Title: Catalytic Oxidations in Supercritical
              Carbon Dioxide

Abstract

This award is made to Dr. Daryle H. Busch,
              Chemistry Department, and Dr. Bala Subramaniam, Department of Chemical and
              Petroleum Engineering, of the University of Kansas for investigation for
              oxidation catalysts in supercritical carbon dioxide (sc CO2).  The award is in
              the Technology for Sustainable Environment component of the EPA/NSF Partnership
              for Environmental Research, and support is provided by the MPS Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program and Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities.  Olefin epoxidation, functional group oxidation
              and bleach enhancers will be studied.  The advantage of sc CO2 as a reaction
              medium is that it is non-toxic, inexpensive, and environmentally benign
              compared to organic solvents often used in the reactions of interest.  Emphasis
              will be placed on modifying the structure of transition metal catalysts in
              order to increase their solubility in sc CO2.  Alternatively, fluorocarbon
              polymer supports or macroporous templated polymers will be investigated. 
              Included among the metal systems to be studied are manganese complexes; rhenium
              oxides; salen derivatives of cobalt, iron, and chromium; and ruthenium
              porphyrins.  Supercritical oxidation kinetics will be performed in batch
              reactors under well-defined process conditions.

High volume chemicals such
              as ethylene glycol and propylene glycol are formed in epoxidation reactions
              while selective functional group oxidation is important in manufacture of many
              fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals, and bleach catalysts have potential
              application in sc CO2 dry-cleaning businesses.  In this project, alternative
              routes to many widely used oxidation reactions will be studied and optimized
              for use in the benign solvent sc CO2.





