Title       : A Statistics Program at the National Center for Atmospheric Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a9815344

Award Number: 9815344
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Katz rwk@ucar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1303,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815344
Katz
	The Geophysical Statistics Program (GSP) at the National Center
              for 
Atmospheric Research (NCAR) makes contributions to atmospheric and
              oceanic 
science through the development and application of new statistical
              methodology. 
The project supports a critical mass of statistics visitors at
              NCAR, trains 
young researchers, and involves close collaboration with
              resident NCAR 
geophysical scientists. The continuation of this project
              expands statistical 
research to the entire spectrum of scientific activity at
              NCAR and in so doing, 
establishes a permanent statistics group at this
              research center. The richness 
of geophysical measurements pose substantive
              research problems in statistical 
science and continue to challenge the
              boundaries of statistics. Some broad areas 
of research include modeling and
              inference for spatial and spatial/temporal 
processes, statistical design,
              inverse problems, statistical computing, and 
functional data analysis. These
              statistical topics have many direct applications 
to the geophysical sciences,
              including the detection of climate change, 
improvement of numerical models,
              prediction of severe weather, and design of 
field experiments.
	The primary
              purpose of the Geophysical Statistics Program (GSP) at the 
National Center
              for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) is to promote collaboration 
between the
              statistical and geophysical sciences. NCAR, base-funded by the 
National
              Science Foundation, is a focal point for basic research on the 
atmosphere and
              has strong links to universities throughout North America. The 
complexity of
              problems in the atmospheric and oceanic sciences (e.g., large 
numbers of
              variables and massive data sets) indicates that statistics could make
              
important contributions. There is also a broader benefit to statistics and
              
mathematical sciences. New statistical methods, motivated by geophysical
              
problems, can be transferred to other areas which consider spatiotemporal
              data 
and the output of numerical models.  Besides these benefits to the
              scientific 
fields involved, this collaborative research would result in
              potential benefits 
to society. For instance, it could lead to improved
              weather and climate 
forecasts, as well as to more reliable quantification of
              uncertainty in global 
climate change studies. Such information should be of
              substantial value to 
decision makers and policy analysts.

