Title       : An Examination of Genetic Patterns and Phylogeny of Antarctic Pack Ice Seals: A
               Coordinated Multinational Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9815786

Award Number: 9815786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301065             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald B. Siniff siniff@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Stirling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis Strobeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815786
SINIFF
The pack ice region surrounding Antarctica contains at least
              fifty percent of the world's population of seals, comprising about eighty
              percent of the world's total pinniped biomass. As a group, these seals are
              among the dominant top predators in Southern Ocean ecosystems, and the
              fluctuation in their abundance, growth patterns, life histories, and behavior
              provide a potential source of information about environmental variability
              integrated over a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. This proposal was
              developed as part of the international Antarctic Pack Ice Seals (APIS) program,
              which is aimed to better understand the ecological relationships between the
              distribution of pack ice seals and their environment. During January-February,
              2000, a research cruise through the pack ice zone of the eastern Ross Sea and
              western Amundsen Sea will be conducted to survey and sample along six transects
              perpendicular to the continental shelf. Each of these transects will pass
              through five environmental sampling strata:  continental shelf zone, Antarctic
              slope front, pelagic zone, the ice edge front, and the open water outside the
              pack ice zone. All zones but open water will be ice-covered to some degree. The
              objective of this component of the APIS program is to investigate the genetic
              diversity among widely dispersed populations of the four species of Antarctic
              ice seals and to examine the phylogenetic relationship among the species.
              Microsatellite techniques will be used to explore heterozygosity patterns
              within each species and to relate these patterns to known life history
              characteristics. Mitochondrial DNA analysis will be used to examine the
              sequence of divergence between the four species. Additionally, this component
              will coordinate genetic sample analyses through a collaboration with the
              University of Alberta, Canada. Better insight into the interplay among pack ice
              seals and biological and physical features of Antarctic marine ecosystems will
              allow for a better prediction of fluctuation in seal population in the context
              of environmental change.


