Title       : Robust Error Compensation Methods for Machine Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9815687

Award Number: 9815687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Ni junni@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jingxia Yuan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shixin Jack Hu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0400000   Industry University - Co-op             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815687
Ni

This project is carried out as a part of the NSF Research Centers
              - Small Firms Collaborative R&D initiative, under the leadership of The Center
              for Dimensional Measurement aned Control in Manufacturing, an IUCRC established
              by the National Science Foundation.

The accuracy of machine tools is a
              determining factor on the competitiveness in the machine tool industry, and has
              a significant impact on the manufacturing of the United States.  The NSF I/UCRC
              at the University of Michigan has focused on the development of real time error
              compensation methodologies.  In general, these methods use information measured
              by temperature sensors mounted on the machine tool structure, and mathematical
              models of machine thermal errors, to predict the cutter location errors caused
              by various sources; the methods them compensate for the errors in real time. 
              In this study, the NSF I/UCRC at the University of Michigan will initiate a
              collaborative R&D project with Saginaw Machine Systems, Inc. to perform the
              following research:

1. Develop a scientific methodology to determine a set
              of optimal sensor locations quickly before mounting the sensors on the machine.
               A software simulation method will be developed to determine the optimal
              thermal sensor locations when the machine structure and working conditions are
              known.
2. Develop an innovative concept of thermal error mode analysis.  The
              thermal error mode analysis will reveal each machine's thermal error features
              for optimizing the sensor locations.
3. Validate the above methodologies and
              techniques experimentally on a CNC turning center.  The number of sensors
              required is expected to be reduced significantly.  At the same time, the
              calibration time for thermal errors is expected to decrease dramatically. 
              Furthermore, year-round machining accuracy can be achieved.

The success of
              this study will shed light on future research and applications of machine tool
              error compensation methods in industry.  The success would not only make a
              significant contribution of the science base of this important technical field,
              but would also make a great impact on the widespread industrial applications of
              error compensation research.  Thus, it will help U.S. machine tool industry,
              and further generate positive impacts on any manufacturing industry that uses
              machine tools, to compete 

