Title       : Collaborative Research: The Roles of Sperm-Egg Interactions in Reproductive
               Isolation in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a9815962

Award Number: 9815962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rhonda R. Snook rsnook@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research will apply new technological advances to the study of an
              outstanding biological question - how do sperm-egg interactions during and
              following fertilization affect reproductive success?  The primary role of sperm
              has traditionally been viewed as a delivery vehicle for the "DNA cargo." 
              However, recent evidence indicates that sperm may play a more fundamental role
              in fertilization and early development.  For example, in almost all cases
              examined, including humans and other mammals, the entire sperm cell enters the
              egg at fertilization.  Sperm structure within the egg may therefore be an
              essential element of fertilization, as supported by the existence of Drosophila
              mutants defective in both sperm structure within the egg and subsequent
              embryonic development.  This incompatibility between sperm inside the egg may
              represent an unrecognized mechanism of sterility between individuals.

              
Sperm-egg incompatibility will be studied in three steps using Drosophila:
              (1) the 3D structure of sperm inside eggs from matings of the same species will
              be determined and compared with, (2) the 3D sperm structures inside eggs from
              matings between different species.  Information gathered in (1) and (2) will be
              used for a detailed analysis of the fitness consequences of altered sperm-egg
              interactions.  (3) 3D sperm structure will be determined using the CAVE, a
              virtual reality environment, in which 3D projections of sperm inside eggs will
              be traced and compared.  The use of the CAVE represents a novel application of
              super computing technology to complex biological processes.  The ubiquitous
              nature of sperm-egg interactions during and following fertilization suggest
              that these findings will have relevance to the reproductive biology to a wide
              range of animals, including endangered species and humans.

