Title       : Disseration Research: A Phylogenetic Analysis of the Plesiadapiformes and their
               Relationship to Euprimates and other Archontans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1999    
File        : a9815884

Award Number: 9815884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10066              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Rose   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Fossil deposits dated to the Eocene (approx. 55 million years ago) have yielded
              the earliest unequivocal members of our own order of mammals.  The source of
              these primitive primates has traditionally been thought to lie among the
              Plesiadapiformes, an archaic group of mammals with primate-like teeth that date
              to the Paleocene and Eocene.  Recent work looking only at non-dental traits has
              suggested that some members of the plesiadapiform cluster are more closely
              related to the modern Indonesian group of gliding mammals, the Dermoptera, than
              to the primates. This hypothesis leaves the source of origin of our own order
              as a matter of debate.  

This project seeks to reevaluate the position of
              the Plesiadapiformes using contemporary systematic techniques.  Data will be
              collected on all available anatomical regions, and for all plesiadapiform
              groups.  The goals of this study include the elucidation of interfamilial
              relations within the Plesiadapiformes, and the clarification of the precise
              phylogenetic relationship of plesiadapiform families to undoubted primates,
              dermopterans, bats, tree shrews, and a few extinct fossil groups (Mixodectidae
              and Plagiomenidae).  Stratigraphic information will also be incorporated into
              the analysis, to investigate the importance of the relative ordering of
              specimens through time to the elucidation of evolutionary relationships.  This
              study will be the first to include all sources of information across a broad
              enough range of taxa to answer the questions surrounding the systematics of the
              Plesiadapiformes, and to clarify the events at the base of the order
              Primates.

