Title       : Evolution of P Transposable Elements in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a9815754

Award Number: 9815754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret G. Kidwell kidwell@azstarnet.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract   

Evolution of P transposable elements in Drosophila  
P.I.:
              Margaret G. Kidwell  

The geographical distribution, genetics and evolution
              of P transposable elements will be investigated in natural populations of
              Drosophila willistoni for comparison with parallel existing data from
              Drosophila melanogaster. Specific objectives are to 1) characterize P element
              variation in contemporary geographical populations; 2) determine the role of P
              elements in promoting structural genomic changes; and 3) assess the role of
              natural selection in P element evolution.  Methodology includes genetic
              crossing, DNA sequencing and molecular cytogenetic analysis. This is a new
              collaborative project with complementary expertise being provided by Dr. Vera
              Valente's laboratory in Southern Brazil. 

Transposable elements ("jumping
              genes") are ubiquitous in living organisms. During the last 25 years,
              transposable P elements in D. melanogaster have provided extraordinary advances
              in our knowledge. However, this species-element association is very young and
              has limited generalizability. In contrast, D. willistoni has hosted the P
              element for millions of years and is expected to provide basic new information
              on the genetics and evolution of transposable elements, their mechanisms of
              regulation and their impact on the evolution of host genomes.  Knowledge of the
              role of transposable elements in the production of mutations and chromosomal
              structural changes has implications for better understanding of population
              variation, human disease mechanisms, and possibly speciation. 

