Title       : Publication and Dissemination of a CD-ROM Formatted Multimedia Ethnographic
               Research Methods Instructional Package
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9815467

Award Number: 9815467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel L. Carlos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Monterey Bay Fdn
	      100 Campus Drive
	      Seaside, CA  939558001    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will continue work that has been underway for several years.  It
              will focus on designing, producing, and disseminating a "stand alone"
              instructional package on a CD ROM.  This tool is designed to teach
              undergraduate students selected ethnographic field research methods in a
              life-like learning environment.  It is intended to be used as a cultural
              anthropology laboratory section module for introductory cultural anthropology
              courses, or for special projects.  Additionally, students and instructors will
              be able to visit a Website which will contain additional ethnographic
              information and multimedia materials on the ethnographic field site.      The
              CD package will consist of the following components:  (1) a start up and launch
              mechanism that provides a tutorial and brings navigation instructions to the
              screen,   (2) a tutorial on how to use the courseware,   (3) ethnographic
              background information on the region and communities, and descriptions of uses
              and meaning of the field research methods featured in the various field
              exercises in the package,  (4) three field research exercises with
              corresponding sets of questions or assignments for evaluating what students
              have learned.      Materials intended for inclusion in the CD ROM have been
              tested at two universities.  The work has been conducted in part with support
              from the Division of Undergraduate Education of the National Science
              Foundation.  The PI, Dr. Manual Carlos plans to publish these materials using a
              commercial publisher for classroom use.
