Title       : Bifurcation Analysis of Transition to Turbulence in Dilute Polymer Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a9815518

Award Number: 9815518
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Graham graham@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              It is well established that a small concentration of polymeric material in a
              liquid can result in a large reduction of the wall shear stress in a turbulent
              flow.   This proposal addresses a related but less well established topical
              area:  that of transition from laminar to turbulent flow states.  The proposer
              has identified a distinctive flow condition that will permit the effects of the
              polymer additives to be isolated.  This flow state is termed a Nagata flow. 
              The following segment, from the authors text, concisely states the central
              features of the proposed work.

	We believe that the discovery of the Nagata
              flows provides an important opportunity to study the physics of the onset of
              turbulence, and that examining how these flows are affected by viscoelasticity
              will shed light on the fundamental nature of drag reduction and more generally
              the nonlinear fluid dynamics of polymer solutions.  Therefore, the proposed
              work will extend the bifurcation analysis of theNagata flows to models of
              polymer solutions, considering both the large scale computation of the "exact"
              viscoelastic Nagata flows, as well as low-order models constructed to attempt
              to contain the dominant physics.  An important unresolved question in drag
              reduction is the relative importance of extensional viscosity, anisotropy of
              viscosity and fluid elasticity.  We will examine fluid models that incorporate
              these three effects separately, observing how the type of fluid model used
              modifies the Nagata flows and the bifurcation sequence that leads to them.

