Title       : Organic Conductors in High Magnetic Fields: A Theoretical Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2000  
File        : a9815094

Award Number: 9815094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor M. Yakovenko yakovenk@physics.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9815094
Yakovenko
This grant supports research devoted to the theory of
              quasi-one-dimensional (Q1D) organic conductors and related materials in strong
              magnetic fields.  The study focuses on the Bechgaard salts, whose chemical
              formula is (TMTSF)2X, where TMTSF is tetramethyltetraselenafulvalene and X
              represents various inorganic anions.  These materials demonstrate an
              astonishingly rich variety of physical properties and states: metallic,
              insulating, superconductive (possibly triplet), charge-and spin-density-wave
              states, antiferromagnetism, the spin-Peierls state, and the state of Hubbard
              paramagnetic insulator.  A strong magnetic field induces the cascade of phase
              transitions between magnetic-field-induced spin-density-waves (FISDW), which
              exhibit the quantum Hall effect.  It was discovered recently that the magnetic
              field also induces an insulating behavior in the normal state at a higher
              temperature without any apparent phase transition, possibly by opening an
              energy gap in the charge channel.  At lower temperatures, behavior of the
              system becomes very sensitive to the orientation of the magnetic field. 
              Rotations of the magnetic field in three mutually perpendicular planes produce
              striking oscillatory effects, some of them compatible and some incompatible
              with the conventional theory of metals.  One of these rotations makes the
              system metallic at the so-called magic angles and insulating otherwise.  The
              organic materials are interesting not only by themselves, but also for
              conceptual connections with the conventional quantum Hall effect and high
              temperature superconductivity.

The research can be divided into three groups
              with each containing several topics.  The work on high temperature
              superconductivity extends the research on organic materials and is not a major
              subject in the proposal itself.  The three groups of study are: (1) Q1D organic
              conductors in the normal state; (2) Q1D organic conductors in the FISDW state;
              (3) high-temperature superconductors.
%%%
This grant supports theoretical
              research on the fascinating properties of organic materials in the presence of
              very strong magnetic fields such as those available at the National High
              Magnetic Field Laboratory.   These materials exhibit a number of different
              states which, while interesting in their own right, may also shed light on
              topics of great current interest in condensed matter and materials physics. 
              These topics include the quantum Hall effect, high temperature
              superconductivity, and spin-and charge-density-wave states.
***

