Title       : The Quaternary Glacial History of the Wilkes Land Margin, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2001   
File        : a9815085

Award Number: 9815085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29696              (Estimated)
Investigator: Detlef A. Warnke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Calvin F. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carlota Escutia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Hayward Fdn
	      25976 Carlos Bee Blvd
	      Hayward, CA  945421602    /   -

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports research to study existing sediment cores
              from the Wilkes Land margin (i.e., USNS-Eltanin 1968-1971, US Geological Survey
              1984, and Japanese National Oil Corporation 1982-1983 cruises), supplemented by
              new material that will be collected during a cruise to Wilkes Land in
              February-March 2000 by the Osservatorio Geofisico Sperimentale (OGS), Trieste,
              Italy and Antarctic CRC, Hobart, Australia. The objective of the study is to
              determine how the evolution of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet has affected the
              deposition of Quaternary sedimentary sequences on the Wilkes Land continental
              shelf, slope, and rise. The present model of glacial stratigraphy for the
              Wilkes Land margin indicates that supply of sediment to the shelf, slope and
              rise is strongly cyclic. During times of glacial maxima, most terrigenous
              deposition occurs on the outer shelf, slope and rise. During interglacials,
              most terrigenous deposition occurs on the inner shelf, while the outer shelf,
              slope and rise receive mainly biogenic and hemipelagic sediment. The most
              complete record of glacial/interglacial, and smaller scale cycles can thus be
              obtained by combining the sedimentary record contained on the shelf, slope and
              rise. 

The existing sediment cores (up to 11 meters long) will be dated
              using diatom stratigraphy and magnetostratigraphy. Once sediment cores are
              dated, sedimentation and accumulation rates will be determined for each
              depositional environment to determine shifts in depositional centers across the
              margin. Studies of downcore variations of sedimentary parameters (e.g.,
              siliciclastic vs. biogenic, clast-rich vs. clast-poor intervals, and massive
              vs. laminated) will be done in order to determine: 1) glacial sedimentary
              processes which control patterns of sediment distribution and 2) cyclicities in
              the strata that can help to establish climatic fluctuations related to
              Antarctic glacial events in the Wilkes Land margin. Study of existing cores
              will be complemented by preliminary results from shipboard and onshore analyses
              of cores collected during the 10 February -19 March 2000 OGS - Antarctic CRC
              cruise. Shipboard analyses include: visual description, determination of
              physical properties, smear slides and microfossil identification. Cores from
              the cruise will be stored in the Antarctic CRC Marine Geoscience institute,
              Hobart, Australia. If appropriate materials can be recovered, and it
              appropriate reservoir corrections can be established, some samples will be
              selected for radiocarbon dating using accelerator mass spectrometry techniques
              on core samples frozen just after collection. Results from this project will be
              used to help fulfill ODP requirements for "maturation" of the existing ODP
              proposal for drilling on the Wilkes Land continental margin.

This research
              is expected to provide information that will allow refinement of the existing
              depositional models and to understand better the glacial/interglacial
              sedimentation processes and cycles across this margin. This research was
              developed in response to recent national (NSF-East Antarctic Margin Workshop,
              Ohio, 1997) and international (ANTIME and ANTOSTRAT, Hobart, 1997) workshops,
              where the Wilkes Land margin was identified as one of the main targets for
              multidisciplinary research, including long-term and recent glacial history.


