Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Theoretical and Experimental Studies of Aqueous
               Solutions Under Extreme Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1999      
File        : a9815256

Award Number: 9815256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald M. Levy ronlevy@lutece.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815256
Levy

This award supports a three year collaborative research project
              between Professor Ronald Levy of Rutgers University in New Brunswick and
              Professor Masaru Nakahara of Kyoto University in Japan.  The researchers will
              undertake theoretical and experimental studies of aqueous solutions under
              extreme conditions.  The study of water and aqueous solutions under conditions
              that are far from standard pressure and temperature is receiving increasing
              attention.  The potential industrial importance of supercritical water, as a
              good solvent for separations and reactions provides one motivation for this
              effort.  The recent development of new experimental and theoretical
              high-pressure techniques to study problems in biophysical chemistry is another.
               The three goals of the project are:  1) a study of the role of polarizability
              in the physical chemistry of aqueous solutions under extreme conditions;  2)
              further development of hydration shell models based on statistical mechanics to
              describe the thermodynamics and dynamics of aqueous solutions as a function of
              temperature and pressure; and  3) computer simulations of biomolecular
              hydration at high pressure and temperature. 

This project brings together
              the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
              capabilities.  The U.S. researchers have expertise in the study of solvent
              effects in physical and biophysical chemistry and the Japanese researchers are
              experts in the use of high resolution NMR to study the structure of
              supercritical water.  Results of the research will have practical engineering
              applications in the field of chemical waste management where supercritical
              water is being used as a solvent for separations and reactions involving toxic
              wastes.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.
***

