Title       : Microscopic Dynamics of Roughening in Copper Electroplating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1999   
File        : a9815067

Award Number: 9815067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183312             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale P. Barkey dpb@kepler.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Electroplated copper is used in the fabrication of microelectronic devices. 
              Because of its superior conductivity and scalability, it is likely to replace
              aluminum alloys for on-chip interconnects.  The engineering design and control
              of plating processes rely on surface-active additives.  This project is an
              experimental study of chemical and molecular surface processes, which determine
              the microscopic properties of the plated surface.  Chloride ion and dissolved
              oxygen will be used as model additives in a first step toward generalizing the
              impact of surface processes on the organization of material on the sub-micron
              level during crystal growth.  The central work of the project will be the
              quantitative measurement and analysis, by in-situ atomic-force microscopy, of
              the dynamic surface properties of  homoepitaxial deposits on copper single
              crystals and on vapor-deposited seed layers during plating and at open circuit.
               The rates of change of key features will be used to evaluate surface
              processes, particularly nucleation, point of discharge, and surface diffusion,
              as they depend on deposition parameters and the presence of additive films.  A
              rotating ring-disk electrode will be used to study the surface chemical regime
              and its relationship to the growth mechanisms.  Exploratory work to determine
              the interactions of inorganic components with organic additives will be
              initiated.
