Title       : Geodynamics and Neotectonic Forearc Deformation: Late Pliocene-Recent Basins,
               Hellenic Arc (Greece)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9815028

Award Number: 9815028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Kleinspehn klein004@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815028
Kleinspehn
	Fore-arc regions display a wide range of kinematic
              behaviors, including deformation internal to the fore-arc.  Among fore-arcs
              globally, arc-parallel extension is the most commonly observed internal strain
              and it can produce substantial rapid fore-arc uplift.  The goal of this study
              is to establish the relationship between subduction-zone dynamics and observed
              internal neotectonic strain of the southern and southeastern Hellenic fore-arc
              (Greece) as a function of the obliquity of lithospheric convergence.  By
              examining the kinematics recorded by young basins along strike in the fore-arc
              going eastward from Crete, where convergence is nearly orthogonal, to the
              island of Rhodos where the convergence vector is highly oblique, several
              alternative hypotheses concerning the mechanisms driving neotectonic fore-arc
              uplift will be addressed: (1) arc-parallel extension, (2) radial extension, (3)
              shortening, or (4) wrench tectonics under transpression or transtension. 
              Combined structural mapping/kinematic analyses, tectonostratigraphy, and age
              relations along with threedimensional modeling of the fore-arc geodynamics will
              address the changing kinematics along the strike of the arc with increasing
              obliquity of convergence.  By using the fill of Late Pliocene-Recent basins for
              temporal and paleogeographic control and documenting its synand
              post-depositional deformation as well as adjacent basement kinematics, the
              neotectonic defon-nation internal to the fore-arc will emerge.  The ability to
              quantify the lithospheric response to oblique convergence relies on dating
              deformation using combined 4OAr/39Ar geochronology, magnetostratigraphy and
              biostratigraphy of the basins.  Limiting the study to the youngest basins
              restricts the age of the inferred kinematics and will capitalize on the
              vertical velocities inherently recorded by sedimentary basins. 
              Three-dimensional numerical model results will be compared to the observed
              tectonostratigraphic and defon-national patterns to link lithospheric
              geodynamics to the observed strain and to compare the Hellenic system to other
              internally deforming fore-arcs globally.  The proposed study will examine
              onshore tectonostratigraphy equivalent to offshore sequences soon to be
              targeted during a leg of the Offshore Drilling Program and would complement a
              currently planned ICDP project on Crete to evaluate the mechanical behavior of
              the leading edge of the overriding plate.  Because this study addresses modem
              tectonics, it is relevant to archeological studies of the impact of seismicity,
              changing topography and migrating marine shorelines on ancient and modem
              Mediterranean cultures.  Understanding the mechanisms driving neotectonic
              uplift of these fore-arc islands may enable more accurate evaluation of seismic
              hazards in the vicinity of these populated islands.



