Title       : Local Environmental Decision Making: Non-Mandated Environmental Policies and
               Public Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1998 
File        : a9815876

Award Number: 9815876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Troy D. Abel  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Dietz tdietzvt@aol.com  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Why do some communities do far more than is required of them to protect the
              environment?  What can be learned from these innovative approaches?  Can a
              better understanding of these approaches lead to more effective, efficient
              popular environmental policy?  What role does public participation have in
              innovative local policies?  The present study attempts to answer these
              questions.  Fifty localities that have been recognized by national
              organizations for their adoption of voluntary environmental policies are being
              compared to localities without voluntary policies in the same state or region. 
              We are examining how social, economic, and political factors influence local
              policy.  For each community that has been recognized for innovative
              environmental policy, we are identifying a comparison case from the same region
              that has not adopted such innovations.  These pairs of cases will be compared
              utilizing statistical procedures to examine which local factors influence the
              adoption of voluntary, innovative local environmental policies.  The predictor
              variables will be obtained from various existing sources including the Census
              of Governments, the City/County Databook, and the Internal Revenue Service
              summary statistics.  In addition, a mail and telephone survey will be
              administered to selected officials both innovator and non-innovator communities
              to determine the scope, content, and influence of public participation
              procedures in local environmental decision making.  The results of the project
              will help to identify the local factors that constrain or foster the effective
              adoption of voluntary environmental policies and programs.  Thus, project
              results will provide insights into local capacity for environmental policy
              responsibilities, what key factors influence a localities decision-making
              capacity, and how these factors shape policy outcomes.    It is expected that
              the research results will benefit policy makers and risk professionals at all
              levels of government.  First, local decision makers will benefit from the
              results of this research as it will provide guidance on critical factors at the
              local level that facilitate and inhibit policy efforts.  Second, as the EPA and
              other federal agencies continue to evolve from a regulator to a facilitator,
              this research will provide insights into local government policy capacity,
              local barriers and opportunities to policy success, and local deficiencies
              which may be leveraged with state or federal support.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
