Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Study of 3-D Solar Wind Structure and Dynamics
               Using Heliospheric Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a9815377

Award Number: 9815377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard V. Jackson bvjackson@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Hick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 1323,5921,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815377
Jackson 

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Bernard Jackson of the University of California, San
              Diego and Professor Masayoshi Kojima of Nagoya University in Japan.  The
              researchers will be undertaking a study of 
3-D solar wind structure and
              dynamics using heliospheric tomography.  The solar atmosphere (the solar wind
              and the structures within it) forms a solar-terrestrial connection extending
              from the corona to the magnetosphere of Earth.  This project involves the
              analysis of solar remotely sensed data, which provide densities, velocities,
              and other physical parameters of heliospheric and coronal plasmas.  The primary
              goal will be the three-dimensional reconstruction and presentation of
              structures that interact with the Earth using tomographic methods.  The
              researchers will then use these observational data to better define and answer
              questions such as the shape of quiet solar wind structures which pass the
              Earth, their interaction with the ambient solar wind plasma, and their effects
              in modifying embedded solar magnetic fields.  The densities, velocities and
              magnetic fields determined in situ at Earth by spacecraft will be used to check
              the accuracy of the remote sensing techniques.  

This project brings
              together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and
              research capabilities. Results of the research will be used to map solar wind
              structures, determine the extent of their interactions with the Earth and
              locate their origins on the Sun.  The technique can also be used with a large
              variety of ground and space-based data systems.  This research advances
              international human resources through the participation of graduate students. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.
***

