Title       : Limitations and Interactions of Bulk Power Transfers in Large Scale Electric
               Power Systems (Joint Proposal with Cornell; Robert Thomas, PI)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2000        
File        : a9815325

Award Number: 9815325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Dobson dobson@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fernando L. Alvarado  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher L. DeMarco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0400000   Industry University - Co-op             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815325
Dobson

This project is carried out as a part of the NSF Research
              Centers - Small Firms Collaborative R&D initiative, under the leadership of the
              Cornell/UC-Berkeley/UI-Urbana/UW-Madison Center for Power Systems Engineering,
              an IUCRC established by the National Science Foundation.

This project is
              motivated by the fact that many of the advantages expected to accrue from a
              competitive electric power market in North America depend upon an open
              transmission grid, capable of a flexible response to demands for long distance
              bulk power transfers.  Indeed, such power transfers are essential to a
              competitive market for electric power.  Power system available transfer
              capability indicates how much interarea power transfers can be increased
              without compromising system security.  Accurate identification of this
              capability provides vital information for operation of the bulk power market. 
              There is a need in this rapidly developing field to synthesize a coherent
              account of the various approaches to the methods underlying available transfer
              capability calculations and communicate this to industry.  The project will
              address this need by writing a tutorial on the methods developed and their
              relation to previous work.  Demonstration software to illustrate the concepts
              and calculations will be developed.  The tutorial and demonstration software
              will be placed on the world wide web so that anyone with a browser can
              understand the project results and interactively run the demonstrations over
              the web.  This is a collaborative project between the University of Wisconsin,
              Cornell University and Christensen Associates, a small firm located in Madison,
              WI.

