Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Exotic sp2 Carbon Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9815744

Award Number: 9815744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Eklund   (Principal Investigator current)
              Apparao M. Rao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Haddon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gene F. Dresselhaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mildred S. Dresselhaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815744
Eklund

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Peter Eklund of the University of Kentucky and
              Professor Mildred Dresselhaus of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with
              Professor Toshiaki Enoki of the Tokyo Institute of Technology in Japan.  The
              researchers will undertake a study of exotic sp2 carbon systems.  Carbon-based
              materials offer intellectual challenges in basic materials science, and high
              potential for the development of new technologies.  The proposed program
              focuses on the physical and chemical properties of sp2 bonded carbon materials.
               The research objective is to produce a fundamental understanding of the
              structure-property relationships in these materials by carrying out a variety
              of experiments and by interpreting the results in terms of existing, or by
              developing new, theoretical models.  The carbon materials to be investigated
              exhibit a wide range of structural order and disorder.  These materials are
              synthesized by both the U.S. and Japanese collaborators.  The four materials
              are:  1) single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNT);  2) polyparaphenylene (PPP)-based
              carbons;  3) mesophase pitch-based carbon fibers (MPCF's); and  4) nanographite
              donor- and acceptor- intercalation compounds (Nano-GIC).

This project brings
              together the efforts of three laboratories that have complementary expertise
              and research capabilities. Results of this research have the potential of
              extending an already thriving technology into new areas of nanostructure
              technology.  This research advances international human resources through the
              participation of a younger scientist and graduate students.  Through the
              exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
              knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation.
***

