Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Lessons from a Cyanobacterial Genome Sequence to
               Understand Metabolic Processes in Cyanobacteria and Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9815642

Award Number: 9815642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Himadri B. Pakrasi pakrasi@biology2.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9815642
Pakrasi

This award supports the participation of American scientists
              in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Lessons from a Cyanobacterial Genome Sequence to
              Understand Metabolic Processes in Cyanobacteria and Plants, to be held in
              Okazaki, Japan from January 10-13, 2000.  The co-organizers are Professors
              Himadri Pakrasi at Washington University in St. Louis and Masayuki Ohmori of
              the University of Tokyo.  This area is the subject of intense study, both in
              the U.S. and abroad.  The recent determination of the complete genome sequence
              of 6803 has opened the door to a new era in the level and complexity of
              information that is now within reach.  The seminar will include scientists who
              are deeply interested in genetic, biochemical and physiological studies of
              cellular metabolism in plants and cyanobacteria.  Some are principally
              geneticists while others use mainly biochemical and physiological approaches. 
              Many span more than one discipline and a number use combinations of genetic,
              physiological and biochemical techniques.  Many use microbial systems such as
              cyanobacteria or the eukaryotic alga Chlamydomonas reinhardii, while others use
              green plants such as Arabidopsis and rice.

The theme of the seminar is the
              use of the genomics and proteomics information about this oxygenic,
              photosynthetic organism to gain deeper insights into the overall metabolism of
              cyanobacteria and plants.  The research areas will be presented in sessions
              devoted to special topics of metabolism, e.g. photosynthesis, respiration,
              light-signal transduction, transport of metabolites and ions, etc.  Genetic,
              molecular, biochemical and physiological perspectives will be presented within
              the frame-work of each session.  There will also be a session devoted to
              discussions on development of general tools that will aid in studies on plants
              and cyanobacteria.  Each section will conclude with a discussion among all of
              the participants aimed at identifying the areas that would be of particular
              importance for development and where interdisciplinary approaches will be
              particularly useful.  Seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve
              younger researchers.  The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in
              this field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work, and will
              set the stage for future collaborative projects.
***

