Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Recent Progress in Homotopy Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9815343

Award Number: 9815343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21000              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Boardman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Morava  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Stephen Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815343
Boardman

This award supports a one year collaborative research
              project between Professor J. Michael Boardman of Johns Hopkins University in
              Baltimore and Professor Goro Nishida of Kyoto University in Japan.  The
              researchers will be undertaking a study of the recent progress is homotopy
              theory.  One focus of the program will be recent advances in homological
              algebra in the category of spectra and their interaction with the chromatic
              program, but it is also an opportunity to review recent developments in the
              field as a whole.  The program will sponsor weekly seminars during the academic
              year, culminating in a conference and workshop in March, 2000.  This decade has
              seen revolutionary developments in homotopy theory, and this program is an
              opportunity to review, evaluate, and rationalize this work.  Problems with the
              foundations of the theory of ring-spectra and their modules, which have blocked
              the development of the subject for two decades, have been solved by
              sophisticated generalizations of classical techniques from homological algebra.
               A goal of this program is to bring these developments to the attention of the
              wider mathematical community.  

This project brings together the efforts of
              two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities.
              Results of this research would provide a forum for informing researchers, in
              the area of homotopy, of the latest developments and, therefore, enabling them
              to expand the scope of their own research projects. This research advances
              international human resources through the participation of a younger scientist
              and graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
              project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish a volume that
              contains the works presented in the year-long seminar.
***

