Title       : Macroevolutionary Trends of Defenses and Counterdefenses in an Ancient
               Plant-insect Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9815648

Award Number: 9815648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith X. Becerra jxb@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Pinero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Lawrence Venable  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815648

Becerra

Determining the factors that direct the co-evolution of
              plants and the insects that feed on the plants have been a central question in
              the field of plant-insect interactions. This project will provide a
              quantitative assessment of the role of plant structure and chemical defenses,
              and biogeographical distributions in directing the evolution of host shifts in
              plants. More specifically, the PIs will develop DNA sequences to reconstruct
              the evolutionary trees of the ancient and speciose Blepharida - Bursera system.
              Bursera (New World tropical shrubs and trees related to frankincense and myrrh)
              are one of the most diverse and abundant groups of plants in tropical dry
              forests, which are a predominant vegetation type in Mexico, while Blepharida
              includes about 45 species in the New World. The Blepharida - Bursera system is
              considered on the best example of an old interaction between a herbivore and a
              plant. Thus, it is an ideal system for testing macroevolutionary questions. The
              information generated from this project will provide a precise evaluation of
              the importance of plant defensive chemicals and defensive morphology in the
              marcoevolution of host exploitation and will help in understanding the
              evolution of insect-plant interactions. In addition, it will clarify the
              Systematics and evolution of an important group of Mexican plants and insects,
              while addressing issues that are very important to the areas of plant-insect
              interactions, macroevolution and general evolution.


