Title       : International Conference on Special Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1998  
File        : a9815552

Award Number: 9815552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Dunkl cfd5z@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9815552

By providing air travel funds this group award will support
              twelve 
U.S. researchers participation in the  International Workshop on
              
Special Functions: Asymptotics, Harmonic Analysis, and Mathematical
Physics,
              City University of Hong Kong, June 21-25, 1999. This 
conference is designed
              to provide a forum for experts in asymptotics,
classical special functions,
              combinatorics, harmonic analysis, quantum
groups, mathematical physics,
              differential equations, and orthogonal 
polynomials to exchange ideas and to
              acquaint participants with the 
most recent developments in these areas. The
              goal of recent work in 
asymptotics is to derive expansions whose error terms
              are exponentially
small. Such expansions give much greater accuracy than the
              classical 
Poincare' type expansions and have larger regions of validity. The
              
harmonic analysis aspects of special functions involve root systems 
and
              representations of quantum and classical matrix groups. In the 
last few
              years, such methods have been used to find new results about
special functions
              (both standard and q-type) of several variables.  
For example, these methods
              were used to prove conjectures of Macdonald 
that came from an algebraic
              combinatorics setting and to construct 
exact solutions of quantum many-body
              systems of Calogero-Moser-
Sutherland type.
 
Special functions form a large
              family of functions of fundamental 
importance in Mathematics. For instance,
              they appear in the modelling 
of any physical phenomena where there is some
              degree of symmetry, as in
the vibrations of a circular drum. The conference
              program includes invited
one-hour plenary lectures, several parallel sessions
              of half-hour presentations, and round-table discussions of outstanding problems
              and future research directions.  
Approximately eighty participants are
              expected. Researchers from many 
countries will be invited as speakers
              including relatively large 
delegations from the U.S., Canada, Netherlands,
              Japan, and Australia.  
This international workshop will facilitate
              discussions between applied 
mathematicians and more theoretical researchers
              so that applied problems 
amenable to solutions via special functions can be
              identified and the 
new mathematical tools can be utilized in applications.
              The conference 
will be held  in cooperation with the Society for Industrial
              and Applied 
Mathematics (SIAM) including SIAM's Activity Group on Orthogonal
              
Polynomials and Special Functions and the newly chartered South East 
Asia
              Section.

