Title       : Dissertation Research: Dental Variation in Hominoids: Its Implications for
               Fossil Species Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9815546

Award Number: 9815546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry Harrison terry.harrison@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
	This project will study dental variation in four groups of living hominoids:
              gorillas, chimpanzees, orang-utans, and gibbons. Novel image-analysis
              techniques will be used to accurately measure morphological features on the
              dental surface of these apes. A large number of specimens from various museums
              will be studied, so as to sample all geographical populations.
	This study is
              important for several reasons:  (1) It will have implications for fossil
              species discrimination. Dental characters are consistently used to
              differentiate fossil species, but because of limited sample sizes, the nature
              and patterns of variation in species differentiating characters cannot be
              studied. The present study will provide an exhaustive comparative database of
              patterns of variation in living hominoids against which variation in similar
              characters in fossil hominoid species can be compared.  (2) It will help in
              understanding the place of humans in nature. A study of the degree and pattern
              of dental variation will help in understanding the within- and
              between-grouprelationships of the hominoids. This being the group of primates
              most closely related to humans, it will help in understanding of the systematic
              and evolutionary relationships of humans.  (3) It will help in understanding
              the conservation status of the hominoids. Several species and subspecies of
              hominoids are threatened with extinction in their natural habitat, and much
              international effort is expended in trying to save them. The study of dental
              variation as proposed here will help in understanding the taxonomy and
              interrelationships of the various populations, subspecies and species of
              hominoids. This is critical for forming informed opinions on the need for
              conservation in the hominoids. 


