Title       : Molecular Design and Synthesis of Novel, High-Performance Polycarbonates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2002     
File        : a9815957

Award Number: 9815957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Boyles dboyles@msmailgw.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Bendler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9815957
Bendler
The objectives of this research are to use advanced chemical
              modeling tools and software to accelerate design and development of new
              high-temperature, high-impact engineering polycarbonate resins.  The Principal
              Investigator will utilize atomistic molecular modeling methods, including
              energy minimization and molecular dynamics, to simulate and predict mechanical
              and thermal properties of unique, chemically-modified polycarbonates prior to
              their synthesis in the laboratory.  These computer studies will allow a large
              number of potential new polycarbonate molecules to be screened for high-heat,
              impact toughness and ductility performance, thus avoiding costly and
              time-consuming laboratory scale-up and property testing.  Based on the
              molecular screening studies, a small number of new, promising polycarbonate
              polymers will be synthesized and characterized, with assistance from General
              Electric Research and Development Center and Clark University.  The results
              from the synthesis and testing of the computer-designed polymers will then be
              compared to the theoretical modeling predictions in order to validate and
              refine the fundamental property prediction algorithms.
%%%
Advanced molecular
              modeling tools and capabilities are critical technology components which enable
              US pharmaceutical and biotech industries to quickly and efficiently bring new
              drugs, pesticides and genetically-modified seeds and plants to market.  This
              proposed research will attempt to demonstrate that molecular modeling tools can
              also have a significant impact on materials development, which would then
              directly benefit US chemical and polymer manufacturers.  New, high-impact
              transparent polymers will find applications in fighter jet canopies, 
              automotive and building window coverings, and unbreakable, reusable medical
              equipment.
***


