Title       : Dissertation Research: Small Game Use and Human Economic and Demographic Change
               at the Transition to Agriculture in the Levant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9815083

Award Number: 9815083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11190              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary C. Stiner mstiner@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Mary Stiner, MS Natalie Munro will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her project is to understand the
              processes which led to the domestication of plants and animals in the Near East
              and to this end she will analyze small faunal remains recovered during the
              excavation of three archaeological sites. All are attributable to the Natufian
              culture (ca. 13,000 to 10,000 years ago). This is the time period which
              immediately preceded the appearance of agriculture and pastoralism in the
              region. The Natufians were the last people to subsist on hunted and gathered
              foods and many archaeologists believe that a detailed understanding of their
              subsistence practices will shed light on the major revolution which followed.
              Previous analyses by Stiner and Munro on Natufian material from the site of
              Hayonim cave has indicated a surprisingly heavy reliance on small animals,
              especially birds and hares, species which are difficult to hunt, which
              reproduce rapidly and therefore can withstand heavy predation pressure. This
              finding is unusual because Natufian peoples are generally viewed as subsistence
              specialists who depended heavily on gazelle for food. Munro postulates that the
              Natufian shift to small and less desirable small animals likely reflects
              pressure on and depletion of food resources, likely the result of human
              population increase. Were such the case, it would bolster "push" arguments
              which postulate that human societies where pushed to utilize a broad range of
              resources and develop effective techniques to obtain low ranked foods. Such a
              strategy would logically lead in the direction of domestication.

MS Munro
              will analyze the remaining Natufian fauna from Hayonim Cave as well as from two
              other Natufian sites to determine whether the preliminary pattern is in fact
              correct. She will examine bones to ascertain which result from human activity
              and the extent to which the sample is biased by natural post depositional
              destruction. She will reconstruct butchering patterns and species specific
              mortality profiles. With the incorporation of published biological data she
              will be able to determine how humans utilized and relied on these species and
              how in turn these populations were affected. This project will not only
              contribute to understanding the "Neolithic Revolution" but also assist in
              training a promising young scientist.

