Title       : Dissertation Research: Power and Competition in the Upper Egyptian Predynastic:
               A Settlement Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9815953

Award Number: 9815953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Richardson, III JBR3+@PITT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. O'Connor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. James Richardson, Mr. David Anderson will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological fieldwork at
              the site of El-Mahasna, located in the Abydos region of Upper Egypt. Situated
              in the Nile Valley El-Mahasna documents the rise of complex society in Egypt
              and has the potential to shed light not only on the origins of the Egyptian
              state but also on the processes which led to the emergence of complex society.
              Preliminary research conducted by Mr. Anderson demonstrates that significant
              areas of the site are intact and contain deposits undamaged by the intensive
              plow agriculture which characterizes much of the Valley. On the basis of
              surface materials and the presence of discolored areas it is possible to locate
              the positions of individual houses. Because the amount of overburden is
              relatively slight, large areas can be easily excavated. Thus El-Mahasna
              provides the opportunity to examine the spatial distribution of social groups
              and specific activities within a single settlement over an extended period of
              time. Mr. Anderson will combine test pits with large scale horizontal
              excavation to achieve this goal.

Archaeologists have proposed several models
              to explain the rise of complex hierarchical societies. According to one set,
              elites or chiefs emerge to provide managerial services and it has been
              hypothesized that in the Nile Valley these included the storage and
              distribution of grain and other food sources to compensate for the large and
              unpredictable interannual variations in agricultural productivity. Other
              theories emphasize competition among groups to accumulate resources and status
              for personal ends. According to this scenario power is accumulated through
              threat and favor for the benefit of a limited number of individuals and is not
              willingly ceded, as the managerial theory predicts to further the common good.
              Mr. Anderson has developed a series of archaeologically visible correlates
              which logically follow from these two contrasting processes and will use the
              El-Mahasna data to determine which applies to the Nile Valley. This research is
              significant for several other reasons as well. It will provide historical data
              of interest to many archaeologists. It will also assist in training a promising
              young scientist.

