Title       : Rheology and Structure of Ionomer and Associating Polymer Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a9815942

Award Number: 9815942
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric W. Kaler kaler@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart L. Cooper  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9815942                                                                         
                                                                                             
                     Cooper                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                 The solution properties of ionomers as well as associating
              polymers will be investigated.  Viscometric, static and dynamic light
              scattering, SAXS, SANS, and rheological experiments on multi-functional
              telechelic and polyurethane ionomers will be used to determine the structure
              and thermodynamics of ionomer solutions in different polarity solvents and
              mixed solvents over a broad concentration regime.  The study can be expected to
              provide insight into the controversial origin of polyelectrolyte behavior.  The
              internal structure and dynamics of the ionic aggregates will be modeled using
              Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations.  The effect of deformation on
              the structure and chain stretching of hydrophobically terminated associating
              polymers will be determined through rheological, flow birefringence, and SANS
              studies.  Particular attention will be paid to determine the molecular factors
              governing shear thickening phenomena.  The experimental findings will be tested
              against the theoretical predictions of a molecular model for telechelic
              associating systems such as random copolymer ionomer solutions.                
                                                                                       %%%   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  The proposed research plus other projects related to studies of ionomer
              morphology and block copolymers represent a broad and integrated program
              designed to bring fundamental understanding of complex fluid rheology.  The
              results of the proposed studies will lead to a more complete understanding of
              ionomer solution behavior, leading to better utilization in commercial
              applications.  The experimental data will instigate the development of new
              theories as well as provide a means of testing them.  The overall research
              findings resulting from this investigation should be useful in defining more
              predictable processing conditions for these important classes of polymers. 
              These materials find applications as membranes, adhesives, coatings, viscosity
              modifiers, and packaging materials; all of which are sensitive to the material
              processing history.
