Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: The Interrelationship of Protein Flexibility,
               Activity and Thermal Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a9815759

Award Number: 9815759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Petsko petsko@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dagmar Ringe  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9815759
Petsko

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Gregory Petsko of Brandeis University and Professor
              Tairo Oshima of the Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Science in Japan. 
              The researchers will be undertaking a study of the interrelationship of protein
              flexibility, activity and thermal stability.  Proteins are highly flexible
              molecules, but the role, if any, of this flexibility in their biological
              activity and structural stability is still an open question.  Industrial and
              medical uses of proteins require molecules that retain activity over a wide
              range of temperatures, but the rules governing stability at high temperatures
              are not well understood.  The aim of this collaboration is to determine the
              interrelationship between protein flexibility, catalytic activity and thermal
              stability.  The model system to be used is 3-isopropylmalate dehydrogenase from
              several organisms (Thermus thermophilus, Escherichia coli, Samonella
              typhimurium, and Vibrio sp.15).  A series of experiments combining genetic
              selection, X-ray crystallography, kinetic analysis and the mapping of protein
              flexibility by the analysis of B-factors have been designed to provide data
              relating these properties.  

This project brings together the efforts of two
              laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. 
              Results of this research should reveal the basic principles that describe how
              the dynamic behavior of an enzyme contributes to catalytic efficiency and how
              flexibility in a protein structure affects the temperature at which that
              protein unfolds.  From these principles it should be possible to design
              improved temperature stability into mesophilic (human) proteins without
              crippling their activity.  This research advances international human resources
              through the participation of graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas
              and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
              promote international understanding and cooperation.  
***

