Title       : The Role of Fungi in a Lower Devonian Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9815669

Award Number: 9815669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas N. Taylor tntaylor@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. Axsmith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815669
Taylor
	Despite the worldwide diversity of fungi and their importance
              in ecological interactions, little is known about their diversity through the
              fossil record and almost nothing about their interactions through evolutionary
              time. A unique window into fungal evolution and interaction is provided,
              however, by the famous Rhynie Chert in Scotland, with its exceptional
              preservation of plant and animal remains including cellular details of
              associated microbial and fungal organisms. The sandstone deposits are dated to
              Devonian times, ca. 400 million years ago, and record some of the earliest
              known land plants and animals. Dr. Thomas Taylor at the University of Kansas
              and his colleagues have been expanding our knowledge of the freshwater
              environment preserved in these deposits, with a program of meticulous analysis
              and description of the broad range of fungi found in association with many of
              these plants and animals. Because fungi are heterotrophs, they require a
              nutritional interaction with other organisms to obtain a source of carbon. The
              fungi that existed in the Rhynie Chert ecosystem were involved in a variety of
              saprophytic, parasitic, and mutualistic associations with several groups of
              organisms (cyanobacteria, eubacteria, algae, macroplants) as well as other
              fungi. For example, some of the associations involve plant roots in the form of
              endomycorrhizae; and some of these plants possessed free-living gametophytes
              that also appear to harbor mutualistically associated fungi. Also present in
              this Lower Devonian ecosystem was at least one lichen that consisted of
              colonies of cyanobacteria with the fungus. To date, the major fungal groups
              present in the Rhynie Chert appear to be chytrids and zygomycetes. Documenting
              the occurrence of various fungal taxa and their interactions provides a unique
              opportunity to place these associations in an evolutionary context and to test
              hypotheses about the first appearance of such interactions, and to compare
              these associations with those known to exist today. 

