Title       : Board on International Comparative Studies in Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a9815157

Award Number: 9815157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2157810            (Estimated)
Investigator: Colette Chabbott cchabbot@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Morison  (Principal Investigator former)
              Michael J. Feuer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexandra K. Wigdor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

NSF award 9815157
Abstract revised May 2001

This project continues the
              work of the Board on International Comparative Studies in Education (BICSE),
              supported since 1988 by NSF and the U.S. Department of Education's National
              Center for Education Statistics (NCES).  The National Research Council selects
              members of the board based on their expertise in comparative education, teacher
              education, psychometrics, assessment, and education policy.  During its first
              decade, BICSE focused on improving the quality of large-scale cross-national
              education studies and indicators.  In addition, the board provided technical
              guidance to sponsors about the conduct and use of large-scale education
              studies, such as the Third International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS)
              and the Computers in Education Study.  

The current grant (1998-2002) from
              NSF and NCES expands BICSE's scope of work to include examination of smaller
              scale international comparative education research and synthesis of lessons
              learned from past and current large-scale studies.  Building on BICSE's
              leadership as a national forum for synthesis, analysis, and strategic planning
              for international comparative research in education, the National Research
              Council has reconfigured the board to accomplish the goals set forth in the new
              scope of work.  The goals include: using the findings of international studies
              to improve U.S. education policy and education reform efforts; increasing the
              rigor and sophistication of these studies by encouraging synergies between
              large and smaller scale international comparative education research;
              identifying gaps in the existing research base; and assisting in the
              communication of results to policy makers and the public.  The ultimate goal of
              BICSE's activities in this grant cycle is to recommend a conceptual framework
              and agenda for future international education studies, as well as offer
              guidance for a supporting research agenda.



