Title       : Small Firms Collaborative R&D Project with Rainbow Displays, Endicott, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9815599

Award Number: 9815599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bahgat G. Sammakia bahgat@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry Kroger  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gary L. Lehmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Constable  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Pitarresi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0400000   Industry University - Co-op             
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9815599
Kroger

This project is carried out as a part of the NSF Research
              Centers - Small Firms Collaborative R&D initiative, under the leadership of the
              Integrated Electronics Engineering Center, an S/IUCRC established by the
              National Science Foundation.

This project is a collaborative research and
              development program between Binghamton University and Rainbow Displays Inc.
              (RDI).  The latter is a small start-up enterprise located in Endicott, NY,
              whose goal is to produce at a competitive cost, a large screen active matrix
              liquid crystal display (LCD) by tiling four small LCD's to produce a single,
              large area, seamless (to the human eye) display.  The project will address two
              different problems associated with liquid crystal display technology as
              previously demonstrated, with prototype hardware, by RDI.  The first is related
              to the reliability of the interconnection between the flex circuitry which
              carries the driver device (which actuates the pixels on the screen) and the
              Indium - Tin Oxide (ITO) metallization on the glass display screen.  University
              researchers and RDI bonding engineers will jointly develop a reliable, optimum
              bonding process.

The second problem involves the assembly of the tiles in a
              composite lamination.  The tiled LCDs are almost butted together and may have
              slightly different thickness.  The present method of assembly uses liquid
              adhesive to take up any differences in height and to fill the cavity between
              the panels.  RDI will butt the LCD panels together and use a polymer film type
              adhesive between the LCDs and the protective glass cover plate.  This will
              provide improved resolution, minimize panel alignment requirements and reduce
              the cost of assembly.  This study will use existing codes to model the proposed
              structure and to evaluate the interaction between the film material properties,
              film thickness and LCD panel thickness with the assembly parameters; roller
              speed, pressure, curvature, width etc.

