Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Modelling and Visualizing the Complexity of
               Mantle Convection in Heterogeneous Medium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9815544

Award Number: 9815544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26900              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Yuen davey@krissy.msi.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9815544
Yuen

This award supports a two year collaborative research project
              between Professor David Yuen of the University of Minnesota and Professor
              Satoru Honda of Hiroshima University in Japan.  The researchers will be
              undertaking a study of modeling and visualizing the complexity of mantle
              convection in a heterogeneous medium.  Heterogeneities in the mantle are due to
              the mixing and stirring of a wide variety of sources.  These will in turn
              produce heterogeneities in the viscosity field, because of the rheological
              dependence on stress, strain-rate, grain-size and composition.  The slab can
              also be considered as a complex rheological medium and its strength may be
              strongly dependent on the speed of subduction.  The researchers plan to study
              the dynamics of mixing in hetergeneous viscous fluids in convection and the
              effects of grain-size in mantle convection, especially the interaction between
              grain-size growth and viscous heating and the strength of slabs with
              subduction.  They will also work on issues of 
co-processing in visualization
              of data sets taken from numerical simulations in both the U.S. and Japan.  
              

This project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
              complementary expertise and research capabilities.  The researchers will have
              the use of the excellent high-performance computing and scientific
              visualization at Minnesota, Los Alamos and the IBM Watson Lab.  In Japan they
              will have access to the high-performance IBM clusters, the University of
              Tokyo's Hitachi computer and the Digital-alpha cluster at Hiroshima University.
               Important outcomes of this joint work will cover the areas of solid-earth
              geodynamics, mixing in heterogeneous convecting fluids, high-performance
              network computing, and advanced scientific visualization techniques.  Younger
              scientists and graduate students will also be participating in this project. 
              The researchers plan to share the results of their research on their university
              web sites in the U.S. and Japan.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology,
              this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.
***

