Title       : Functional Traits of Key Species in the Ectomycorrhizal Community: Genet Size
               and Colonization Strategy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a9815262

Award Number: 9815262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Bruns boletus@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9815262

Bruns

Ectomycorrhizal fungi (EM) are obligate symbionts of most of
              the dominant tree species in temperate forest ecosystems. These fungi have been
              shown to be necessary for the growth and development of fine roots in many
              systems. It is in the fine roots, where most plants get many of the nutrients
              they need and the fungi play a vital role in the development of these roots and
              may also may have a direct role in the transfer of nutrients.  In spite of
              their importance, EM fungi are often neglected by plant ecologists or they are
              treated as a single group (without regard to species). Due to their small size,
              the difficulty of and time consuming methods of species identification, coupled
              with their belowground habitat, working with them especially at the species
              level has difficult in the past. This project will determine the colonization
              strategy of five species of EM fungi in a temperate forest ecosystem.
              Specifically, this proposal would study the sizes and spatial patterning for
              genets of 3 of the 5 species that have very different life strategies.  A
              molecular technique (Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphisms) will be used as
              the primary tool for discerning genetic identity. This technique will provide a
              fast, reliable and abundant source of variable markers, which will all allow
              the PI to identify the EM fungi to the species level. In addition, using this
              technique, a better understanding of the spatial patterns of EM fungi will be
              done. This work will provide tools for future investigators and allow them to
              explore and understand the population structure of key EM fungi.


