Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Mechanisms of Ion Channel Targeting in the
               Mammalian Nervous System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1999       
File        : a9815347

Award Number: 9815347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31050              (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Trimmer james.trimmer@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9815347
Trimmer

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor James Trimmer of the State University of New York
              (SUNY) at Stony Brook and Professor Kazuhiro Ikenaka of the Okazaki National
              Research Institutes in Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study of
              the mechanisms of ion channel targeting in the mammalian nervous system. 
              Proper levels of expression and localization of ion channels is required for
              the propagation of signals in the nervous system.  In mammalian central
              neurons, voltage-gated K+ channels play a crucial role in regulating the
              resting membrane potential, impacting dendritic excitability, controlling the
              frequency and duration of action potentials, and modulating neurotransmitter
              release.  Neurons synthesize a great variety of K+ channels that are
              fundamental components of neuronal activity patterns.  This research is aimed
              at determining the molecular mechanisms that regulate the abundance and
              distribution of voltage-dependent K+ channels.  The proposed studies focus on
              determining the auxiliary subunits that regulate the expression of the Kv4
              channels that comprise the dendritic "A" current, and the axonal proteins that
              localize Kv1 channels to the juxtaparanodal regions of nodes of
              Ranvier.

This project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that
              have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The U.S. researchers'
              expertise is in the area of biochemistry and immunohistochemistry and the
              Japanese have expertise in the area of genetics. Results of this research would
              provide a for a better understanding of protein channel subunit expression and
              interaction in neuronal systems, and its potential biomedical implications in
              mammalian and human neuronal disease.  This research advances international
              human resources through the participation of a younger scientist and graduate
              students.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  
***

