Title       : Optically Probing the Chemistry of Thin Film Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a9815846

Award Number: 9815846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353036             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irving P. Herman iph1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to identify the chemical steps in plasma-assisted
              chemical etching of electronic materials by obtaining a detailed view of the
              chemistry that occurs on the surface during this thin film process. The
              approach is to use optical probes of the surface, those that have been
              developed, and by developing and employing new surface-sensitive optical probes
              as needed, and by utilizing existing diagnostic techniques to probe the plasma.
              The etching of several key materials, including Si, GaN, and SiC, will be
              studied in several environments, including C12 and C12/Ar high charge density
              plasmas, to understand the molecular and surface processes that contribute to
              these materials processes. 
Laser-induced thermal desorption (LITD), a surface
              sensitive optical probe, will be used to study the steady-state surface layer
              that is formed during etching in an inductively coupled plasma (ICP), a
              prominent type of high charge density plasma. The chemistry of the formation
              and desorption of this layer, which is sometimes only a monolayer thick is
              considered key to understanding the etching process. Laser-desorption based
              methods will be used to probe in situ and in real time the plasma etching. When
              possible, laser induced fluorescence (LIF) will be used to examine the desorbed
              products. When LIF detection is not possible or feasible, the transient
              increase in plasma-induced emission (PIE) after laser desorption will be
              monitored to detect desorbed products. This LD-PIE method will be developed as
              part of the proposed work. Preliminary studies have shown that LD-PIE analysis
              can have submonolayer sensitivity. Other diagnostics will be used to
              characterize the plasma and the etching process, such as optical emission
              actinometry, Langmuir probing, and microwave interferometry.
%%%
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science having
              high potential technological relevance. The research will contribute basic
              materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important fabrication
              aspects of electronic/photonic devices.  New experimental optical tools are now
              available to allow more detailed observation of elementary surface processes
              which when better understood allow advances in fundamental science and
              technology. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is
              expected to contribute to improving the perform-ance and stability of advanced
              devices and circuits.  An important feature of the program is the integration
              of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
              and technologically significant area.
***

