Title       : A Development System for Rapid Prototyping of Dynamically Reconfigurable
               Mixed-Signal Low-Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a9815615

Award Number: 9815615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarma K. Vrudhula sarma@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Olgierd A. Palusinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0400000   Industry University - Co-op             
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9815615
Vrudhula

This project is carried out as a part of the NSF Research
              Centers - Small Firms Collaborative R&D initiative, under the leadership of the
              Center for Low Power Electronics, a S/IUCRC established by the National Science
              Foundation.

The project is aimed at developing a novel architecture for the
              rapid prototyping of mixed-signal (analog and digital) systems.  The system
              will be designed using the recently developed dynamic and partially
              reconfigurable field programmable logic arrays (DPGA) and reconfigurable field
              programmable analog arrays (FPAA).  They not only allow time-multiplexing of
              different tasks that are mapped on the same silicon area, but also allow
              overlapping of active computation in one section with configuration of another
              section of the chip.  The granularity at which the reconfiguration can be
              applied can be a single programmable cell logic block.  A development board and
              associated CAD software tools will be build that will permit the design of
              mixed-signal systems.  A key feature of the system is that part of the
              computation can be performed in the analog domain and part of it can be
              performed in the digital domain.  The development board will include a
              microprocessor and associated hardware interfaces to control the two arrays. 
              The project is a collaborative effort of the Center for Low Power Electronics
              and Western Design Center (WDC), one of its small business partners.  The
              mixed-signal development system (board and software) will be manufactured and
              commercialized by WDC.  The system will also be distributed to university
              teaching and research laboratories to be used as a vehicle for the rapid
              prototying of analog, digital and mixed-signal circuits. 

