Title       : Evolutionary Adaptation in Viruses: The Role of Recombination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a9815576

Award Number: 9815576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick M. Cohan fcohan@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory P. Krukonis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              +9815576 
Cohan

The proposed research will investigate the two different
              mechanisms by which organisms acquire new capabilities:  1) mutation, changes
              in existing genes, and 2) recombination, the acquisition of genes from
              different organisms. Both mechanisms occur in nature but information is lacking
              about the relative likelihood of the different events and the different
              consequences of each type of event. These questions will be addressed using an
              experimental system of bacteriophage (viruses that infect bacteria) and their
              bacterial hosts. New viral strains with the ability to infect previously
              resistant hosts will be produced in the laboratory via each mechanism, and
              molecular techniques will be used to identify the genes responsible for the
              changes in host range. The study
will compare the activity of the new strains
              produced by recombination and mutation, to determine if host range changes
              caused by recombination might be more effective than those caused by mutation.
              Finally, the new viruses will be grown in the laboratory for several
              generations to determine how the initial changes allowing the infection of a
              new host drive the acquisition of further modifications.

Acquisition of new
              functions by organisms, especially microorganisms, is becoming an increasingly
              important issue for human health and safety. HIV, the virus that causes AIDS,
              is rapidly mutating to produce forms resistant to current drug therapy. New
              influenza strains appear each year, and major changes such as those that caused
              the 1914 pandemic are thought to result from recombination. The proposed
              research will increase our general understanding of
the mechanisms and
              outcomes of these different processes. In addition, the experimental viral
              system will allow the collection of data specific to the study of the origin of
              viruses capable of infecting new hosts.
















