Title       : The Contribution of Economic Information to Environmental Decision-Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a9815472

Award Number: 9815472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149666             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard A. Shabman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt Stephenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1239,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Congressional concern over the expansion of environmental regulation has
              motivated legislative proposals to formally compare the benefits and costs of
              new regulations. The Clinton administration and past administrations all have
              issued guidelines for evaluating the benefits and costs of both new regulations
              and federal environmental expenditures. Federal and state court judgements and
              administrative processes levy financial penalties on those liable for damages
              to the environment. In public debate, economic arguments often are made to
              support or to oppose particular environmental decisions. Recognizing the
              widespread interest in economic measurement, a significant research program
              within the economics profession has become the development of tools to make
              money measurements of the value of the environment. However, using money
              estimates of environmental values as a guide for decisions remains
              controversial among decision-makers and economists. In addition, other economic
              information (for example, cost estimates) may be a more significant influence
              on the decisions made. If the money measurements advocated by many economists
              are not employed, what economic  information is most valued in decision making?
              Why is that particular economic information employed? Can economics research
              improve the quality of the economic information in decision making? Identifying
              the economic information decision participants find both useful and credible is
              challenging given the complex nature of public decision-making processes.To
              reflect this complexity and identify common relationships, this study utilizes
              a pattern model approach to understanding environmental policy decisions . 
              Case studies, published materials, and agency guidelines will be synthesized to
              form an initial description of causal relationships between analytical results
              and final decision outcomes.  The preliminary pattern model will then be
              refined and expanded through interviews with analysts, lawyers, and public
              officials involved in the relevant decision process.  After accounting for the
              role of other explanatory factors, the pattern model will be used to identify
              how specific economic information affects final decision outcomes. 
              Verification of results is accomplished by applying the model to a
              representative sample of cases and examining how closely the model represents
              the decision process and outcomes. The identification of what economic
              information is most useful and credible to decision participants in evaluating
              environmental changes will lead to more effective incorporation of
              environmental values into public decisions.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
