Title       : Molecular Analysis of RNA Polymerase I Transcription Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9219220

Award Number: 9219220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise Pape   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The most actively transcribed genes in any organism are those                  
              coding for the ~37S pre-ribosomal RNAs.  In eukaryotes, this is                
              accomplished by RNA polymerase I and additional factors.  How these            
              interact is of fundamental importance.  In vivo analysis of the                
              role of the rDNA transcription factor UBF (upstream binding factor)            
              in catalysis of rRNA synthesis in the yeast Schizosaccharomyces                
              pombe is proposed.  To facilitate these studies the S. pombe UBF               
              gene is being cloned.  The first transcription extract capable of              
              supporting accurate initiation on an S. pombe rDNA mini-gene is now            
              successfully established, and it is sensitive to the action of a               
              vertebrate rDNA enhance which specifically interacts with UBF.                 
              Activation of the rDNA promoter in this S-100 extract is also                  
              responsive to regulatory elements in the pombe intergenic spacer               
              (from ~-1800 to ~-850 that apparently act by stably binding RNA                
              polymerase I transcriptional factors.  Factors interacting with                
              essential rDNA promoter and intergenic regulatory sequences will be            
              analyzed.  Our two experimental aims include:  1.) Analysis of the             
              activity of the S. pombe RNA polymerase I transcription factor UBF             
              in vivo and in vitro; 2.) Characterization of the role of                      
              regulatory sequences in the S. pombe rDNA spacer in transcriptional            
              activation of the rDNA promoter and identification of interacting              
              factors.                                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Every cell in an organism has millions of ribosomes, the complexes             
              where proteins are synthesized.  The function of these complexes is            
              absolutely required for all cells, since proteins are key                      
              determinants of cellular structure and functions.  The ribosomes re            
              composed of both protein and nucleic acid components.  My                      
              laboratory is studying how the essential nucleic acid components of            
              these complexes, called the ribosomal RNAs, are produced.  Our                 
              approach incorporates both genetic and biochemical analysis of                 
              requirements for the production of the ribosomal RNAs and analysis             
              of the means by which a cell regulates this production.
