Title       : Dissertation Research: The Isotopic Composition and Ecology of Archaic Human
               Diet in the Eastern Chihuahuan Desert of Texas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1992   
File        : a9219458

Award Number: 9219458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9190               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffery A. Huebner  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Thomas Hester, Mr Jeffery Huebner, a                
              graduate student at the University of Texas, Austin, will collect              
              data for his doctoral dissertation. Mr. Huebner has amassed and                
              will submit prehistoric skeletal, tissue, fecal, animal and plant              
              samples to Geochron Laboratories for carbon and nitrogen isotopic              
              determination. The results will permit him to do two things: 1.                
              reconstruct how prehistoric diet changed in the Chihuahuan Desert              
              region over a time interval when the enviroment shifted markedly.              
              2. allow refinement of a set of isotopic techniques widely used                
              by scientists to reconstruct human diet.                                       
                                                                                             
              Past research has shown that different animal and vegetable foods              
              vary in their isotopic composition in both carbon and nitrogen.                
              These "isotopic signatures" are transmitted, with some                         
              alteration, to the tissues of animals which consume them.                      
              Analysis of human skeletal material for example shows isotopic                 
              variation which is related to diet over the course of an                       
              individual's life. Because of this fact, and because human                     
              skeletal material is often preserved, anthropologists have                     
              increasingly used this technique in an attempt to reconstruct                  
              prehistoric diet. Because of its dry environment and the                       
              excellent preservation of organic remains, the Chihuahuan Desert               
              provides a unique opportunity to help to develop this technique.               
              Not only are well dated human skeletal remains available, but                  
              both mummified tissues and fecal remains are also present.                     
              Analysis of all three allow an interesting comparison since soft               
              tissue reacts differently than bone and reflects diet over a                   
              shorter time interval. Because plant and animal remains are well               
              preserved, analyses of them provides a control against which                   
              tissue results can be calibrated.                                              
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will increase               
              our understanding of how humans adapt to a difficult and changing              
              environment. It will help to develop a technique of widespread                 
              anthropological use. It will also assist in the training of a                  
              promising young scientist.
