Title       : Investigation of hormonal regulation of transcription using permeabilized cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1994     
File        : a9219545

Award Number: 9219545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Chalkley roger.chalkley@mcmail.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt U Med Ctr
	      Office of Biomedical Sciences
	      Nashville, TN  372322103    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9251,
Abstract    :
                   The hormonal modulation of gene expression is a complex series            
              of events starting with hormone binding to receptor and ending with            
              transcription factor bound to specific DNA elements interacting                
              with the transcription machinery.  Transcription of the gene                   
              encoding phosphoenolpyruvate carbonxykinase (PEPCK) is stimulated              
              by glucocorticoids and glucagon (via cAMP) and inhibited by insulin            
              in the liver-derived H4 cells.  DNA elements mediating the hormonal            
              affects on PEPCK gene expression have been identified.  It has been            
              demonstrated that transcription of the PEPCK gene continues to be              
              hormonally regulated after lysolecithin permeabilization of H4                 
              cells.  This treatment allows chemicals, including macromolecules,             
              to enter cells when normally they would be excluded.  This proposal            
              describes the refinement of the permeable cell transcription system            
              and its use to investigate the mechanism of hormonal regulation of             
              gene expression.  In vivo footprinting of the endogenous PEPCK gene            
              in lysolecithin permeabilized H4 cells will be used to determine if            
              hormone causes induction, replacement, or no change in factor                  
              binding to hormone response elements.  In vivo footprinting in the             
              transcriptionally active permeable cell system as well as of the               
              transcription initiation complex and to assess if hormone affects              
              the stability of any of these protein-DNA complexes.  This proposal            
              attempts to bridge the gap between the intact cell which is                    
              difficult to probe biochemically and cell extracts made by                     
              destroying the cell, but which are easily probed with biochemical              
              approaches.  This new method allows the cell to become permeable to            
              biochemical probes without destroying the overall survival of the              
              cell.  We wish to begin to determine some of the properties of the             
              chromosome using these cells.                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              The proposed work investigates the molecular mechanisms involved in            
              regulation of expression of specific genes within cells.  As part              
              of the research, the investigator will develop experimental methods            
              to make possible experiments which are not currently feasible given            
              existing methods.
