Title       : Characterization of mRNA Instability Determinants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9219357

Award Number: 9219357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet L. Schottel schot002@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The overall process of gene expression involves several events            
              including transcription, RNA processing, mRNA degradation,                     
              translation, and post-translational protein modification.  Very                
              little is known concerning the mechanism or regulation of mRNA                 
              degradation.  The focus of the proposed experiments is to                      
              characterize mRNA instability sequences that determine the rapid               
              decay rate of labile mRNAs.  An instability determinant originating            
              from the E. coli chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene has been               
              identified (287R) that can function in a cis-dominant manner to                
              destabilize the normally stablw ompA mRNA.  Several approaches will            
              be used to characterize the 287R instability determinant.  1)                  
              Deletions will be introduced into the sequence to identify the                 
              smallest sequence that still has destabilizing activity.  2) Site-             
              directed mutagenesis will be used to further define the minimum                
              instability sequence and to probe the functional importance of                 
              potential structures within the sequence.  3) The ribonuclease that            
              recognizes this instability sequence will be identified.  Initially            
              the function of the instability sequence will be tested in mutants             
              defective in known ribonucleases.  If these experiments indicate               
              that a novel ribonuclease interacts with the 287R sequence, it will            
              be isolated and characterized.  An in vitro decay assay will be                
              developed and used to monitor enzyme purification.  4) If time                 
              permits, the effect of this instability determinant on growth rate             
              regulation of ompA mRNA decay in E. coli will also be investigated.            
              %%%                                                                            
              The goal of this project is to elucidated the mechanisms by which              
              cells degrade messenger RNA molecules.  mRNA degradation is a basic            
              metabolic process and is vital to the organism's survival and                  
              adaptation abilities.  The decay rate of a particular mRNA can                 
              influence the amount of protein synthesized from that transcript               
              and thereby have a critical impact on the expression levels of the             
              corresponding gene.  The experiments outlined in this proposal will            
              characterize elements within mRNAs called instability determinants             
              that result in the rapid decay of labile mRNAs.  The sequences or              
              structures that are required for the function of an instability                
              determinant will be defined, and the cellular enzymes that                     
              recognizes these sequences will be identified.
