Title       : Using Cosmogenic Isotopes to Determine Rates of Denudation and Sediment
               Transport in Large Drainage Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1993      
File        : a9219487

Award Number: 9219487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. Gillespie   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Dunne  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two year project will demonstrate whether measuring cosmogenic            
              isotope abundances in sediment provides a useful and efficient way             
              to determine basin-scale denudation rates and sediment fluxes.  It             
              has three specific goals: 1) evaluate the simple model we have                 
              developed for interpreting the abundance of in-situ-produced                   
              cosmogenic nuclides in sediments; 2) use isotope abundance to                  
              characterize the variability in sediment production and routing in             
              mesoscale (1000km2) drainage basins in the Oregon Coast Range; 3)              
              measure isotope concentrations in sediments carried by some of the             
              world's largest rivers and compare "cosmogenic" denudation rates               
              with those calculated by other means.  At the conclusion, we will              
              have determined the applicability of our interpretive model and we             
              will understand better the dynamics of sediment production and                 
              transport in the Coast Range.                                                  
              The study will begin with collection of quartz-rich sediment                   
              samples from hillslopes and stream channels in the western Oregon              
              Coast Range.  We will sample along the drainages, beginning in                 
              first-order tributaries and continuing to the trunk streams.                   
              Quartz will be separated from these samples and the abundance of               
              in situ-produced cosmogenic isotopes (26Al and 14C) will be                    
              measured.  Isotope abundances will be interpreted using the                    
              mathematical model that we have developed and will be compared to              
              the rates of sediment production, transport, and storage which we              
              and others have quantified through prior field studies in the Coast            
              Range. In addition to Coast Range samples, we plan to analyze                  
              sediment collected by us and by others from rivers draining a                  
              variety of geomorphic and hydrologic provinces.  These sample sites            
              will be selected to represent areas which have significantly                   
              different denudation rates.  They will include sites in the Amazon             
              Basin, where we are currently studying sediment transport by more              
              traditional means, as well as sites on other large rivers where we             
              have experience or contacts resulting from the Amazon work
