Title       : Paleopalynology of the Silurian Section at Arisaig, Nova Scotia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1993   
File        : a9219965

Award Number: 9219965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Strother strother@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed project concerns the collection,                             
              description and study of microscopic plant remains and                         
              acritarchs from Silurian age rocks in northeastern North                       
              America.  The principal section to be sampled will be the                      
              Arisaig Group in Nova Scotia, an extremely well-studied                        
              shallow marine deposit which spans the entire Silurian                         
              Period.  Spores and other plant fragments occur as organic                     
              components of these near-shore marine deposits, and, because                   
              organic-walled phytoplankton (acritarchs) are mixed in with                    
              land plant remains, it will be possible to compare the North                   
              American assemblages directly with their counterparts from                     
              the type sections in the Welsh Borderlands and the Prague                      
              Basin.  Since palynomorphs represent the remains of primary                    
              producers in both the terrestrial and marine realm, the                        
              reconstruction of palynomorph assemblages should serve as an                   
              index of the basal trophic resource for benthic marine                         
              communities.  PI will compare palynomorph diversity and                        
              assemblage dynamics at both micro-and macro-scales with                        
              previously documented paleoecological and benthic community                    
              reconstructions for the Arisaig section.  PI will also test                    
              for correlations between benthic invertebrate community                        
              assemblages and syndepositional phytoplankton assemblages.                     
              The documentation of  the non-marine component of the                          
              Arisaig Group will represent the first attempt to study the                    
              primordial adaptive radiation of the land plants from a                        
              single continuous Silurian section.  By establishing a                         
              stratigraphic record of fossil plant remains, the                              
              information generated from this project will be critical to                    
              the serious study of the origin and early evolution of the                     
              terrestrial plant kingdom.
