Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematic Cultural Change in the U. S. Prehistoric
               Southwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1992   
File        : a9219848

Award Number: 9219848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7358               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Diehl  (Student current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Margaret Nelson, Mr Michael Diehl will              
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will study materials            
              at a number of U.S. museums which house archaeological collections             
              from the Mogollon region of New Mexico. The goal of the work is to             
              examine the emergence of inequality within social groups over time.            
              Dr. Diehl will focus on the Early and Late Pithouse periods because            
              over this time period clear changes in subsistence and settlement              
              strategy are documented in the archaeological record. Pithouse                 
              peoples started as highly moble hunters and collectors and over                
              time appear to have settled in larger groupings. Sites were                    
              occupied for longer periods of time and dependence on agriculture              
              appears to have increased. In many parts of the world similar                  
              changes are correlated with the emergence of social inequality                 
              among domestic household units. It is unclear whether a this                   
              phenomenon occurred among Pithouse peoples and Mr. Diehl will                  
              examine this question. More importantly, he will try to discern the            
              underlying mechanisms which underlay the changes which took place              
              and try to determine precise cause and effect relationships. To                
              accomplish this, he will examine excavation documents, botanical               
              remains, ceramics and "luxury" items from a series of sites which              
              span this time period. In this way he can reconstruct changes in               
              subsistence, settlement and social differentiation.                            
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. Social inequality              
              is both a fact of life and a cause of problems which face many                 
              societies today. Anthropologists wish to understand how this                   
              phenomenon originally arose and this research will address the                 
              issue. It will also assist in the training of a promising young                
              scientist.
