Title       : Muscle Development in Squid: An Integrated Analysis of Muscle Fiber
               Specialization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1995      
File        : a9219495

Award Number: 9219495
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Kier billkier@bio.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The development and differentiation of two muscle fiber types in               
              the squid Sepioteuthis lessoniana will be studied.  First,                     
              transmission electron microscopy will be used to document the                  
              differentiation of the cross-striated muscle cells of the tentacles            
              and the obliquely striated muscle cells of the arms.  Second, the              
              differentiation of these two muscle cell types will be correlated              
              with behavioral changes that occur during development and growth               
              using high speed video recording of prey capture.  Third,                      
              immunocytochemical techniques will be used to document the pattern             
              and timing of expression of alpha-actinin and paramyosin, proteins             
              important in determining the dimensions and organization of the                
              muscle cell filaments.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This integrated approach to muscle fiber differentiation will                  
              provide the most comprehensive account of cephalopod muscle                    
              development to date.  It will afford a unique opportunity to study             
              the transition between two muscle striation types and will examine             
              the significance of the structural characteristics of muscle cells             
              specialized for a particular function.  In addition, it will                   
              examine the mechanisms controlling the assembly of two distinct                
              muscle cells types during development and will, therefore, provide             
              fundamental insight into the mechanisms of muscle cell growth and              
              development.  Because the study will integrate analyses at several             
              levels of organization, the physiological significance of the                  
              diversity of structural and biochemical components of muscle can be            
              explored precisely.
