Title       : Laboratory Studies of the Physics of Debris Entrainment, Transport, and
               Deposition at the Bed of a Temperate Glacier
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1992  
File        : a9219198

Award Number: 9219198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81958              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Iverson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Processes of erosion, entrainment, and deposition at                      
              the beds of glaciers govern the supply of debris available                     
              for subglacial modification, and thus, play an important                       
              role in the evolution of subglacially sculpted topography.                     
              In addition, deformation of subglacial debris directly                         
              influences the dynamics of many glaciers and ice sheets.                       
              Despite the strong motivation for studying the physics of                      
              interactions between concentrated debris, ice, and glacier                     
              beds, no laboratory experiments under well controlled,                         
              realistic conditions have been conducted.                                      
                   We propose a series of experiments in which conditions                    
              at the bed of a temperature glacier will be closely                            
              simulated.  In some experiments,  a rock bed slid beneath a                    
              fixed block of temperate ice that contains dense arrays of                     
              rock particles.  Our goals will be to simulate glacial                         
              abrasion and debris comminution, and to demonstrate the                        
              conditions under which basal melt-out and entrainment of                       
              debris occur.  Experiments to date indicate that these                         
              processes are strongly affected by the tendency for ice to                     
              penetrate and flow through debris by regelation.  To better                    
              understand this process regelation of ice through till will                    
              be idealized in other experiments by pushing ice through a                     
              three-dimensional array of spheres.  Results will be                           
              compared with predictions of an existing regelation theory,                    
              which we will modify by including the important effect of                      
              solutes on thermal gradients.  In both series of                               
              experiments, all pertinent glaciological variables will be                     
              monitored, including ice and bed temperature, basal melt                       
              rate, and effective pressure.  These experiments will held                     
              fill a conspicuous void in the study of glacial geologic                       
              processes.
