Title       : Regulation of fatty acid desaturation in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1993  
File        : a9219356

Award Number: 9219356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Somerville   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9186,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the project is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms               
              which regulate the degree of unsaturation of membrane and storage              
              lipids.  We will address this question by measuring the effect of              
              variation in developmental stage and environmental conditions on               
              the expression of several recently isolated genes encoding fatty               
              acid desaturases from the plant Arabidopsis thaliana.  The                     
              existence of regulatory mechanisms which act at the level of direct            
              enzyme activation or deactivation will be examined by measuring the            
              effects on lipid composition in transgenic plants which contain                
              higher than normal levels of desaturase activity due to                        
              overexpression of cloned desaturase genes.  The spatial                        
              organization of lipid desaturation within cells will be elucidated             
              using anti-desaturase antibodies to localize the enzymes by                    
              immunogold electron microscopy.  Finally, we will attempt to                   
              isolate genes for several additional desaturases by map-based                  
              cloning methods based on the availability of a comprehensive                   
              collection of mutants of Arabidopsis.                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              Plant fatty acids provide about one third of the calories in human             
              diets and are also used for a wide variety of technical products               
              raging from synthesis of nylon to cosmetics.  In addition, the                 
              ability of many plants to withstand exposure to temperature                    
              extremes is thought to be controlled by the fatty acid composition             
              of plant membranes.  The experiments proposed here are designed to             
              provided detailed information about the factors which regulate                 
              plant fatty acid composition.  This information may be useful in               
              permitting genetic modification of the fatty acid composition of               
              plants so that they produce edible oils with advantageous dietary              
              qualities, expanded technical uses or enhanced ability to withstand            
              temperature extremes.
