Title       : Biochemical and Molecular Investigations of the Transductionof Blue Light
               Signals in Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9219256

Award Number: 9219256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Winslow R. Briggs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9198,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Blue light photoreception plays an important role in the regulation            
              of higher plant development.  Blue light photoreceptors mediate                
              directional growth toward the light on the one hand (phototropism)             
              and the extremely rapid inhibition of growth of stem elongation                
              that is a part of the early de-etiolation response of emerging                 
              seedlings on the other.  There is strong evidence that these two               
              processes proceed through separate and independent signal                      
              transduction pathways.  The goals of this research are: (1) to                 
              isolate, characterize, and obtain sequence information on a plasma             
              membrane protein that is phosphorylated as a consequence of blue               
              light irradiation, and that appears to be involved at an early                 
              stage in phototropism, and (2) to isolate, characterize, and obtain            
              sequence information on a protein cross-reactive with several                  
              antibodies directed against animal intermediate filament proteins,             
              a protein that may be involved in the rapid inhibition of growth.              
              Arabidopsis thaliana mutants are available in both pathways, making            
              Arabidopsis the organism of choice for these studies.  It is                   
              expected that complete sequence information will be obtained on                
              these two A. thaliana proteins involved respectively in two                    
              different blue light-induced signal transduction pathways.                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Blue light is an important environmental signal in plant growth and            
              development.  It stimulates plants to grow toward light and                    
              regulates the elongation of young seedlings as they emerge from the            
              soil.  This research will take advantage of the power of molecular             
              genetics to study the structure and role of two specific proteins              
              involved in early stages of the response of plants to blue light.              
              The results will be important contributions to our understanding of            
              the molecular basis of plant responses to the environment.
