Title       : Crustal Structure of Collisional Orogens: The Ural Mountains, Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9219915

Award Number: 9219915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112892             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry D. Brown brown@geology.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Knapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest C. Hauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9219915  Brown         The Ural Mountains of central Russia form a 3,000-km
              linear  orogenic belt of Paleozoic age and constitute a unique natural 
              laboratory to address a number of basic issues concerning  collisional
              orogenesis and the evolution of continental crust.   Several features appear to
              distinguish the Urals from other  Paleozoic orogenic belts such as the
              Appalachians, Caledonides, and  Variscides.  Primary among these are (1) the
              apparent presence  (based on seismic velocities) of a preserved crustal root
              below the  Urals, (2) the apparent lack of syn- or post-collisional collapse 
              evidenced in the Urals based on existing data, (3) the relatively  shallow
              crustal level and generally low metamorphic grade exposed  in the Urals, and
              (4) the nature and distribution of crustal  reflectivity in the Ural orogen. 
              In particular, the apparent  similarity in early orogenic evolution between the
              Urals and the  Appalachians, and the subsequent divergence in post-orogenic
              paths,  offer a special opportunity to evaluate the role of various  orogenic
              processes in the development of lower crustal structure.   For example, if the
              prominent lower crustal layering observed  beneath the Appalachian interior
              relates to post-orogenic  extension, will it be absent beneath the  Urals?  Do
              the Urals  preserve an intermediate stage in orogenic development between the 
              more mature collapsed orogens like the Appalachians and more recent 
              compressional belts like the Alps and Himalayas?         The Principal
              Investigators will initiate a collaborative  research program with Russian
              scientists at the Bazhenov  Geophysical Expedition in Scheelite (near
              Ekaterinburg, formerly  Sverdlovsk), Russia, for a comprehensive study of the
              nature and  origin of the crustal structure of the Urals based on their 
              extensive existing geophysical database.  This  collaboration  constitutes the
              initial phase of a larger, long-term program to  compare and contrast the Urals
              with other Paleozoic orogens,  eventually leading to the  first deep seismic
              reflection profile  across the Urals.  This effort also represents the first 
              collaboration between US scientists and EUROPROBE, a major new  European
              initiative to coordinate lithospheric studies in Europe.   The US component
              will focus on a comparison of Uralian and  Appalachian structure, complementing
              EUROPROBE's investigation of  the Urals versus Variscan evolution.         In
              particular they will focus on reprocessing and synthesis  of Russia reflection
              (mostly shallow), refraction and DSS (deep  seismic sounding) data, with the
              aim of mapping the crustal  structure and understanding the Phanerozoic history
              of the Urals  and nearby regions.  In doing this, they will be establishing
              with  their Russian collaborators a common knowledge of the various  existing
              datasets and their interpretations.         It is important to note that the
              Bazhenov Expedition is the  center for all geophysical data available on the
              Urals (including  DSS and reflection data, gravity and magnetic data, heat
              flow,  etc.) and the majority of these data, are of unrestricted access  under
              the conditions of a joint statement with scientists from that  institute.  ***
