Title       : Retinylidene Phototransducers in a Eukaryotic Model System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1994     
File        : a9219854

Award Number: 9219854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Spudich John.L.Spudich@uth.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC Houston
	      P.O.Box 20036
	      Houston, TX  772250036    713/500-9352

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9108,
Abstract    :
                 Compelling evidence has accumulated for the existence of                    
              retinylidene (rhodopsin-like) photosensory receptors in unicellular            
              eukaryotes.  These photoreceptors constitute a new class of                    
              retinal-containing sensory proteins in nature, evolutionarily                  
              intermediate between visual pigments in higher animals and sensory             
              rhodopsins in archaebacteria.  In Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, two               
              distinct motility behaviors have been shown to depend on retinal               
              for light detection:  phototaxis migration and photophobic                     
              responses.  Indirect evidence indicates the retinal chromophore for            
              the photophobic response is chemically similar in its retinal                  
              /apoprotein interactions to the archaebacterial rhodopsins.  On the            
              other hand, there is data indicating the phototaxis receptor is                
              more similar in chromophore properties to visual pigments.  The                
              aims of this research are to establish the number of rhodopsin-like            
              pigments responsible for C. reinhardtii photobehavior, to determine            
              spectroscopic and biochemical properties of the photoreceptor(s),              
              and to use this information to clone the corresponding structural              
              gene(s).  Phototactic and photophobic behavior of retinal analog-              
              reconstituted cells will be analyzed by quantitative motion                    
              analysis to establish spectroscopic and chromophore binding                    
              properties of the retinylidene photoreceptors(s).  Photobehavioral             
              mutants will be isolated and characterized.  This work will provide            
              criteria for spectroscopic identification of the photoreceptor                 
              pigments and for protein enrichment and isolation of radio-labeled             
              retinal binding fragments.  Protein primary sequence information               
              will be obtained and used to design oligonucleotide probes.                    
              %%%                                                                            
              For most organisms, the ability to detect and respond to light                 
              stimuli is a fundamental property critical to their survival.  In              
              animals, the primary detector of light is the so-called visual                 
              pigment, a protein called rhodopsin which functions in association             
              with retinal (vitamin A).  A related but different form of                     
              rhodopsin is found in the photoresponsive apparatus of                         
              archaebacteria.  Prior work with archaebacterial rhodopsin by this             
              laboratory has been important not only because of the potential for            
              expanding knowledge about rhodopsin sensory function in general,               
              but also for laying the groundwork for development of a potential              
              new generation of rhodopsin-based miniature photodetectors with                
              broad applications.  In the present study, this laboratory is                  
              focusing on the photoresponses of a unicellular motile green alga,             
              Chlamydomonas.  This organism exhibits two different types of                  
              photobehaviors: a phototactic response, in which the organism swims            
              toward the light, and a photophobic response, in which the organism            
              swims away from a sudden flash of light.  Preliminary data suggest             
              that the two photoresponses are mediated by different rhodopsins,              
              one resembling the visual pigment of animals and the other                     
              resembling the archaebacterial photosensor.  These photoresponses              
              will be studied in a multidisciplinary fashion, combining genetics,            
              molecular biology, biochemistry, and biophysical measurements, to              
              expand our understanding of this important class of photoresponsive            
              biomacromolecules.
