Title       : Study of an Enzyme that Regulates Oil Synthesis in Seeds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1995   
File        : a9219323

Award Number: 9219323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Huang anthony.huang@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,9161,9186,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Synthesis and degradation of triacylglycerols (TAG) in seeds during            
              maturation and germination involve active metabolic pathways.                  
              Understanding the detailed mechanism of TAG metabolism will enable             
              the control of food reserve deposition and utilization during                  
              active stages of the plant life cycle.  It will also provide an                
              indispensable information of how to breed or genetically engineer              
              better seed oils for human utilization.  The long  term                        
              objective of the laboratory is to elucidate the mechanism of TAG               
              metabolism in seeds.  The focus is on a crucial TAG synthesizing               
              enzyme, lysophosphatidate (LPA) acyltransferase, in maturing seed.             
              This enzyme catalyzes the incorporation of acyl moiety from acyl               
              CoA to the sn-2 position of 1-acyl-glycerol-3-phosphate, and the               
              product phosphatidate will be further metabolized to either TAG or             
              phospholipids.  The enzyme has a very stringent acyl preference on             
              both substrates, and thus controls the incorporation of preferred              
              fatty acids into the sn-1 and sn-2 positions of TAG.  The fatty                
              acid composition, and thus the properties of seed TAG, rely heavily            
              on the acyl preference of LPA acyltransferase.  In this research               
              proposal, the following two objectives will be pursued.  The first             
              objective is to examine whether seed LPA acyltransferase of a                  
              special acyl preference from one plant species will be active in               
              another plant species after genetic transformation.  Experiments               
              will be performed to characterized seed LPA acyltransferases from              
              palm, Brassica, and meadowfoam, to obtain their genes for                      
              transformation of appropriate plants, and to detect activities of              
              the foreign enzymes in the transformed plants.  Several different              
              approaches will be used to obtain the gene; these approaches                   
              include: screening cDNA libraries for the genes by oligonucleotides            
              deduced from the purified enzyme and by a bacterial gene, and                  
              functional complementation with a bacterial mutant.  Putative E.               
              coli mutant lines functionally complemented with plant cDNA                    
              encoding the enzyme have been obtained; these lines will be studied            
              most intensively.  If time permits, we will use the palm and                   
              meadowfoam LPA acyltransferase genes to transform Brassica, and                
              analyze the transformed plants for activities of the foreign                   
              enzyme.  The information will be crucial to our understanding of               
              the control mechanism of fatty acid assembly into TAG in seeds as              
              well as glycerolipids in non seed organs. The second objective is              
              to test if a membrane-associated, lipid-metabolizing enzyme of                 
              bacterial origin can be active, in higher plants.  by transforming             
              Brassica with an E. coli gene encoding LPA acyltransferase and                 
              studying the expression of the bacterial gene in the transformed               
              Brassica.                                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              This project aims to take a gene which makes an enzyme that                    
              Produces a certain plant oil found in palms, and introduce the gene            
              into other plants to see if they also would produce the palm oil.              
              If this is successful the investigators have found a way for oil               
              produced in plants not common to the US to be available in other               
              species of plants common in this country.  Furthermore, these                  
              enzymes could be used to make novel lipid biomaterials.
