Title       : Genetic Analysis of an ABC Transport Mechanism for Secretion of Syringomycin, a
               Phytotoxin Produced by Pseudomonas Syringae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1995      
File        : a9219200

Award Number: 9219200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil B. Quigley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9219200  Quigley  The research described in this proposal will investigate the 
              mechanism of secretion of syringomycin by the plant pathogenic  bacterium,
              Pseudomonas syringae pathovar syringae.  Strains of this  bacterium cause
              disease in a wide range of important  crop plant  species.  Virtually all of
              the pathogenic strains of P. s. syringae  produce syringae produce
              syringomycin, which is a potent phytotoxin  related to the polypeptin class of
              peptide antibiotics.  The syrD  gene of P. s. syringae is required for the
              production of  syringomycin, and its predicted product, SyrD, has strong
              homology  with proteins in the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter family, 
              and it carries all of the key sequence and structural features  required for
              function by ABC proteins.  Preliminary experiments  have demonstrated that the
              syrD gene is restricted to pathovar  syringae strains of P. syringae.  It is
              proposed that SyrD gene is  restricted to pathovar syringae strains of P.
              syringae. It is  proposed that SyrD is an inner membrane protein that functions
              as  the pivotal translator in the secretion of syringomycin by P.s.  syringae. 
              Objectives of this project are: 1) to determine of SyrD  is a membrane protein
              that functions as an ABC transporter protein  in syringomycin secretion.  2) To
              determine if the syrD holologs in  strains of P. s syringae that produce
              analogs of syringomycin  encode SyrD proteins that are functionally
              interchangeable.  3) to  identify and genetically analyze other protein
              components of the  syringomycin export apparatus.  %%%  This research is
              significant because (i) syringomycin is an  important virulence determinant in
              diseases caused by P. s syringae  (ii) secretion of syringomycin by an ABC
              transporter mechanism  involving  SyrD would represent the first demonstration
              of such a  system in toxin production by any plant pathogen, and would 
              establish SyrD as the first known protein for bacterial phytotoxin  secretion,
              and (iii) the mechanisms of lipopeptide antibiotic  sec retion is largely
              unknown, reflecting the poor knowledge of the  secretion  mechanism for
              bacterial antibiotics in general.  Further  analysis of SyrD could provide
              important knowledge about the  secretion of lipopeptide antibiotics produced by
              medically and  agriculturally important bacterial pathogens.  ***
