Title       : Computational Studies of Biological Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1993       
File        : a9219619

Award Number: 9219619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Jakobsson jake@ncsa.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              See-Wing Chiu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shankar Subramaniam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9215,9216,
Abstract    :
              The computations and analysis provide much more detailed pictures              
              of molecular motions in membranes than is directly available                   
              experimentally.  The essential strategy is to verify the                       
              computational methods by comparison to experiment, and then to                 
              use the computational methods to see membrane phenomena in much                
              greater detail than would otherwise be possible.   For many                    
              membrane proteins, traditional crystallographic and spectroscopic              
              methods for structure determination are not readily accessible.                
              In those cases, the computational methods in this work may                     
              contribute greatly to structure determination.  A significant                  
              beginning has been made in describing the detailed motions of                  
              ions and water molecules in ion channels and the details of                    
              charge distributions that give rise to surface potentials in                   
              biological membranes.  It is anticipated to extend this work that              
              has been begun and to explore other membrane phenomena, such as                
              protein-lipid interactions in membranes.  This work will be                    
              greatly facilitated by the utilization of massively parallel                   
              computers.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              The objective of this work is to provide new insights into the                 
              detailed molecular physical bases of biological membrane                       
              function.  The methods to be employed are all computational and                
              theoretical and include molecular simulation, statistical                      
              mechanics, and molecular modeling.  These techniques are mutually              
              complementary to each other and to modern methods of experimental              
              molecular and membrane biophysics.
