Title       : RUI: Thermodynamics of Lipid-Lipid Interactions in Model Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1992  
File        : a9219255

Award Number: 9219255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96224              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Spink Spink@SNYCORVA.Cortland.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Cortland
	      P O BOX 2000
	      Cortland, NY  13045    607/753-2201

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal presents a plan to study the thermodynamics of                   
              transfer of common lipid membrane components between gel and fluid             
              phases of a reference bilayer, dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine,                 
              using differential scanning calorimetry as the primary technique.              
              The experimental protocols involve carrying out the measurements in            
              very dilute solutions of the solute components in the bilayer, and             
              then using the regular solution model to evaluate the free energy              
              proposed for evaluation of the enthalpy of transfer of the solute,             
              so that the entropy change can also be determined. In the end a                
              complete thermodynamic description of the transfer process will                
              allow comparisons between a variety of lipid classes that are                  
              important in membrane biophysics.  By systematically varying the               
              structures of solute molecules, a set of parameters can be devised             
              that will relate structural features of the solutes to the overall             
              thermodynamic transfer characteristics.  Molecules such as the                 
              phospholipids, fatty acids, sphingolipids and steroids will be                 
              studied.                                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Interactions between the lipid components of biological membranes              
              determine the physical and chemical characteristics of the                     
              components in the membrane.  Evaluation of the thermodynamics of               
              these interactions is fundamental to understanding the behavior of             
              molecules in the bilayer membrane environment.  It has been                    
              difficult to devise methods to evaluate the thermodynamic                      
              properties of membrane components because of the limitations of                
              models and techniques that can be used to study the interactions.
