Title       : Molecular Analysis of Photoregulated Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9219031

Award Number: 9219031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence N. Yager V5464E@TempleVM  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Conidiation (asexual sporulation) in the filamentous fungus,                   
              Aspergillus nidulans, involves the formation of multicellular                  
              differentiated structures that produce pigmented, haploid conidia              
              at precisely scheduled times. It has been shown that light is                  
              necessary for conidiation, but will only elicit development if                 
              irradiation occurs during a critical period of development.                    
              Furthermore, conidiation is induced by red light and suppressed                
              by an immediate shift to far red light, a property that is                     
              characteristic of phytochrome mediated responses observed in                   
              plants. Several different classes of mutants that affect light                 
              dependent conidiation have been identified. Some mutants abolish               
              light sensitivity, allowing conidiation to occur in the absence                
              of light, while others affect the ability to conidiate at                      
              specific wavelengths. Thus, it appears that light signals are                  
              perceived in A. nidulans by a phytochrome like photoreceptor that              
              transmits information by an unknown mechanism to genes that                    
              control asexual development. The objective of this proposal is to              
              develop a detailed understanding of the mechanisms that regulate               
              light mediated conidiation in this organism. The major aim of                  
              this work is to identify and characterize the red light                        
              photoreceptor through the molecular cloning of phytochrome                     
              related sequences. A phytochrome like clone has been isolated and              
              experiments are proposed to compare the sequences and function of              
              the A. nidulans phytochrome gene with known phytochrome genes                  
              from plants. These experiments include determining the DNA                     
              sequence of both genomic and cDNA clones, deducing the pattern of              
              transcriptional expression, following the pattern of                           
              translational expression through the use of gene fusions and                   
              phytochrome specific antibodies, and examining the phenotype of                
              gene disruptants. Another aim of this work is to identify                      
              interactions that occur within the photo transduction pathway.                 
              Mutants have been isolated in a cloned gene (acoD) that affect                 
              sensitivity to red light. Experiments are proposed to examine the              
              transcriptional and translational activity of acoD in different                
              growth and illumination conditions, to identify at the nucleotide              
              level the mutational defects that cause red light insensitivity,               
              and to identify gene interactions through the isolation and                    
              analysis of suppressor mutations. These studies will help                      
              elucidate the complex regulatory mechanisms that affect cellular               
              differentiation is this eukaryote.
