Title       : Seismic Wave Attenuation in Germany's Deep Borehole Area from VSP Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1993      
File        : a9219208

Award Number: 9219208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52638              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose Pujol pujol@ceri.memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9219208  Pujol         This project involves the determination of seismic wave 
              attenuation using VSP (Vertical Seismic Profiling) data recorded  in a
              4-km-deep pilot borehole next to the super-deep borehole   currently being
              drilled in Germany (expected to reach between 10  and 12 km).  In spite of
              extensive research, attenuation mechanisms  are not well understood, and even
              its measurement is plagued with  uncertainty, as wave amplitudes are also
              modified by wave  propagation effects generally only approximately known.  For
              this  reason, VSP data offer the best chance to observe the actual   change in
              the amplitude and shape of seismic waves with the minimum  amount of
              interference.  The importance of the German deep-  drilling program for this
              proposal is two-fold.  (1) The borehole  is one of the very few drilled in
              crystalline rocks.  Very little  information about attenuation in this type of
              rocks is available.   (2) Several zero-offset VSP data sets for different
              seismic sources  have been collected.  Explosive, vibrator, and impact sources
              have  been used to generate P and S waves.  This is an exceptional data  set
              that will be used to study the influence of the type of source  and the
              frequency content of the waves on the measurement of  attenuation, a matter on
              which little or no research has been  carried out so far because of the
              unavailability of data.         Although the measurement of attenuation (Q)
              using VSP data is  the most reliable technique and getting a number for Q is a
              rather  straightforward procedure, there are a number of factors that  affect
              the measurements.  In fact, different methods of measurement  (e.g., spectral
              ratio, rise time) and even the choice of a tapering  window may affect the
              results.  In addition, wave propagation in  the real earth affects wave
              amplitudes and frequency content  because of scattering and the filtering
              effect of thin layers.  For  this reason, the main goal of this research will
              be the computation  of reliable intrinsic Q values and a  study of the factors
              that  affect it.  This will be the most detailed information on  attenuation in
              crystalline rocks and will be extremely useful to  calibrate the attenuation
              that  may be determined from the analysis  of high-quality reflection seismic
              data collected in the borehole  area.  ***
