Title       : Transcription Termination by RNA Polymerase III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9219017

Award Number: 9219017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Setzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The long term goals of this project are to understand and describe             
              in detail the macromolecular interactions and biochemical                      
              mechanisms mediating transcription termination by RNA polymerase               
              III.  While important for understanding the synthesis of a number              
              of important small cellular and viral RNAs, the experiments                    
              proposed should also contribute to understanding fundamental                   
              biochemical properties shared by all RNA polymerases.  Experiments             
              are described that provide a further test of a proposed model for              
              termination by RNA polymerase III, in which transcription                      
              termination is dependent of the stability of the RNA-DNA hybrid                
              upstream of the termination signal.  Using methods already                     
              developed that permit the uncoupling of multiple mechanistic steps             
              in transcription termination by RNA polymerase III, the                        
              relationship between polymerase pausing and transcription                      
              termination at weak and strong terminators will be analyzed.  The              
              identity and determinants of the cis-acting sequence signals for               
              transcription termination by RNA polymerase III will be further                
              investigated with attention given to their role in promoting                   
              polymerase pausing and /or release from the DNA template.  Protein-            
              DNA cross-linking studies will permit the identification of                    
              subunits of RNA polymerase III that interact with the template, and            
              will perhaps allow identification of polymerase-DNA interactions               
              that are altered at the termination signal, relative to those                  
              present in a transcription elongation complex.  All these                      
              experiments will be conducted using purified RNA polymerase III and            
              "tailed" linear DNA templates that permit the analysis of                      
              activities associated with the RNA polymerase molecule in the                  
              absence of other proteins normally required for accurate and                   
              efficient transcription initiation by RNA polymerase III.  In some             
              cases, the results obtained will be confirmed by analysis of                   
              transcription reactions in oocyte nuclear extracts.                            
              %%%%                                                                           
              Cells and tissues regulate protein synthesis by several mechanisms             
              including the amount of RNA produced both as messenger RNA which               
              codes for proteins, and other forms of RNA which are components of             
              the protein synthesizing apparatus of the cell (5s RNA and tRNA).              
              This study focusses on the structure and stability of the RNA-DNA              
              hybrid which is formed when RNA polymerase III synthesizes RNA in              
              a complex of the three macromolecules.  The structure and the                  
              stability of these complexes once understood will yield methods to             
              produce greater quantities of proteins.  These studies contribute              
              to biotechnological applications involving specific protein                    
              production in cells.
