Title       : Investigations of the Western Arctic: Transport and Water Properties in Bering
               Strait and Over the Chukchi Shelf
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1997     
File        : a9219847

Award Number: 9219847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $763138             (Estimated)
Investigator: Knut Aagaard aagaard@apl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A collaborative research project will be undertaken by investiga-              
              tors at the University of Washington and the University of Alaska              
              as part of the Ocean-Atmosphere-Ice Interactions (OAII) component              
              of the Arctic System Science (ARCSS) global change research                    
              program.  The research objective is to measure the transport of                
              water through the Bering Straits and to determine the influence of             
              this transport on the physical properties and variability of the               
              Arctic Ocean, and particularly the surface layer.  These physical              
              properties, such as ice cover and thickness, vertical mixing, and              
              thermo-haline structure affect the extent of the Arctic ice pack.              
              If changing climate conditions caused the ice pack to shrink or                
              change significantly, the effect would be felt throughout the                  
              world's atmosphere and ocean.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The influx of water through the Bering Strait is one of the major              
              inputs to the Arctic Ocean, therefore its volume and physical                  
              properties must be known if one is to understand the processes that            
              control the Arctic Ocean's physical features.  Three coordinated               
              projects will each deal with one or more aspects of the system, and            
              together provide insight into the broader workings of the Arctic's             
              physical and geochemical processes.  Moorings will be deployed for             
              a three-year period at key locations.  They will provide concurrent            
              time series of water column properties including temperature, sal-             
              inity, currents and an upward looking sonar (ULS) will make a full             
              year of ice thickness observations.  A hydrographic program will               
              also examine water column variability in the northeastern Chukchi              
              Sea, where the low-salinity portion of the Pacific inflow drains               
              into the Arctic Ocean.  The work builds on earlier efforts funded              
              by ONR and NSF that were conducted in cooperation with the physical            
              and chemical oceanographic programs of NOAA/PMEL.
