Title       : FSML: Renovation of SWRS Main House to Provide a Lecture/ Meeting Room and to
               Enlarge/Enhance the Dining Room
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2000      
File        : a9811598

Award Number: 9811598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wade C. Sherbrooke wcs@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Southwestern Research Station (SWRS) of the American  Museum of Natural
              History (AMNH) was established in 1955  and is located in southeastern Arizona.
               There it offers  field biologists, from numerous U.S. and international 
              institutions, a modern research facility with access to a  wide range of
              biological communities.  The primary  objective of the Station is to provide
              accommodations and  scientific to support the activities of scientists, 
              graduate students, undergraduate courses, scientific  meetings, and workshops. 
              One measure of institutional  success the SWRS has achieved over the years is
              the body  of scientific generated at the Station, over 900  publications in
              peer review journals.    The main House building at the SWRS contains a dining 
              room, where scientists, students, and staff share meals  and exchange ideas,
              and a lounge/lecture room where  scientific presentations, classes, etc. occur.
               The  current facility is small and overcrowded, which impedes  its ability to
              serve these functions well.    The renovations encompassed by this project are
              aimed at  1) alleviating a facilities bottleneck in the ability of  the SWRS to
              significantly improve the environment for the  intellectual exchanges between
              the scientists and students  utilizing the Station from across the country, and
              2)  increasing the ability of the Station to serve as a  meeting site for
              regional, national, and international  scientific meetings and workshops. 
              Thus, the proposed  building renovation will enhance the activities of all 
              scientists and students utilizing the Station.  Changes in  the Main House will
              expand the seating capacity of the  dining room from 62 to 82 and will improve
              its acoustics,  and the lounge/lecture room (current capacity 30)  will be
              enlarged to become a lecture hall facility that  will have seating capacity for
              100 people.  The modernized  dining room, where everyone at the Station eats,
              will have  an environment conducive to the exchange of ideas between 
              established scientists,  graduate students, undergraduate  SWRS volunteers,
              undergraduates in university classes,  meeting and workshop participants, and
              naturalists.  The  lecture hall will (1) continue to fulfill its role as a 
              lounge/casual meeting area, (2) afford ample space  (currently extremely
              crowded) for the 40+/- seminars held  on a regular basis by and for residents
              at the Station,  and (3) provide a meeting area for larger groups of 
              scientists coming to the Station for meetings, workshops,  and retreats.    The
              additional capacity will allow the SWRS to improve and  expand its role as a
              leading national center  for biological research and education in the
              Southwest.  The positive impact on the quality of research  at the Station will
              come about through conditions  that  promote additional collaborations between
              visiting  scientists, and b integrating the research activities and  results
              into the informal and formal education programs.
