Title       : Collaborative Research: Evolution of Physical and Chemical Attributes of Gametes
               in Free Spawning Marine Invertebrates: A Functional and Phylogenetic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1998    
File        : a9811121

Award Number: 9811121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275254             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Podolsky podolsky@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this project is to examine the evolutionary significance of 
              gamete traits that influence fertilization success in free-spawning marine 
              organisms.  Basic research in this field is crucial for understanding the 
              reproductive ecology of harvested invertebrates, for aquaculture and for 
              conservation biological reasons.   Recent work on the fertilization ecology  of
              free-spawners has raised diverse questions regarding character evolution  at
              the gamete stage of the life cycle. Theory and empirical studies suggest  that
              the size of eggs and egg coats, the density of sperm receptor sites,  the speed
              and longevity of sperm, and the action of sperm-activating  compounds released
              by eggs can each influence fertilization success by  affecting rates of
              sperm-egg contact. These studies, however, have not  resolved whether
              particular traits are a product of selection on  fertilization success, and
              whether such traits appear to co-evolve as a  result of their functional
              interactions.       This project will involve a set of at least 9 sympatric
              species of  marine brittlestars in the genus Macrophiothrix (Echinodermata: 
              Ophiuroidea) from coral reef ecosystems. This group includes at least  40-fold
              variation in egg volume and provides an ideal comparative system  for assessing
              the importance of size and other gamete attributes in  sperm-egg collision. 
              Interest in this genus is especially motivated by our  discovery of an unusual
              degree of species-specificity in sperm chemotaxis,  which offers a unique
              opportunity to examine the role of sperm chemotaxis  in promoting reproductive
              isolation. The research will integrate  phylogenetic information, tests of
              fertilization performance, and measures  of gamete attributes to address
              fundamental questions about the evolution  and co-evolution of gamete traits.
              In order to test hypotheses about gamete  function in a phylogenetic context,
              this study has the following four  objectives: OBJECTIVE 1: To construct a
              phylogeny for the study species  using molecular markers. Phylogenetic
              information is needed to establish  historical patterns of character change, as
              well as to control for  correlation among traits due to common ancestry.
              OBJECTIVE 2: To examine  the importance of egg size and other physical gamete
              attributes in  fertilization. In vitro fertilization assays and variation in
              gamete traits  will be used to test the hypothesis that egg target size and
              sperm swimming  speed contribute to interspecific variation in fertilization
              success.  OBJECTIVE 3: To examine the role of spermegg chemical attraction in 
              promoting reproductive isolation.  OBJECTIVE 4: To test hypotheses  concerning
              patterns of covariance among gamete traits. Phylogenetic  information will be
              used to test hypotheses of coevolution where theory  predicts functional
              interactions between pairs of traits: ovum size and  jelly coat size; egg
              target size and sperm speed; sperm speed and  longevity; egg target size and
              the strength of sperm chemotaxis.       This research is designed to fill
              critical gaps in our understanding  of fertilization ecology and the evolution
              of gamete characters. This will  be a comprehensive study in a phylogenetic
              context of both physical and  chemical traits that can influence rates of
              gamete contact . By using  phylogenetic information for a closely-related group
              of ecologically  similar organisms, this research explicitly tests evolutionary
              hypotheses  about functional relationships among such traits. Furthermore, the
              unique  pattern of sperm chemotaxis in this system provides an opportunity to 
              examine the role of pre-contact chemical specificity in promoting the 
              reproductive isolation of synchronously-spawning species. Because 
              free-spawning is the dominant and likely ancestral mode of fertilization, 
              results from this project will have widespread relevance to the evolution  of
              reproductive systems in marine environments.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
