Title       : Labor Market Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9811391

Award Number: 9811391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Rogerson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Macroeconomic analysis has traditionally focused on accounting for regularities
              in highly aggregated economic time series. In the context of the labor market,
              for example, it is common practice to seek to account for movements in
              aggregate employment or unemployment. It is well known that highly aggregated
              data mask a great deal of economic activity; even in periods when aggregate
              employment changes very little, there are very large changes in the employment
              status of individual workers and in the distribution of employment across
              individual establishments. Standard macroeconomic models abstract from these
              changes. For some issues, this abstraction from underlying labor market flows
              may be innocuous, but in other contexts it is surely a serious shortcoming. The
              analysis of many labor market policies are clearly best carried out in
              aggregate models which do account for labor market flows.  Indeed, there are
              growing empirical and theoretical literatures that focus on these underlying
              labor market flows, and these models have been used to begin addressing the
              effects of various policies. Despite the advances that have been made, however,
              much remains to be done. The goal of this research is to sharpen the connection
              between the theoretical and empirical branches of this literature so as to
              better understand what model features are quantitatively important in
              accounting for the key regularities in the data. This effort should also
              sharpen both empirical and theoretical issues individually, since the process
              of confronting theory with data will isolate those empirical relationships
              which have a lot of power to discriminate between model features, and hence are
              worthy of closer scrutiny, as well as isolate those model features which are
              most significant in accounting for empirical regularities and hence guide
              future theoretical extensions.  Loosely speaking, one may identify two
              processes that give rise to labor market flows. One is the rearranging of
              employment positions across establishments, and the other is the rearrangement
              of workers across existing employment positions. Empirical work has shown that
              both of these processes are important in accounting for labor market flows.
              Though the former has been studied, it remains true that not that much is known
              of what model features are important quantitatively to match the cyclical
              properties of job reallocation. The second process has been subject to little
              analytical study. This project brings this feature into the class of matching
              models commonly used to address labor market flows. Labor market regulations
              which differ between Europe and the US are likely to distort this second
              process and this project will also investigate the allocational and welfare
              consequences of policies which restrict wage differentials across workers.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
