Title       : The Paradox of the Viroplankton: High Viral Abundance and Resistance to
               Infection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1998  
File        : a9811319

Award Number: 9811319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262251             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Paul jpaul@seas.marine.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9811319
Paul
Viruses are the most numerous component of the plankton, often
              ten-fold more abundant than their procaryotic and eucaryotic counterparts. In
              most aquatic systems, a steady state exists between bacteria and viruses
              without collapse of the bacterial or cyanobacterial host populations. Because
              the infectivity of phages decays relatively quickly in surface waters, there
              must be an equally rapid re--supply of new phages. However, the cyanobacteria
              (and perhaps the heterotrophic bacteria) are largely resistant to phage
              infection. How can there be constant phage production in the presence of a
              resistant host population? The hypothesis tested in this project is that
              bacterioplanlkon persist in the presence of high viral abundance because lytic
              phages have selected for a community that is resistant to infection.
              Alternatively, bacterioplankton (including cyanobacteria) persist in the
              presence of high viral abundance because of homo-immunity conferred by lysogeny
              and pseudolysogeny. 
     To test these hypotheses, the project will work
              toward the following objectives: 1. To determine the relationship between
              lytic, pseudolysogenic, and lysogenic modes of existence using isolates in
              culture. 2. To determine if the transition between lysogeny and lytic existence
              occurs in natural microbial populations such as those occurring in Tampa Bay. 
              3. To determine the prevalence of lysogeny amongst marine Synechococcus
              isolates. We will examine a series of phycoerythrin containing and non-PE
              containing strains from culture collections as well as our own isolates from
              the Gulf of Mexico for the presence of prophage by mitomycin C and/or UVC
              exposure, and will use these strains to understand the process of lysogeny in
              cyanobacteria. 4. To determine if lysogeny or pseudolysogeny is the mechanism
              of resistance in natural Populations of Synechococcus.  The results obtained
              from this study may substantially alter our understanding of viruses in the
              Microbial Loop, from lytic entities that perpetually attack their hosts to
              co-participants in a highly evolved symbiosis that may switch from virulence to
              temperate existence in response to environmental cues.

