Title       : University-Industry Cooperative Research Program: Modelling and Design of New
               Generation of High Power Diode Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1999      
File        : a9811466

Award Number: 9811466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome V. Moloney jml@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Arizona Center for Mathematical Sciences (ACMS) and Opto Power Corporation
              of Tucson have formed a joint University-Industry working partnership, with the
              specific goal of transitioning cutting-edge basic
research discoveries on the
              theory of the interaction of light with semiconductor media, into future
              generations of high power, high brightness, commercial wide aperture
              semiconductor laser systems.  State-of-the-art, commercial high brightness
              semiconductor laser sources are currently limited to about 2 Watts continuos
              wave diffraction limited output, a far cry from the desired 10 Watt diffraction
              limited level. Above the 2-Watt level, the output is weakly turbulent,
              displaying strong dynamic filamentation intensity bursts with serious
              degradation of the far-field output.  Lack of progress can be partially
              ascribed to the absence of a sound physical and mathematical understanding of
              semiconductor lasers.

ACMS researchers have made significant progress in
              developing such a semiconductor laser theory, which is anchored by the
              microscopic, many-body physics of the light-semiconductor interaction. The
              traveling wave
solutions of the coupled system of nonlinear partial
              differential equations (pdes) describing these complex lasers, produce the same
              qualitative characteristic spatiotemporal behavior as the weakly
              turbulent
experimentally observed outputs of broad area semiconductor lasers.
              The latter have nowhere stable traveling wave solutions.

This project will
              address fundamental physical and mathematical issues related to preventing
              deterious filamentation instabilities of high power semiconductor lasers. At
              the physics level, fundamental challenges which we will address include
              augmenting our existing laser model through the nontrivial step of
              incorporating thermal phenomena, ranging from plasma and lattice heating
              through to quasistatic bulk heating effects and, evaluating the contribution of
              unconfined stated in the barrier regions to the overall
semiconductor optical
              response.  Opto Power Corporation, a highly successful producer of high power
              semiconductor laser systems will be responsible for experimental validation and
              the end production of the laser systems.  On the experimental side,
              theoretically computed gain and refractive index spectra for growing these
              structures and measuring the gain and index spectra will validate specific
              structures. Once validated, wide aperture lasers will be built and tested
              against the predictions of full-scale simulation models.

We expect to be
              able to design new generations of high brightness devices which push the
              existing 2 Watt output to levels approaching the desired 10 Watt level.
              Preliminary results are extremely promising. Opto Power Corporation is
              currently filing a patent on our proposed design of a high brightness source
              which promises to push the 2 Watt limit up by a factor of 2.5-e.0 (5-6 Watts). 
               

This GOALI project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of 
              Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences
              (DMS).
