Title       : REU: Feeding Selectivity and Strategies of Marine Bivalves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a9811380

Award Number: 9811380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Levinton levinton@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Evan Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra E. Shumway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Levinton/Ward

This proposal continues work initiated to study the mechanisms
              of bivalve mollusc selectivity among complex mixtures of particles, living and
              detrital, in order to (1) develop a quantitative method using video endoscopy
              to sample particles within the pallial cavity and to analyze these samples by
              flow cytometry; (2) perform comparative studies among different bivalve feeding
              types; and (3) to identify limiting processing steps of bivalves (e.g., sorting
              of particles on the palp, processing particles through the gut) in order to
              form a model of bivalve particle transfer and processing within the various
              compartments of the pallial cavity. These results, in turn, can be used to
              construct an integrative model of bivalve feeding and particle processing,
              which can ultimately be connected to coastal ecosystem models of seston
              dynamics. Our previous results demonstrate that the combination of flow
              cytometry and video endoscopy is a powerful tool to study (a) rates of particle
              processing and the degree and (b) mechanisms of particle selectivity. We could
              demonstrate in oysters and mussels strong selection against particles of low
              nutritional value and effects of particle quality on processing rate. This new
              approach gives us an excellent assay, and we have only scratched the surface of
              the important problems in feeding functional ecology and effects on coastal
              systems that may be examined. 

