Title       : Adaptive Systems for Equalization of Wireless Multiple Access Communication
               Channel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a9811297

Award Number: 9811297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240866             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Richard Johnson johnson@ece.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9811297
Johnson
Wireless systems for mobile telephony and data transmission
              are currently undergoing very rapid development due to recent international
              agreements opening new regions in the radio spectrum to such services.  These
              new systems, so-called third-generation wireless systems, will incorporate
              considerable signal-processiilg intelligence in order to provide advanced
              services such as multimedia.  In order to make optimal use of available
              bandwidth for these services and to provide maximal flexibility, many such
              systems will operate as multiple-access systems, in which channel bandwidth is
              shared my many users on a random-access basis using protocols such as code
              division multipleaccess (CDMIA) signaling.  Moreover, in order to support the
              high data rates inherent in such services, ratios of bit rates to bandwidths
              will be pushed to their limits.  In general, wireless channels can be be very
              hostile media through which to communicate.  Physical impairments such as
              multiple-access interference, co-channel interference, multipath transmission,
              amplitude fading, and dispersion due to limited bandwidth, all contribute to
              make it difficult to transmit data reliably and quickly through wireless
              channels.  Moreover, the dynamism resulting from user mobility and  the
              above-noted random-access nature of mobile channels, amplify the effects of
              these impairments, and make them much more difficult to ameliorate.  Solutions
              to these difficulties lie in the use of
advanced adaptive systems to perform
              advanced signal processing functions, and  this proposal addresses such
              solutions.

Specifically, we plan to consider three general research problems
              within the area of adaptive equalization of multiple-access wireless channels:
              optimal methods for joint adaptive equalization and multiuser detection;
              adaptive linear and nonlinear methods for joint adaptive equalization and
              multiuser detection; and iterative methods for joint adaptive equalization and
              multiuser detection on coded channels.  By addressing these research issues we
              can answer key questions about the equalization of wireless multiple-access
              channels.  In particular, the consideration of optimal methods will establish
              baseline results by which other methods can be benchmarked.  Furthermore,  by
              considering low complexity adaptive linear and nonlinear methods, we can
              develop an understanding of mechanisms by which adaptivity can brought to bear
              on the problem at hand, and moreoever we. can examine the dynamics of
              adaptation in a tractable setting.  And, finally, by consideration of
              iterative, and other adaptive nonlinear methods,  we can seek adaptive
              techniques that can approach the ideals - of high performance and low
              complexity - established via the analytical results of the two other areas.
              

In order to accomplish these goals, it is necessary to take a novel
              approach to these problems, and in particular to synthesize technologies from
              disparate areas.  Consequently, this studv will be conducted as a joint project
              among three institutions - ALGOREX, Inc., Cornell University, and Princeton
              University - bringing together considerable separate expertise in the fields of
              equalization, interference suppression, and adaptive system design to
              facilitate the necessary synthesis of ideas.  
***

