Title       : Partitioning of Light Energy Absorbed by Organic Chemicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9811570

Award Number: 9811570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Wagner wagnerp@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on two general themes; the effect of molecular   structure
              on localizing photonic excitation energy, and the selectivity   of the
              resulting reactivity.   The temperature dependence of the quantum   efficiency
              of intramolecular hydrogen abstraction will be measured for a   series of
              structurally related ketones to distinguish processes   controlled by changes
              in energy from those controlled by variations in   surface crossing
              probabilities.   The temperature dependence of the ratio   of photoinduced
              cyclization in biradical arising from intramolecular   hydrogen abstraction,
              relative to other competing processes, will be   correlated with theoretical
              computations of biradical structure to   elucidate the role of structure on
              intersystem crossing.   Graduate and   postdoctoral students will be trained in
              organic synthesis and   mechanistic organic photochemistry.  With this award,
              the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program   supports the research of Dr.
              Peter Wagner of the Department of Chemistry   at Michigan State University.  
              The absorption of light causes an abrupt   increase in a molecule's energy
              thereby enhancing its reactivity.   Dr.   Wagner will focus his research on
              elucidating the processes by which the   excited molecule localizes the energy
              needed to achieve a specific   reaction, and identifying the structural
              parameters that affect this   energy localization.   Dr. Wagner's educational
              activities involve   training graduate and postdoctoral students in organic
              synthesis, and the   measurement and characterization of excited-state
              processes.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
