Title       : Role of mRNA Transport in Isoactin Sorting and Process Outgrowth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a9811384

Award Number: 9811384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Bassell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva University
	      500 West 185th Street
	      New York, NY  100333201    212/960-5400

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9811384  BASSELL   Neurons are the quintessential asymmetric cell  having two
              morphologically and functionally distinct types of  processes:  axons and
              dendrites.  The development of the nervous  system proceeds by the extension of
              processes over long distances  to reach their appropriate target cells.  The
              ability of a  neuronal process to grow and be properly directed depends upon a 
              unique structure at the tip of the growing fiber called the growth  cone.  This
              compartment is filled with a cytoskeleton of fibrous  polymers that induce
              membrane protrusions and influence both the  rate and direction of process
              outgrowth.  One of these polymers is  composed of the dynamic protein, actin,
              which can rapidly form  bundles that project from the growth cone in the form
              of  filopodial protrusions of the membrane and which promote process  growth. 
              An important area of basic research is to understand how  the nerve cell
              targets the cytoskeletal molecules to the growth  cone for their utilization in
              filopodial formation and control of  process outgrowth.  Dr. Bassell's
              laboratory has shown that a  specific actin isoform, beta-actin, is highly
              enriched within  growth cones.  They have proposed that the localization of the
               beta-actin protein depends on the localization of beta-actin  messenger RNA
              (mRNA, the intermediate piece of genetic information  that codes for the
              synthesis of the protein).  The localization of  mRNAs is an important protein
              sorting mechanism that has been  recently demonstrated in several cell types. 
              They hypothesize  that the localization of mRNAs may be a basic mechanism for
              the  normal regulation of growth cone structure and motility.  As a  model
              system to study mechanisms involved in process outgrowth,  they are using a
              cell culture approach in which cerebral cortex is  dissected from embryonic
              rats and the dissociated cells are grown  on a suitable matrix in a liquid
              medium.  High resolution  microscopy and DNA probe methods developed in the
              laboratory will  be used to defin e where beta-actin mRNAs are normally
              localized in  living cells, and hence where beta-actin protein monomers are 
              normally produced.  By perturbation of this normal mechanism in  live neurons
              growing in culture, it will be possible to determine  the function of mRNA
              targeting and localized synthesis in process  outgrowth.  Molecular strategies,
              such as expression of a mutated  protein that is normally involved in mRNA
              targeting, will be  employed to disrupt this mechanism in living cells.  It is 
              expected that neurons that are unable to target beta-actin mRNA  and protein to
              growth cones will have abnormal migration  characteristics.  The elucidation of
              a novel mRNA transport  mechanism in neurons should provide insight into the
              regulation of  growth cone structure that may underlie process outgrowth during
               the development of the nervous system.
