Title       : Collaborative Research: Strategy and Structure: Exploration and Instrument
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1998      
File        : a9811323

Award Number: 9811323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77028              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Willer willer@gwm.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1338,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a study of optimal strategies for different positions in exchange
              networks, employing computer simulations and evolutionary game theory. Existing
              work has either not paid attention to the strategies used by people in exchange
              networks or has assumed that all people use the same simple strategy. Moreover,
              existing work has ignored potentially cooperative relations between positions
              where actions affect one another, even though they do not exchange with one
              another. The current project extends the concept of evolutionary stability to
              apply to exchange networks and modifies the replicator dynamics to study the
              hypothetical evolution of strategy sets in exchange networks.    A central part
              of this project is an interactive site on the World Wide Web, employing the
              ExNet II simulation programmed in Java.  The user can construct networks of
              various configurations by placing nodes and exchange relations.  As simulants
              interact, ExNet will display all ongoing offers, counteroffers, acceptances and
              exchanges.  The website will bridge between research and instruction, because
              it can be incorporated in college courses as well as employed by researchers to
              develop theoretical ideas.  Students selecting and designing strategies and
              structures bring fresh perspectives and may find patterns not found by
              researchers who are more experienced.    This project contributes to
              fundamental theoretical understanding of knowledge networks, which is essential
              for creation of the communication systems of the future. The web-based
              educational component provides research-like training activities for social
              science students, that are often lacking at their colleges and universities.
