Title       : An Examination of the Impact of Service Guarantee Strength on Service Quality
               and Firm Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a9811047

Award Number: 9811047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur V. Hill ahill@csom.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George John  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Many practitioners and academics have enthusiastically endorsed service
              guarantees as a means for service firms to transform themselves into quality
              focused, customer driven learning organizations. Large and small firms claim
              that their service guarantee programs have boosted their financial performance,
              strengthen defensive and offensive marketing, motivated workers, improved
              service quality, enhanced customer satisfaction,  and increased customer
              loyalty.  With the number of firms offering service guarantees growing rapidly
              (especially with the phenomenal growth of internet based services), rigorous,
              theory driven, empirical research is needed to disentangle the `hype` and the
              truth about service guarantees. Currently, we can only speculate about what
              constitutes a `strong` service guarantee, how service guarantees might affect
              service quality and financial performance, and how practitioners should design
              a service guarantee. Both academics and practitioners need a solid theory base
              for understanding these important service quality issues. A multidisciplinary
              research team will study 30 hotels of the Radisson Hotel Corporation that is in
              the process of implementing a service guarantee.  This research starts with the
              premise that all firms have service guarantees (either implicitly or
              explicitly), and that the strength of these guarantees differs widely between
              firms in the same market. The researchers hypothesize that service guarantee
              strength (SOS) has a significant impact on service quality, customer
              satisfaction, and customer loyalty (SQL) and that SQL has a positive financial
              impact on the firm. They further hypothesize the existence of three intervening
              variables in the SOS/SQL relationship    marketing communications impact (MCI),
              employee motivation/vision (EMV), and organizational service learning (OSL).   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
