Title       : Dissertation Research: From Biotype to Genotype: Mapping Behavior in Buenos
               Aires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9811169

Award Number: 9811169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Rabinow rabinow@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project contributes to understanding the ways in
              which cosmopolitan science interacts with local historical forms in the
              production of a new biomedical subjectivity. It traces the establishment of a
              network by a French genomics company for the collection, banking and analysis
              of DNA samples from mental patients in Argentine public hospitals.  The network
              is part of a joint venture with a major pharmaceutical company to map the
              susceptibility genes for schizophrenia, a disorder of unknown etiology and
              pathophysiology.  The goal of this project is to document the process whereby
              new forms of categorizing personhood emerge.  Three questions frame the
              research: How does contemporary genetic psychiatry relate to prior attempts to
              explain behavior in hereditary terms?  What challenges will be faced in the
              process of finding a pedigree of schizophrenic families?  What institutional
              links and technological innovations enable the venture to be carried forward? 
              During ten months of ethnographic research in Buenos Aires among psychiatrists,
              genetic scientists, health officials and legal authorities the investigator
              will analyze the local implications of this alliance between psychiatric
              science and multinational capital.  The method to be employed will be an
              interpretive analysis based on historical research, interviews, and
              participant-observation.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
