Title       : The Role of Customer Relationships in Electronic Commerce
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a9811060

Award Number: 9811060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mariann Jelinek                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lester A. Wanninger lester.a.wanninger-1@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl R. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George John  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel B. Wackman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mani Subramani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project focuses on understanding the central role of communications in
              developing customer relationships in the rapidly emerging and changing
              environment of electronic commerce. It examines how technologies can be applied
              to develop such relationships with a special emphasis on communications and
              methods that get customers involved in designing and measuring the
              effectiveness of applications and products.  The metaphor of making, accepting,
              and keeping promises is at the heart of mutually beneficial relationships
              between a business and its customers. Computing and communications technologies
              enable the compression of time and space in which customers can interact
              directly with the company. Formerly distinct functions such as marketing,
              communications, and sales transactions and fulfillment can occur simultaneously
              and in real time.  This research investigates what electronic servicescapes
              will enable and enhance relationships and whether effective electronic
              servicescapes have many of the interpersonal communication characteristics of
              excellent sales and service people.    A cross disciplinary faculty team will
              work with five companies: 3M's Baldrige Award winning Dental Division who has
              developed a web site specifically to foster relationships with its customers;
              General Mills who market to consumers through retailers and are leaders in EDI
              use; Unisys, an information technology supplier; and Periscope Marketing
              Communications, a relationship marketing company.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
