Title       : Recruitment Success in Infauna: Geochemical Cues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9811433

Award Number: 9811433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174732             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Nelson nelson@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2453

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Recruitment success in infauna: geochemical cues  This study will address two
              questions about recruitment, an important  determinant of community dynamics:
              1) what are the qualities of the  sediment surface to which recruits are
              responding? and 2) what processes  (physical, biological and chemical) control
              availability and acceptability  of sites? Recent experiments and models suggest
              that some new recruits  respond to substances common to a variety of habitats,
              namely porewater  solutes such as ammonium and oxygen. These solutes appear to
              be indicative  of habitat quality and disturbance history -- both of which may
              strongly  influence survivorship of recruits. Most biologically active
              sedimentary  systems are characterized by steep solute gradients within the top
              sediment  layers, driven by organic matter decomposition (diagenesis) and
              transport  processes (Bemer 1980). Most disturbances result in changes in
              chemistry  that render the surficial sediments more suboxic or anoxic in
              character.  The steep gradients in chemical properties in sediments and the
              changes in  surficial chemistry that accompany disturbance provide a broadly
              available  and potentially significant chemical signal for new recruits. This
              study  will examine the hypothesis that organisms use this diagenetic
              information  in the site selection process.  This study will examine the
              significance of surficial sediment chemistry to  the decision making phase for
              primary and secondary recruitment from an  experimental and mathematical point
              of view. The research will address the  following: (1) separate the signal
              provided by solutes from that provided  by other, more commonly evaluated
              factors such as grain size and organic  matter content; (2) evaluate the
              generality of the responses of new  recruits to solute signals both
              experimentally and mathematically, for  example, do organisms which as adults
              inhabit different sedimentary  environments respond similarly to solute signals
              as new recruits; and (3)  evaluate the implications of the
              disturbance-surficial chemistry link, for  example how do the severity of the
              disturbance and the steepness of the  solute gradients interact, and are the
              circumstances under which new  recruits will accept a given location
              predictable on the basis of the  solute profile and disturbance history?  The
              study is expected to develop coupled experiments and models with an  evaluative
              and predictive capacity; an understanding of the degree to which  new recruits
              of species with significantly different adult distributions  use solutes that
              are broadly distributed, but environmentally informative,  as chemical cues to
              habitat suitability; and an appreciation for the  influence of disturbance on
              surficial solute distributions and the adaptive  significance of the responses
              of new recruits to disturbance signals.  Overall, the  integrated modeling and
              experimental approach will provide a  predictive tool for evaluating
              recruitment patterns and choices in a  variety of nearshore habitats.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
