Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Heroes of Suburbia Consideration of Social
               Class, Race, Gender and Community in Suburban Volunteer Fire Departments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9811303

Award Number: 9811303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7474               (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Gagnon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed doctoral dissertation research focuses on volunteer fire
              departments (VFDs). The broader theoretical motivation involves questions of
              how social class, race, gender and voluntarism interact to shape the voluntary
              organizations and the experiences of their members. We will gather and analyze
              data on the organizational structures of VFDs, their members, and the effects
              of firefighting on volunteers and their families. The first component of the
              research design will employ questionnaire data to assess the demographic
              composition of VFDs. This information provides the means to determine the
              degree of homogeneity within the VFD ranks and the demographic similarities and
              differences between volunteer firefighters and the communities they protect.
              The second component uses interview data to illuminate the details and patterns
              of VFD participation. Firefighter interviews will focus on motivations,
              rewards, official and social activities and issues of danger and risk. Spouses
              of volunteer firefighters provide information on the positive and negative
              effects of volunteer firefighting on marriage and family life and the
              mechanisms used to cope with the demands of VFD participation. Prior research
              on VFDs has focused primarily on the individual firefighters and/or rural VFDs.
              The research findings will contribute a social structural dimension to VFD
              research, extending research to include the families of firefighters and
              shifting attention to suburban settings where VFDs are an important presence.
