Title       : Linguistic Diversity in the North American Midland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9811487

Award Number: 9811487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195003             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Labov wlabov@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Over the past four years, the Telsur Project at the Linguistics Laboratory of
              the University of Pennsylvania has made a national survey of the phonological
              patterns of North American English through tape recorded interviews, conducted
              by telephone, of speakers native to their present places of residence.   The
              major focus of Telsur research has been the most active sound changes in
              progress: the Northern Cities Shift of short vowels, which affects all of the
              Inland North; the Southern Shift, which affects to one degree or another the
              regions of the Southern States, including Appalachian areas; and the low back
              merger of short /o/ and long open /oh/ in Eastern New England, Western
              Pennsylvania, the West and Canada. The region of greatest heterogeneity is the
              Midland, which extends from Pennsylvania to Kansas. Research so far shows that
              each of the seven major Midland cities Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Columbus,
              Cincinnati, Indianapolis, St. Louis and Kansas City have distinct and different
              systems, and they appear to be moving in different directions. The current
              project is designed to investigate the Midland region in much greater detail,
              to discover whether there is any overall direction of sound change, and to
              provide both the linguistic and social explanations as to why the various urban
              dialects are following their distinct paths.  Despite the indications of
              Northern influence on the Midland, the boundary between North and North Midland
              seems to be fixed just where it was first established by the settlement
              patterns of the mid nineteenth century.  The northern boundaries of all the
              Midland city dialect regions will be traced in detail, as well as their
              southern limits and the east west boundaries between them. To accomplish this,
              the telephone survey will be extended to intermediate and satellite cities, a
              range of smaller communities that will define these boundaries.  The overall
              goals of the research are to develop the theory of chain shifting by a close
              examination of such mixed systems and to search for a general explanation as to
              how dialect boundaries are maintained long after the original defining features
              have disappeared.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
