Title       : Query Optimization Techniques for OODB Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a9811525

Award Number: 9811525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonidas Fegaras fegaras@cse.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This research is carried out in collaboration with David Maier of the Oregon
              Graduate Institute. One of the key factors for object-oriented database (OODB)
              systems to successfully compete with relational systems as well as to meet the
              performance requirements of many non-traditional applications is the
              development of an effective query optimizer. This research addresses efficient
              query optimization for OODB languages. The research framework is based on a
              calculus, called the monoid comprehension calculus, which has already been
              shown to capture most features of modern OODB query languages. This effective,
              yet simple approach transforms the queries into an intermediate form, based on
              this calculus, that can be efficiently optimized. This research concentrates on
              two very important optimization problems and proposes practical, effective, and
              general solutions. The first problem is query unnesting, an optimization that,
              even though improves performance considerably, is not treated properly by most
              OODB systems. A framework is developed that generalizes many unnesting
              techniques proposed recently in the literature and is capable of removing any
              form of query nesting using a simple and efficient algorithm. The second
              problem is query optimization in the presence of side effects, i.e., queries
              that may contain object updates at any place and in any form. A practical
              method is developed that allows the same optimization techniques proposed for
              regular queries to be used with minimal changes for OODB queries with side
              effects. A prototype query optimizer is constructed to demonstrate that these
              optimization techniques considerably improve performance for queries as well as
              updates. The results of this research will help OODB vendors build better query
              optimizers, leading to better system performance.
              

http://www-cse.uta.edu/~fegaras/opt/

