Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Globalization and Local Response: The
               Place-Based Community Computer Networking Movement in the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9811142

Award Number: 9811142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8510               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn A. Staeheli lynner@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              STAEHELI, L.A. and LONGAN, M.W.  The doctoral dissertation research is concerned
              with the manner in which `communities` are constructed in today's changing
              technological environments.  The construction of community has long been
              associated with changes in technology, especially computer technologies, and
              this study interrogates the changing meaning of community in the information
              age.  It is thought that traditionally local forms of community have been
              weakened and that community networks are being used as tools for community
              revitalization and for countering the perceived effects of globalization on
              place.  These local community networks differ from other placeless virtual
              environments in that they provide explicitly local or regional information and
              free or low-cost electronic forums for discussion of local issues.  Moreover,
              they provide links to regional and global information that can be used to
              situate or provide context for local circumstances and to solve local problems.
              The study will assess how particular meanings of place and community used by
              networks help to empower or limit the potential of community responses to
              perceived effects of globalization.  A general survey of various community
              networking movements will be conducted, and this will be followed by in-depth
              interviews with community networking activists in four cities.  The results of
              the research are important to understanding whether new, globally-informed
              meanings of community are evolving in the information age and thereby
              challenging absolute understandings of place based on self-contained and inward
              looking perspectives.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
