Title       : U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Environmental Monitoring of Pesticides by
               Biosensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9811002

Award Number: 9811002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohyee E. Eldefrawi melde001@umaryland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 5944,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9811002
Eldefrawi

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Mohyee Eldefrawi, Professor of Pharmacology and Experimental
              Therapeutics at the University of Maryland at Baltimore and Dr. Nabil Mansour,
              Professor of Pesticide Chemistry at Alexandria University in Egypt.  The two
              plan to develop pesticide biosensors using chlorpyrifos (CPS) which is widely
              used in Egypt.  Antibodies (Abs) will be produced for use as sensing peptides. 
              Materials produced at Dr. Eldefrawi's laboratory will be used to construct a
              dipstick biosensor for field use to detect CPS and the data will be validated
              by enzyme-linked immuno-sorbent assay (ELISA) analysis of the same samples. 
              The knowledge gained will be used for future construction of a portable enzyme
              electrode for detection and quantification of CPS.  The technology and
              procedures are applicable to most pesticides and other chemicals of
              environmental concerns.

 Scope:  This award will allow collaboration between
              Egyptian and US scientists who have significant complementary technical
              background and expertise to carry out the proposed research.  The US scientist
              has extensive experience in biosensor technology, while the Egyptian scientist
              has long experience in pesticide chemistry, and in chromatographic techniques. 
              This project will provide for a new method of detecting environmentally hazard
              chemicals that are widely used as pesticides in developing countries, using
              relatively simple but accurate methods.  This proposal meets the INT objective
              of increasing US-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit both sides.   This
              project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
              these cooperative activities. 


