Title       : GOALI: III-Nitride and SiC Transistors for High-Frequency, High-Power Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9811366

Award Number: 9811366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: P.Paul Ruden ruden@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin F. Brennan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9811366  Ruden  Certain wide band gap semiconductor materials are quickly
              emerging as the materials of choice for important device applications.  Among
              these applications are ultraviolet (UV) photodetectors, blue and UV light
              emitters, and high frequency, high power electronic devices.  In this context,
              GaN and the related III-nitride materials have recently attracted great
              interest, and much work has been done aimed at assessing their basic
              properties.    In a past NSF sponsored effort, the Georgia Tech and University
              of Minnesota groups involved in this proposal have teamed to begin the
              development of a novel, materials theory based device modeling technique. 
              Application of this technique to the study of GaN bulk material has resulted in
              much new information: the first determination of the high field carrier drift
              velocities, the first determination of the hole transport properties, the first
              determination of the electron and hole impact ionization rates, the first
              determination of the breakdown electric fields in GaN, and the low and
              intermediate field electronic transport properties of A1N and AlGaN.  Building
              on these achievements, a more device oriented study of the potential of GaN and
              the related III-N materials for several different applications can now be made.
                 It is the principal goal of this proposed research effort to analyze the
              prospectus of the III-N materials and of SiC for use in high frequency power
              amplifiers.  The program involves a theory and modeling effort in conjunction
              with an experimental program.  The proposed theory and modeling work will be
              complemented by experiment in order to help refine and compare the models to
              real structures.  By working in conjunction with an experimental team, the
              effect of nonidealities such as dislocations and impurities within the
              materials can be explored theoretically in the presence of a crucial feedback
              mechanism that will enhance the accuracy and relevance of the theoretical
              models.  In addition, the theory and modeling effort w ill explore ways in
              which novel physical effects can be used to improve device performance. 
              Specifically, the modeling will examine the usage of piezoelectrically induced
              charge densities to increase the current carrying capability of a
              heterojunction field effect transistor and how the p-type carrier concentration
              within the base of a heterostructure bipolar transistor can be increased to
              reduce the base resistance.  In addition, the theory and modeling will be used
              to determine the ultimate limits of performance of SiC and GaN based high
              frequency, high power amplifiers by providing the first accurate determination
              of the parameters which influence their performance, i.e., the breakdown field,
              current carrying capability, "knee" voltage and heat dissipation.  The study of
              the breakdown characteristics of different FET designs will build on our
              earlier work on impact ionization in bulk GaN material.  However, it will not
              be limited solely to ideal bulk material but will include the effect of field
              non-uniformity in realistic device structures as well as effects associated
              with impurities and dislocations on the breakdown properties.    For a
              meaningful device modeling effort close coupling to experimental work is
              desirable.  This will be accomplished through extensive collaboration with
              three experimental groups active in III-N and SiC research.  The principal
              collaborators in this effort are Superior Vacuum Technology Assoc. (SVTA) of
              Eden Prairie, MN, which has produced state of the art III-N materials and
              devices.  Prof.  Ruden has had close and fruitful interaction with SVTA in this
              area for several years.  SVTA will provide device quality III-N structures for
              this proposed program at cost of fabrication.  The second key collaborative
              group is at Motorola in Tempe, AZ.  The Motorola group will be principally
              involved in high frequency device testing.  Lastly, Prof.  Willander's group at
              Chalmers University, Sweden, will provide SiC material and will be strongly
              involved in the fabrication  and characterization of both SiC and III-N
              devices.  Direct comparison of the calculations to experiment can thus be made,
              greatly aiding the refinement of the models and ensuring that they address
              issues confronted in state of the art devices.  Additional collaborations of
              the principal investigators relevant to the proposed program involve the
              Honeywell Corp., Lockheed Martin Corp. (III-N devices), and Nortel(SiC
              devices).  ***
