Title       : Adaptive Identification and Control of Dynamical Systems Using Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9811390

Award Number: 9811390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436329             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kumpati S. Narendra kumpati.narendra@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9811390
Narendra
The field of control is inherently interdisciplinary in
              nature and extends from design, development and production on the one hand to
              mathematics on the other.  The objective of control is to influence the
              behavior of dynamical systems.  Achieving fast and accurate control under
              different environmental conditions, even while assuring stability and
              robustness, is the aim of all control systems design.
The best developed part
              of control theory deals with linear systems, and most of the controllers used
              in modern industry are based on linear control principles.  When some of the
              parameters of the system are unknown, we have an adaptive control problem.  The
              complexity of the problem is substantially greater when the plant
              characteristics are known but distinctly nonlinear, and becomes truly
              formidable when some of its parameters/functions are unknown or vary with time.
               Very few methods currently exist for controlling such systems.  However, as
              applications in industry are becoming more complex and the frontiers of
              technology are being extended, such problems are being encountered with
              increasing frequency.  This is the case both in well established areas such as
              process control and aircraft control, as well as new areas such as space
              technology, robotics, and manufacturing.  New methods for addressing such
              problems using neural networks will be studied in this project.
This project
              consists of four parts.  The first part deals with some of the important
              questions related to neural network based identification and control that
              require further investigation.  In the second part, the problem of control
              based on pattern recognition, and the use of neural networks in optimal
              control, are studied.  The third part re-examines the question of stability of
              neural network based control systems.  The PI believes that the first three
              parts are essential for a better understanding of the difficulties encountered
              in nonlinear adaptive control, and that they will set the stage for the fourth
              and final part, which contains the main thrust of the work.  Here, a detailed
              study will conducted of the problem of controlling both linear and nonlinear
              dynamical systems using multiple models, when time variations and external
              perturbations are present.

