Title       : Dissertation Research: The Ladies Diary: Mathematics and Gender in
               Eighteenth-Century England
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1998    
File        : a9811414

Award Number: 9811414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret W. Rossiter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Despite strong growth in the field of gender and science over the past fifteen
              years, historical studies of gender and mathematics are all but nonexistent. 
              This study will attempt to remedy this situation by focusing, through a
              historical case study, on the question of where do mathematics and gender meet.
              More specifically, although mathematics has often been portrayed as a rigorous
              body of knowledge which epitomizes objectivity and freedom from worldly
              concerns, mathematical practice takes place through interpersonal interaction
              and is therefore subject to a variety of entrenched social practices and deeply
              held beliefs.  This study focuses on one social element, gender, and analyzes
              its relationship to mathematical practice in eighteenth century Britain. First,
              the study aims to understand the involvement of women as well as men in
              mathematics in eighteenth century England.  Women's exclusion from professional
              life in this era means that locating mathematics in popular culture - in
              periodicals, public lectures and texts intended for a wide audience - is
              fundamental to this project.  Second, the study seeks to understand the notion
              of mathematics as gendered.  Although we might agree that mathematics to day is
              largely perceived as `unfeminine,` the study asks: was that the case in
              eighteenth-century England?  The study focuses for its methodology on The
              Ladies' Diary, a periodical printed annually from 1704 to 1840.  It published
              mathematical problems which were submitted and answered by its numerous
              readers, both male and female.  It is a rich text on the ways both men and
              women perceived mathematics.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
