Title       : Responses to Emotion Stimuli in a Tri-Ethnic Sample
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a9811955

Award Number: 9811955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34471              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beatrice M. De Oca deocab@silver.wnmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurence A. French  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western New Mexico Univ
	      College Avenue
	      Silver City, NM  88061    505/538-6328

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With national Science Foundation support, Dr. Beatrice de Oca and Western New 
              Mexico University will purchase eight Biopac student labs, each equipped with
              two electrode lead sets, disposable electrodes, skin-conductance transducer,
              pulse plethysmogram transducer, skin temperature transducer, push button hand
              switch, head phones and related supplies. These permit the measurement of
              physiological responses to controlled stimuli. The equipment will serve as the
              base for the development of a laboratory for the study of emotion and
              information processing. Dr. De Oca wishes to build upon the extensive research
              that has been acquired on conscious and unconscious attentional processes,
              physiological responses to fear-relevant and irrelevant stimuli and fear
              potentiation of acoustic startle and determine the extent to which they are
              mediated by cultural variables. She will examine how emotions are processed in
              a tri-ethnic sample composed of Native Americans, Mexican-Americans and
              non-Hispanic White Americans. In order to accomplish this, participants will be
              presented with neutral, fear-relevant and culturally-relevant stimuli.   This
              grant also serves an important training function. Western New Mexico University
              serves a student body which is primarily rural and made up of non-traditional
              students. The university provides the only opportunity for many of these
              individuals to develop their academic research and professional skills.
              Currently there are no research facilities in the social and behavioral
              sciences available and creation of Dr. De Oca's laboratory will provide
              important exposure to the realm of scientific research. Undergraduates will be
              extensively involved in Dr. De Oca's work..                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
