Title       : Democratic Steering and Technological Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9811962

Award Number: 9811962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Woodhouse woodhouse@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This goal of this project is to understand the strategies, procedures, and
              institutional arrangements that would facilitate better steering of
              technological design.  Design is understood as a broadly social activity
              including not only engineers and other professional designers but also those
              who purchase and use technological devices and systems, manufacturers, third
              parties who suffer side effects, government regulators, university researchers
              - the entire social process of innovating, utilizing, and revising technologies
              based in part on learning from experience.  One part of this research is
              devoted to clarifying what `better` steering would involve.  The method is to
              develop a full specification of the categories that can arise in technological
              endeavors.  Examples include failing to put needed technologies on the design
              agenda, exacerbating social class inequalities (hazardous waste dumps in
              minority neighborhoods), and changing workplace technological processes in ways
              that interfere with quality of work life.  The goal of the first half is to
              produce a finished framework that is complete,  simple enough for many
              different scholars and other users to remember and utilize, and that clearly
              delineates the interrelationship among the categories of design risks and
              challenges. The second half attempts to determine what political-economic
              procedures and strategies would, in principle, be required to cope with each of
              the problems specified in the work of the first half.  One of the approaches
              studied is that of constructive technology assessment, now emerging on a pilot
              scale in a few nations, principally The Netherlands and Denmark.  The second
              approach is the researcher's own research on intelligent trial and error, which
              has found that catastrophic risks can be reduced substantially by following a
              set of commonsense guidelines.  One of the questions to be answered is the
              extent to which these strategies offer an across-the-board solution to the many
              design challenges standing in the way of improved steering of technologies.    
                                                         p¤                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
