Title       : Microfabrication Methods Applied to the Development of Rigorously Defined
               Occluded Region Corrosion Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2000   
File        : a9811412

Award Number: 9811412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Kelly rgk6y@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Reed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9811412
Kelly

Crevice corrosion occurs as a result of aggressive conditions
              inside small occluded regions on metal surfaces.  One of the primary stumbling
              blocks to the comparison of modeling and experimental results in crevice
              corrosion has been the extraordinary difficulty involved in experimentally
              producing a crevice sample that is directly equivalent to a geometry that is
              amenable to computational modeling.  In this work, both sides of the crevice
              are constructed on silicon wafer substrates.  The metal side of the crevice is
              formed by patterning, etching, and oxidizing the silicon before deposition of
              the metal.  A highly planar surface is produced.  The metal surface is
              segmented to allow measurement of current distribution within the crevice.  The
              crevice-former side of the crevice (formed by patterning and depositing SiO2)
              contains precisely grown spacers that control the gap between the
              crevice-former surface and the metal electrode to a uniform, preselected level.
               The crevice former contains microsensors for pH, chloride concentration, and
              electrochemical potential.  Using these samples, measurements are made that
              directly relate to computational results from a recently developed two
              dimensional occluded region mass transport model.  In this way, the phenomena
              controlling crevice corrosion initiation and propagation are probed. 
              
%%%
The work investigates issues that have prevented the development of
              effective crevice corrosion mitigation strategies as well as life prediction
              methodologies.  The research has impact on other forms of corrosion because the
              critical structures and processes that control many types of corrosion operate
              on the micron to sub-mm size scale.  For example, the chemistry and
              electrochemistry associated with corrosion due to inclusions in stainless
              steel, constituent particles in aluminum alloys, droplets in atmospheric
              corrosion, and defects in organic coatings occur on the 1-micron to several mm
              size scales.  The size scale and dimensionality of the controlling structures
              make experimental and computational studies very challenging, requiring
              compromises and approximations in order to make the problem tractable.  This
              new approach permits improved quantitative assessments.
***


