Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Political Ecology of Regional Free Trade:
               Changing Conditions of Yerba Mate Production in Brazil and Paraguay
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a9811465

Award Number: 9811465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl S. Zimmerer zimmerer@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This doctoral dissertation research is a comparative study that combines
              elements of regional political ecology, `new rural geography` and agroecology. 
              It will document and explain the effects of the MERCOSUR customs union
              agreement on the landscape, especially the ecology and production conditions of
              yerba mate producers in four communities in Brazil and Paraguay, both of which
              must now compete with plantation production in Argentina. As a distinct
              alteration of national economic policies, the MERCOSUR custom's union offers an
              easily delineated policy change common to both countries. The new policy
              modifies the context within which farmers evaluate potential land management
              practices. These practices, in turn, induce distinct ecological effects. Thus,
              the project provides an approach through which the linkages between national
              policy and local ecological impact can be identified.   Small agricultural
              producers provide the focus of the research project. Land management decisions
              are viewed as the result of individual interpretations of the existing
              opportunities and constraints. State policy changes enter into these
              interpretations by means of commodity prices and the perspectives of extension
              organizations and processors. The project makes extensive use of qualitative
              methods to access local perception of production possibilities. Farmers in four
              study areas in (two each in Brazil and Paraguay) as well as the organizations
              and processors with whom they maintain contact are surveyed and interviewed.
              Included study areas facilitate comparison of responses in divergent social
              settings. Key indicators of ecological sustainability suggest the relative
              ecological impact of existing management systems that are privileged under
              MERCOSUR.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
