Title       : SGER: An Experimental Z39.50 Information Retrieval Protocol Test Bed for
               Biological Collection and Taxonomic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a9811443

Award Number: 9811443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99430              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Vieglais vieglais@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Beach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Gomon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Schnase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley D. Blum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen Allison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard Krishtalka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This work represents a potentially high-reward biodiversity  informatics test
              bed project in an expansive community  collaboration.  The goal of the work is
              to demonstrate the  effectiveness of standards-based access to biological 
              specimen and species authority records in the support of  Internet discovery of
              institutional specimen holding,  collection cataloging, taxonomic research, and
              various  management and educational applications of biodiversity  data.  The
              project will implement the ANSI/NISO Z39.50  Information Retrieval Protocol for
              specimen and taxonomic  authority databases.  Deliverables will be (1) Z39.50 
              application profiles for specimen and species (taxon) data  classes, (2) a
              consensus metadata dictionary for both  classes of data, (3) a record syntax
              for both classes of  data, and (4) prototype Z-client applications and
              Z-servers  for specimen and species databases.  A client-server Z39.50 
              information retrieval architecture for biological  collections would include
              the following benefits:    1. Multiple specimen or species databases would be
              queried  simultaneously through a single interface and return  structured
              records from result sets for immediate  utilization in local applications, such
              as database or  analysis programs.    2. Query and retrieval among data in
              Z-servers in other  intellectual communities would be integrated.  This would 
              allow, for example, (1) simultaneous spatial queries of  specimen catalogs and
              map archives,  (2) integrated retrieval of species (taxon) records from 
              biological authority files with bibliographic records tagged  with taxon
              subject headings from library catalogs, and (3)  concurrent query and retrieval
              of taxonomic authority  records, taxon images, and specimen voucher records
              from  multiple sources.    3. Biological collections institutions could
              participate in  a standards-based community architecture for data access and 
              retrieval without surrendering their independence for the  customization of
              local schema and record structures fo r  local needs.    The potential impact
              of a Z39.50 architecture for universal  access to biological collections and
              species data, for the  integration of species and specimen data with
              non-biological  information, and as a community framework for all future 
              biological collections data networking, is profound.  This  prototype and test
              bed project will be the first time  biocollections and species information will
              be brought into  an information standards framework shared by much broader  and
              active information retrieval communities.
