Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Peer Group Revisited: A Network Approach for
               Understanding Delinquency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9811304

Award Number: 9811304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3153               (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell J. Steffensmeier d4s@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A central sociological problem concerns the process by which individuals come to
              engage in delinquent behavior. The objective of this doctoral dissertation
              project is to examine the role of the peer group in influencing adolescent
              delinquency. Although sociologists and criminologists place much emphasis on
              the peer group as a determinant of delinquent behavior, little effort has been
              directed at some fundamental questions: 1) What are the mechanisms through
              which a peer group influences delinquency? 2) How does the influence of peer
              groups change as adolescents undergo developmental changes? 3) What role does
              the school context play in mediating the effects of peer groups on adolescent's
              delinquent behavior? The research to be conducted for this project will pay
              special attention to the social networks within which individuals are located.
              It will employ data from The Adolescent Health Survey to address these issues
              in new ways. An important advantage of these data is the inclusion of
              exceptionally detailed social network information on high school aged
              adolescents. Data will be analyzed using multilevel modeling techniques where
              adolescents and their peer groups are situated within the school environment.
              This allows for the influence of school characteristics to mediate the
              relationship between peer network characteristics and adolescent delinquency.
              This research will improve upon current knowledge by taking network structure
              into account in order to gain a better understanding of the ways in which peer
              groups operate within schools to influence delinquent behavior. 
