Title       : Temporary Workers and U. S. Immigration Policy, 1880-2000: Economic and
               Demographic Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9811613

Award Number: 9811613
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan B. Carter susan.carter@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to explore the economic and demographic
              consequences of flows of temporary workers from abroad into the United States
              over a 120 year period being in 1880 and preceding to the present time.
              Temporary workers have been an important component of international migration
              since the mid nineteenth century. Prior to World War I, many often so called
              `immigrants`, recorded in the official statistics were in fact temporary
              workers. Between 40 and 60 percent of the recorded immigrants in the period
              1900 to 1914 had left the United States before 1920. Most of these workers
              stayed in the country for less than two years. After severe restrictions, were
              placed on immigration in the 1920s, the flows of temporary workers continued to
              be significant, but they were no longer recorded in the official statistics.
              Beginning in 1953, temporary workers who came legally were recorded either by
              the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service or by the U S Department of
              Labor. Many more may have come without authorization or documentation. 
              Temporary workers are usually attractive to the host country because their
              migration decisions are strongly motivated by labor market considerations.
              Temporary workers tend to move toward tight labor markets and leave loose ones
              Their entry thus moderates wage increases during boom times and their exit
              softens domestic job loss during depressions. At the same time, the job skills
              and personal characteristics of temporary workers are often quite different
              from those of the native labor force. They tend to complement  rather than
              compete with existing workers.  Despite these positive benefits, temporary
              workers and the policies which invite and regulate their flow are not without
              critics. There is concern that foreign workers might compete with existing
              residents for scarce jobs or might depress wages. The temporary workers who are
              most visible tend to live at the margins of their host country's economy and
              society, contributing little to the country's culture and repatriating a
              substantial friction of the wages and salaries earned. Some temporary workers
              decide to become permanent  residents, perhaps in numbers unanticipated or
              unwelcome by the host country. In some cases the transition from temporary to
              permanent residence is made without proper authorization.   In the United
              States policy toward temporary worked has largely escaped notice, even in the
              recent debates about immigration policy. To address the issues raised by
              temporary workers, data on the magnitude, character, and timing of the flows of
              temporary workers are developed, and their impact on U.S. economic and
              demographic growth, the wages of native born workers. and the flows of both
              authorized and unauthorized immigration is assessed. This information will be
              important in any assessment of currant immigration policy.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
