Title       : Preparation of Nanostructured Membranes by Reactive Depositions from
               Supercritical Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2000    
File        : a9811088

Award Number: 9811088
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $515000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Watkins watkins@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dionisios G. Vlachos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Tsapatsis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1084,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Watkins - 9811088  The development of functional, nanostructured metal composite
              membranes will have a substantial economic impact on the separation,
              purification and recovery of gases as well as novel membrane reactor
              applications for oxygen-enriched combustion, controlled partial oxidation and
              equilibrium limited dehydrogenation reactions.  Despite progress that has been
              achieved to date, precise control of deposit microstructure, composition and
              distribution within the support has not been realized.  The challenge for
              porous-inorganic support/metal composites remains the development of
              methodologies for the controlled infiltration and deposition of nanostructured
              metal and metal alloys within interior pores at a prescribed depth and
              thickness.  These architectures are inaccessible by current techniques
              including chemical vapor deposition, metal sputtering and electroless plating
              due to constraints of these processes that do not allow for optimization of
              deposit microstructure or composition.  Polymer/metal composites membranes are
              plagued by poor and to rectify this deficiency, processes leading to gradient
              interfaces are required.    The PI's plan to integrate materials synthesis,
              characterization and multi-scale simulations for the development of a
              processing strategy based on the concept of chemical fluid deposition (CFD). 
              CFD is a form of metal deposition that involves the chemical reduction of
              soluble organometallic compounds in supercritical carbon dioxide solution.  The
              key to the process is physicochemical properties of the solvent which lie
              intermediate to those of liquids and gases.  Transport and reduction in
              solution offers low process temperatures, high reagent concentrations and
              eliminates precursor volatility requirements associated with vapor phase
              techniques.  The absence of surface tension and low viscosity of supercritical
              fluid (SCF) solutions are well suited to the delivery of relatively high
              concentrations of organometallic precursors within porous environments.  Deposi
              tion is triggered by the introduction of a reducing agent to produce metal
              deposits.  This reaction scheme can be used to dictate deposit composition and
              microstructure via direct control of nucleation and growth kinetics by precise
              adjustments in stoichiometry of the soluble precursors.  Mass-transport
              limitations are largely eliminated due to high precursor concentration and
              favorable transport properties of the SCF solution which is similar to those of
              a gas.  The permeability of polymer substrates to SCF/organometallic solutions
              can be exploited to produce composite membranes with adherent, gradient
              polymer/metal interfaces and metal interlayers.
