Title       : Molecular Analysis of Morphologically Defined Taxa in the Montastraea Annularis
               Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9811124

Award Number: 9811124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy Knowlton nknowlton@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Failure to accurately define and identify species fundamentally compromises
              our ability to understand and manage marine ecosystems. The problem is
              particularly acute on reefs, where there is no consensus on the species status
              of the numerous ecologically and morphologically distinct `forms` that comprise
              many important groups of corals. While the problematic nature of coral species
              is widely recognized, there is no consensus as to why this problem exists. 
              Some scientists argue that extensive and complex patterns of hybridization make
              species boundaries arbitrary in corals, but the data to test this assertion are
              largely lacking, particularly for Caribbean corals.  In this project, Dr.
              Knowlton and collaborators will tackle this problem using the star coral,
              Montastraea annularis, as a model system. This coral is the most abundant coral
              of the Caribbean, and has been for millions of years. It has been extensively
              studied by biologists and geologists as a kind of `lab rat` for a wide variety
              of studies (e.g. coral bleaching, paleoclimatology), but recent results suggest
              that what had been viewed as a single polymorphic species may represent a
              complex of at least three reproductively isolated forms that can be identified
              by their colony morphologies.  Previous work was on coral genetics, symbiosis,
              morphometrics and reproductive biology but the genetic patterns on wide
              geographic scales are of fundamental importance.  If the three taxa comprising
              Montastraea annularis  do not routinely interbreed, then fixed diagnostic
              differences should in principle be detectable.  Dr. Knowlton has already
              uncovered a few fixed or nearly fixed differences using amplified fragment
              length polyinorphism (AFLP) and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)
              between M. faveolata and the other two taxa. She has as yet found no fixed
              genetic differences between M. annularis and M. franksi, but they appear to
              spawn at distinct times throughout their range, suggesting that they are not
              genetically identical.   In this project, she will continue to screen for
              genetic differences among these taxa, in order to determine if hybrids between
              M. faveolata and the other taxa can be detected and to see if more extensive
              searches will reveal differences between M. annularis and M. franksi.  She will
              also extend the genetic analyses from Panama to other sites in the Caribbean,
              to determine if the patterns observed here are also seen elsewhere. This will
              be the first such genetic analysis of a reef coral species complex throughout
              its geographic range.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
