Title       : Auctions on the Internet: An Experimental Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9811273

Award Number: 9811273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111474             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Lucking-Reiley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1338,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project is inspired by two important aspects of the Internet: the growth
              in the use of auctions online, and the potential of the Internet as an
              experimental research tool.  It involves several experiments to perform new
              tests of auction theory.  It also involves replications of previous experiments
              on auctions, to see whether past results are robust to the environment in which
              most commercial online auctions operate.  The Internet is an increasingly
              important tool for facilitating commerce, and one of the exciting potential
              uses of this tool is in implementing auctions and other pricing mechanisms. 
              Companies such as Onsale and eBay have recently established themselves as
              online auction houses for items as diverse as refurbished computer equipment,
              ostrich burgers, Nissan trucks, and vacation packages.  Currently, these sites
              sell over $15 million in goods per week via auction.  Even some airlines have
              begun to auction a limited number of passenger tickets on their Web sites. 
              Networked computer technology appears to be bringing auctions to a wide variety
              of new markets.  The increased use and variety of auction mechanisms raises new
              research questions.  It is important to understand how well the existing body
              of auction theory applies to the new market situations where auctions are being
              applied, and to learn how efficiently these auctions allocate resources in
              practice.  In this project, experiments with actual bidders investigate the
              properties of various auction selling formats, using the Internet itself as a
              research tool.  This research involves two main components.  First are new
              tests of the theory of the effects of reserve prices (minimum bids) in
              single-unit auctions with varying numbers of bidders.  Reserve prices are
              significant features of almost all auctions, from art to wine to computers.
              Their effects have been investigated theoretically by a number of authors, but
              have received very little empirical attention to date.  Second are new
              comparisons of revenues between auction formats, such as English
              (ascending-price), Dutch (descending-price), and sealed-bid auctions.
              Comparisons of revenues between auctions have previously been studied
              extensively in the laboratory, but the author's recent field experiments
              suggest that past results from laboratory sessions are not always robust to
              Internet-based auctions for real goods.  The proposed work will replicate
              several laboratory experiments, checking their results' sensitivity to (1) the
              use of real goods rather than induced valuations, and (2) variations in the
              rules and timescales of the auctions.  As part of the research program, the
              author develops significant methodological innovations through the construction
              of a `virtual laboratory`.  The ability to conduct experiments with
              participants over the Internet will be a boon to researchers in the social,
              behavioral, and economic sciences.  This project aims to improve research
              technology in Internet-based experiments, opening up possibilities for
              effective data collection on human behavior from participants in all walks of
              life, and in various types of interaction with each other.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
