Title       : Dissertation Research: Petra Lower Market Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1998  
File        : a9811448

Award Number: 9811448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8394               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Routledge routleg@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Bruce Routledge, MS Leigh-Ann Bedal will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. Her work focuses on the archaeological site of
              Petra which is located in Jordan, ca 80 kilometers South of the Dead Sea.
              Documentary evidence indicates that Petra was capitol of the Nabataean kingdom 
              and its impressive rock hewn buildings and monumental tomb facades carved into
              sandstone cliffs are well known. However much less is understod about the
              site's function or the reason for its location in a barren desert region. Based
              on excvavations in the early part of this century, it was hypothesized that
              large open spaces served as markets and that the site played an important role
              in long distance trade. As Ms Bedal notes however, it is extremely uncertain
              what functions these areas in fact were and the goal of this research is to
              address this issue. Over the course of one field season MS Bedal will conduct a
              survey of the "Lower Market" area. She will construct a careful map of all
              standing architectural features and collect surface materials. She will then
              conduct test excavations in selected areas. 

The project will shed new light
              on an important prehistoric site. In this period which preceeded Roman
              conquest, much of the Near East was organized into empires and archaeologists
              wish to understand the functions which such units served and the forces which
              facilitated the integration of diverse ethnic and linguistic groups spread over
              exgtensive geographic areas into large-scale functioning political units. Many
              researchers believe that organization of and control over long distance trade
              permitted the necessary centralization of power and the Nabataean kingdom
              provides a venue to evaluate this hypothesis. The research will produce data of
              interest to many archaeologists and assist in training a promising young
              scientist.

