Title       : Nutrition of Reef Corals: Effects of Morphology, Resource Availability, and
               Water Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a9811577

Award Number: 9811577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Sebens ks95@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1650,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9811577
Sebens

Coral reef ecosystems depend on water movement at all levels.
              Water movement delivers prey to corals and enhances uptake and exchange of
              nutrients, oxygen, carbon dioxide, bicarbonate and other ions. It also affects
              coral competition, larval dispersal, fragmentation, activity of predators, and
              sedimentation, thus having a large potential impact on coral distribution. Flow
              micro-habitats on reefs differ substantially, even over a few meters or less,
              causing measurable differences in coral growth rates. The contribution of
              zooxanthellae (photosynthesis) to coral energetics is most strongly affected by
              diffusional limitations at the lower extremes of flow, modified by changes in
              irradiance. Flow at the smallest scale affects the processes of respiration,
              productivity and suspension feeding by corals, the escape behavior of
              zooplankton encountering corals, and the ultimate success of particular polyp,
              tentacle, and colony morphologies. 
Over an entire reef, there is a
              characteristic gradient from high velocity oscillatory (wave-induced) flow in
              shallow reef zones, to unidirectional flows of lower velocity in deep reef and
              lagoonal habitats. Such flow regimes affect benthic-pelagic fluxes and
              dispersal of gametes and larvae of reef dwelling species. Corals vary in polyp
              size, tentacle form and colony structure; coral growth forms in each reef zone
              reflect adaptations to local flow and light regimes at the polyp and colony
              levels.
In this project Dr. Sebens, collaborators and students will
              investigate the effects of water movement on the feeding biology, energetics,
              and nutrition of reef corals. Attempts to model energy, carbon and nitrogen
              budgets have suffered from a lack of information on prey capture rates and have
              generally not considered flow effects adequately.  Past studies along with new
              data on the contributions of sediment ingestion and inorganic nutrient uptake
              to energy, carbon, and nitrogen requirements will be used to construct energy,
              carbon, and nitrogen budgets for at least six coral species. Effects of water
              flow on each input and output process will be incorporated into this model
              budget.  The project will continue to measure small scale water flow around
              corals in the field. Self-contained underwater flowmeters with fine spatial
              resolution have been constructed for this research.   The data collected will
              be used to characterize the general flow regime, providing new information
              about the flow environment of coral reefs in Jamaica, Florida, Belize and other
              sites in the Caribbean.  This new information on coral feeding with flow will
              extend the current conceptual model to encompass a diversity of colony forms,
              tentacle morphologies, and nematocyst compositions. Zooplankton feeding by
              coral reef cnidarians is necessary for their survival, yet most studies have
              focused on the autotrophic contribution from their endosymbiotic zooxanthellae.
              This research will increase our understanding of energy and nutrient fluxes in
              coral reef environments, which are among the most productive and endangered
              marine habitats.

