Title       : Alternative Environmental Policies in a Second Best World: A General Equilibrium
               and Empirical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1998 
File        : a9811324

Award Number: 9811324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don Fullerton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gilbert Metcalf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research involves a two part project to study a number of environmental
              policies to assess how these policies interact with pre existing distortions.
              First,  general equilibrium models of the economy with consumers, producers,
              factors of production, and government are constructed under various assumptions
              about market structure, tax instruments, and environmental policies. Second, an
              empirical analysis of production is undertaken in which pollution is treated as
              an input to production. In particular, the researcher focuses on measuring the
              elasticity of substitution between pollution and other inputs in production. 
              The first part will assess the importance of pre existing tax distortions in
              designing optimal movements from an unregulated environment towards reduced
              environmental emissions. It will also investigate the design of optimal
              policies in this second best world. The modeling approach used is quite
              flexible and allows for a variety of emissions technologies in production. In
              addition the importance of market structure is investigated in designing
              environmental policy. An important feature is the possibility of monopoly
              production of one or more goods in the economy. Many of the insights developed
              in the initial modeling have application in other areas of economics. In
              particular, the analysis   is extended to consider issues associated with
              second best pricing of common access goods (e.g. frequency bandwidths for
              radio, television, and cellular telephones) and of excludable public goods
              (e.g. a national park).  In the second part, production technologies are
              investigated empirically. Pollution is treated as an input to production which,
              thereby, measures the effect of pollution policies on the demand for other
              inputs such as capital, labor, energy, and other materials. This is done using
              micro level data from the Bureau of the Census Longitudinal Research Database
              along with two possible sources of micro level emissions data from the
              Environmental Protection Agency. With data aggregated to firm or state levels,
              cost functions are estimated using a flexible functional form. Also, the
              elasticity of substitution between purchased inputs and pollution is estimated.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
