Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Alternatives to Promotion in Knowledge-Intensive
               Services: External Hiring, Permanent Employment, and Monetary Incentives in Law
               Firms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1999 
File        : a9811144

Award Number: 9811144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5597               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter V. Marsden PVM@WJH.HARVARD.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aage B. Sorensen  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed doctoral dissertation research will investigate the question of why
              professional service organizations of all varieties are currently going through
              a period of transformation. The traditional model of the professional service
              firm is one of an "up-or-out" system centering around internal promotion from a
              probationary junior level to a senior level characterized by greater job
              security and higher rewards. Many firms have begun to depart from this model by
              recruiting senior professionals from the external labor market, creating
              permanent positions for employees who are not promoted to the partnership or
              senior rank, and making use of performance-based monetary compensation. This
              study investigates why some firms are moving rapidly in these new directions
              and others are not. It proposes that these practices represent alternatives to
              internal promotion that can serve the same purposes--allocation of workers to
              tasks, retention of valued employees, and motivation of performance--and that
              may be preferable for professional firms under certain circumstances. In
              particular, it explores the influence of firms' technological, institutional,
              and market contexts on their external recruitment of partners, their use of
              permanent professional employees, and their reliance on performance-based
              compensation. The study focuses on a sample of law firms, chosen because they
              represent a prototypical form of professional service organization; They are
              numerous enough to permit the identification of a sizeable sample, and a great
              deal of information concerning them is publicly available. The empirical
              findings should also be relevant to a broad array of service organizations
              across professions.
