Title       : Collaborative Research: "The Impact of Education Finance Equalization on
               Students, Teachers, Schools, and State Governments"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9811386

Award Number: 9811386
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86778              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugenia F. Toma   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheila E. Murray  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research analyzes s a number of interrelated issues in school finance
              reform. The first part of the project continues a study of court mandated
              reform, but in this work the focus shifts from the impact of the courts on the
              distribution of dollars to the real consequences of successful school finance
              litigation. This part has three components, all of which share a common theme:
              what are the consequences of education finance reform for schools and students?
              First, the project looks at the impact of court ordered reform on the demand
              for private schools. Using matches of demographic data from the 1970, 1980, and
              1990 Census of Population with school funding data from the 1972, 1982, and
              1992 Census of Governments, it is possible to look at how private school
              enrollment changes as schools receive more funds because of finance reform. The
              unit of observation is the district. The panel nature of our data set allows
              the investigators to purge their estimates of the effects of permanent
              differences across districts. Second, the question is asked: what do schools do
              with the money they receive as a result court mandated reform? Do they lower
              teacher pupil ratios? Increase teacher salaries? Hire better educated, more
              experienced teachers? Expand course offerings? Increase use of computers? To
              address these questions, the study uses unique matches of the Common Core of
              Data to both the Schools and Staffing Survey and the 1988 National Educational
              Longitudinal Survey. Third, a case study is undertaken of finance reform in
              Kentucky. The Kentucky Supreme Court's 1989 decision in Rose v The Council for
              Better Education, Inc. was far reaching, holding that the entire state
              education system  governance and curriculum as well as finance  was
              unconstitutional. This part of the project involves a careful analysis of the
              Kentucky experience in the aftermath of Rose.  This project also includes two
              research projects on school finance that go beyond court mandated reform. One
              is the impact of expanding labor market opportunities for women. At one time,
              teaching was one of the few occupations that welcomed women, and as a
              consequence schools could pay teachers far less than they were worth. While
              occupation segregation persists, women now have more options in the labor
              market than they once did. Consequently, the education finance system will have
              to raise additional funds in order to attract capable people to teaching. This
              part of research will study the hypothesis that the combination of stagnant
              wages for teachers and new opportunities for women may lead to a significant
              decline in the quality of people entering the teaching profession.  The other
              project is fiscal federalism, demographics, and the demand for education.
              Previous research has found that support for public schools is negatively
              correlated with the fraction of the population that is 65 and older. The
              project will analyze the impact of the interaction of the aging population and
              increased centralization on public spending for education. This work will
              differ from past efforts in that it will allow for the possibility that the
              influence of an aging population on school spending depends in part on the
              organization of local government and the state's role in education.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
