Title       : U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Design and Manufacture of Stitch Bonded
               Thermoplastic Textile Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a9811019

Award Number: 9811019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19406              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sabit Adanur sadanur@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Sabit
              Adanur, Associate Professor, Department of Textile Engineering at Auburn
              University in Auburn, Alabama, and Dr. Samy E. Shalaby of the Textile Research
              Division in the National Research Center in Cairo, Egypt.  The two scientists
              plan to design, fabricate, test and analyze stitch bonded laminar thermoplastic
              composites.   The research will address the disadvantages of currently
              available composites including high cost and lack of well-defined design and
              manufacturing rules.  Thermoplastic material use is increasing as the principal
              matrix material for composites due to many advantages.  The research will
              involve traditional and high performance thermoplastic matrix materials.  The
              recycling of composites will be investigated and the mechanical properties of
              the resulting second-generation materials will be analyzed.  Failure
              mechanisms, damage resistance and tolerance of thermoplastic composite
              materials, and the effects of field conditions on laminar composite structures
              will be investigated and the mechanistic models will be developed.  Scope: 
              This award will allow collaboration between Egyptian and US scientists who have
              significant technical background and expertise to carry out the proposed
              research.  The US scientist will develop the stitching method and textile
              preform structures.  The Egyptian scientist will improve the interface between
              resin and reinforcement material.  Chemical analysis and testing will be done
              in Egypt and mechanical testing will be done in the United States.  This
              research project will help the US composite manufacturing companies to
              diversify into civilian applications.  It will help the private Egyptian
              textile companies to participate in the design, development and manufacture of
              textile structural composites.  This proposal meets the INT objective of
              increasing US-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit both sides.   This
              project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
              these cooperative activities.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
