Title       : Exchange Rate Swings, Reallocation, and Heterogeneity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9811059

Award Number: 9811059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9811059  Gourinchas    This project addresses the following question: what
              happens to the real economy when exchange rates fluctuate? More specifically,
              this research analyzes the impact of exchange rate fluctuations on factor
              reallocation. While traditional models emphasize inter-sectoral reallocation of
              workers and capital, this project focuses on intrasectoral effects. New
              multi-sectors non-representative models of sectoral reallocation are developed
              building upon the rich theoretical and empirical literature on micro-economic
              non-convexities and heterogeneity. The emphasis is on the timing of technology
              adoption, an important source of heterogeneity across firms, which is likely to
              be influenced by relative price fluctuations such as real exchange rates. A
              long run goal of this research is to incorporate information on the dynamics of
              the cross-section to help identify how shocks propagate through the economy.
              Another goal is to understand and tie together micro and macro-economic
              implications of real exchange rate volatility and persistent swings on pricing
              decisions, factor allocation or entry and exit. This research will use micro
              data from the Longitudinal Research Database (LRD)to measure and identify the
              exchange rate component driving plants' physical capital adjustments. The
              proposed specification identifies exchange rate contributions off the different
              exchange rate elasticities of different sectors. This part of the research
              measures how exchange rate fluctuations affect the timing and magnitude of
              micro adjustment and how they are filtered through the cross-section
              distribution and time variations in plants adjustment rate. This research
              provides useful information on the propagation and amplification of
              reallocation shocks, the micro adjustment patterns, well as information on
              which industries are exchange rate sensitive. Lastly, it relates the results to
              observable characteristics (product durability, mark-up, market structure,
              capital intensity and trade exposure).
