Title       : U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Fabric Hand Measurement for Quality Control in
               Apparel Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9811021

Award Number: 9811021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mansour H. Mohamed   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5944,9149,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9811021
Mohamed

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor Mansour Mohamed, Head, Department of Textile Engineering,
              Chemistry and Science at North Carolina State University in Raleigh, North
              Carolina and Professor Mohamed Sultan of the Faculty of Engineering in
              Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt.  The two scientists will study and
              evaluate the use of fabric hand in the garment industry to assess the
              appearance, comfort and the manufacturing quality of garments. They plan to use
              a newly developed single tester to judge the quality of fabric hand in the
              garment industry, to assess the tester ability to predict the probability of
              seam pucker occurrence, and determining the limiting values of fabric hand to
              guarantee the absence of seam pucker, correlating the standard values of fabric
              hand for each end use, and utilizing this information to refine the single
              tester.

Scope:  This award is for collaboration between two experienced
              scientists in the US and Egypt, to develop a simple technique for testing
              garments in a manner that correlate the results with the value of the garment
              to the end consumer, namely through the sense of hand feel.  Since the hand
              feel is a subjective measure, developing a tester that simulates that fabric
              hand is both complicated and important.  The Egyptian scientist has developed a
              simple single tester that will be used as the starting point for the proposed
              work.  The US scientist is well qualified to contribute to this research based
              on his extensive research of several aspects of weaving technology and of
              applications of various weaves.  The results of their collaboration could be a
              useful technology to relate physical measurements to subjective evaluation by
              consumers, thus helping the garment industry greatly by producing marketable
              products.  This proposal meets the INT objective of increasing US-foreign
              collaboration in areas that benefit both sides.   This project is being
              supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
              scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
              activities. 

