Title       : Genetic Variation in Widely Distributed Deep-Sea Molluscs: The Role of
               Oceanographic & Topographic Features
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9811925

Award Number: 9811925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239266             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ron J. Etter ron.etter@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Rex  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1650,4444,9104,9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The deep sea is the largest and least known ecosystem on Earth. Recent
              exploration has revealed a surprisingly varied and dynamic environment, and
              quite unexpectedly high biodiversity at both community and landscape levels.
              While a picture of ecological patterns is emerging, the evolutionary origin of
              this rich and highly endemic fauna is unknown. This represents a huge gap in
              our understanding of basic evolutionary phenomena and presents a number of
              major theoretical challenges. The primary evidence of evolutionary divergence
              in other environments is genetic population structure. Our first grant was
              devoted to developing molecular methods to extract n dtochondrial DNA from
              preserved deep sea molluscs. The success of these new methodological advances
              enabled us to perform an analysis of genetic differentiation along a complete
              depth gradient (119 5000 m) within the North American Basin. Results provide
              the first clear insight into how and where genetic variation accumulates and
              differentiates to produce the enormously high biodiversity observed in the deep
              ocean. Genetic patterns confirmed the only explicit model of population
              differentiation in deep sea populations (Etter and Rex 1990). The ability to
              sequence DNA in preserved deep sea specimens makes it possible to explore, for
              the first time, many facets of the historical evolutionary development of this
              unique fauna by using the vast archived collections of deep sea material. We
              propose to continue this research by expanding in 2 directions.  First, the
              unexpectedly large number of mutations characterizing 16S mtDNA haplotypes
              sampled in several species, while exciting, can confound interpretations of
              population level processes because it cannot be ascribed to intraspecific
              versus interspecific divergence (e.g., cryptic morphospecies). We propose to
              develop techniques to assay single copy nuclear genes from formalin fixed
              tissues. Phylogenies based on nuclear DNA can be compared to those from the
              mtDNA enabling us to distinguish between the hypotheses of large scale
              intraspecific polymorphism versus the alternative of co existing 'clades' of
              deep sea taxa. with limited contemporary gene flow. We will target the
              internally transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of the rRNA cluster as well as
              introns within protein coding regions because of their relatively rapid rate of
              evolution. Working with the nuclear DNA from formalin fixed tissues is more
              challenging than our successes with mtDNA loci, primarily due to differences in
              genome copy number/cell. However, our preliminary success with two loci would
              indicate that nuclear gene assays from those individuals previously
              characterized for mtDNA are feasible. The proposed research is essential to the
              confident interpretation of our within basin results, allows for the
              development of molecular tools necessary for interpreting patterns at larger
              scales, and provides the strength of an analysis of several independent loci
              for elucidating concordant evolutionary processes in the deep sea.  Second, we
              propose to extend the analysis of genetic population structure to ocean wide
              scales in five species that we have successfully analyzed on a regional scale
              and to test whether specific potential isolating barriers influence population
              structure. Like many deep sea organisms, these species are very widely
              distributed. A complete understanding of population differentiation, species
              formation and adaptive radiation of higher taxa clearly requires analysis of
              geographic variation on very large scales including those on which geographic
              isolating barriers may operate. Potential barriers include distance, depth,
              major topographic features and ocean current patterns. We will investigate the
              importance of isolating barriers on large scale population structure by
              comparing the genetic structure of two gastropods with different modes of
              dispersal, which should respond to the isolating effects of currents and bottom
              topography in very different ways. One species develops planktotrophically in
              the surface currents and the other has lecithotrophic development in abyssal
              currents. Statistical models will be used to determine whether genetic distance
              can be predicted by differences in depth and distance within and among basins,
              and corresponds to potential isolating barriers. Large scale genetic population
              structure in bivalves will contribute significantly to our understanding of
              speciation in the deep sea, and test the generality of the trend discovered in
              our current research that interpopulation genetic distance decreases with
              increasing depth. This research is the first oceanwide controlled comparison of
              species that has the potential to reveal the basic causes of evolutionary
              divergence in the deep sea ecosystems on scales that are appropriate to the
              processes involved. Expanding our analysis of regional differentiation to
              include the effects of isolating barriers on very large scales would be a major
              advance in our understanding of evolutionary dynamics in the deep sea and will
              provide essential information to formulate future questions about the origin of
              deep sea biodiversity.  A 1.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
