Title       : Modeling Development and Perceptual Phenomena in the Visual Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1998  
File        : a9811478

Award Number: 9811478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Risto Miikkulainen risto@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Although much progress has been made in understanding the development and
              function of the visual cortex experimentally, the exact mechanisms are still
              not completely understood.  With the advent of  parallel supercomputers in the
              past few years, it has become viable to test theories about these mechanisms in
              detailed computational simulations. In the PIs previous project, a model of the
              primary visual cortex was developed that showed how the observed receptive
              fields, columnar organization, and lateral connectivity can arise through
              input-driven Hebbian self-organization.  The current project continues the
              research in four directions: (1) The self-organizing model is extended to a
              hierarchy of visual  representations, taking into account feedback from higher
              levels of visual processing. (2) Internal pattern generators are included in
              the model and the hypothesis that they implement genetic control over the
              self-organized structures is verified against data on chick imprinting and the
              development of face recognition in infants. (3) The hypothesis that visual
              illusions and aftereffects occur as a side effect of the adapting lateral
              interactions in the system is tested computationally.  (4) The hypothesis that
              perceptual grouping occurs based on synchronization mediated by the lateral and
              feedback connections is tested, verifying that Gestalt phenomena emerge from
              self-organized interactions.  The project lends strong computational support to
              the idea that the visual cortex is a continuously-adapting recurrent structure,
              and that perceptual phenomena such as face recognition, illusions, and grouping
              are its emergent
              effects.
http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/nn/pages/research/selforg.html




