Title       : Globally Distributed Engineering Design Teams: Cultural, Social, and
               Technological Factors Influencing Group Process and Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9811568

Award Number: 9811568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Steinfield steinfie@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Lloyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erik D. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth David  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Hinds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to examine empirically the effects of  emerging
              computing and communications technologies on the performance of  globally
              distributed teams engaged in a specific type of collaborative  work -
              engineering design.  The primary objective is to investigate how  social and
              cultural factors shape usage and effects of collaborative tools, and in
              particular shape distributed team communication processes  and team
              performance.  Design teams comprised of engineering students  affiliated with a
              consortium of institutions in Asia, Europe and North  America, and engineers
              working with our industrial partners are provided  with collaboration tools. 
              Surveys and thorough interviews with team  members before, during and after
              project work highlight the interactions between distributed group communication
              and knowledge distribution  processes, computer-mediated communication
              supports, and cultural  factors.  The results of this research will provide new
              approaches for  using computer-based communication and collaboration tools to
              help  distributed groups overcome problems associated with extreme geographic 
              dispersion and cultural differences.  A particular application of the research
              is to improve the likelihood of success of teams comprised of  members from
              differing regions of the world who remain in their home  locations.  It thus
              has applications for international engineering  design, engineering education,
              and collaborative systems development.


http://cscw.msu.edu



