Title       : Dissertation Research: The Cold War, Position, and Gravity:The World Geodetic
               System and the Sociotechnological Evolution of Geodesy from Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9811930

Award Number: 9811930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8576               (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith C. Clarke kclarke@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project will generate the first history of modern
              geodesy to integrate materials from the recently-declassified CORONA
              reconnaissance satellite program and ancillary geodetic programs. In doing so,
              it will make a contribution to Cold War earth science and bridge the
              disciplines of history and geography.  In revealing and exploring the
              previously hidden origins and evolution of World Geodetic System (WGS), the
              project will demonstrate that the civilian, military, and intelligence
              communities were bound to each other in complex ways that reflect the impact of
              the Cold War on the processes of knowledge production.  The work necessarily
              straddles the interdisciplinary common ground between geodesy and remote
              sensing on the one hand, and the history of technology on the other, and
              borrows terminology and methodology from both.  The project will 1) analyze why
              and how the WGS was created, and by whom, and the extraordinary constraints
              imposed upon its creators by the context of the Cold War; 2) interview
              individuals involved in the process and examine the technology hardware and
              organizational structures that accomplished the created of WGS so that the
              technological ensemble is documented as far as possible; and 3) relate the
              specific case of WGS to a `shuttered box` model of the sociotechnical ensemble.
              WGS as a case study of technological development is characterized by an
              extremely tight link between classified military and parallel civilian
              technologies, where flows to the latter resulted in unanticipated increasing
              returns that made further dual use and even declassification possible. 
              Research methods include an examination of now declassified archives and
              primary and secondary sources, interviews with WGS scientists, and revisting
              previous descriptions of WGS to examine both how the work was really
              accomplished, and also how the accomplishment was disguised.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
