Title       : SGER: Exploratory Techniques for the Study of Parrot Behavioral Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9811611

Award Number: 9811611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31811              (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene M. Pepperberg impepper@media.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT    Proposal Number:  9811611      PI:  Pepperberg, Irene
              M.      Humphrey (1976) proposed that intelligence derives from  selection
              processes favoring animals that remember and act  upon knowledge of detailed
              social relations among group  members, i.e. complicated social systems and long
              lives  correlate with intelligence.  Tests of this idea have  concentrated on
              primates.  This project extends studies to  birds. Comparing social species and
              their ecological and  social selective pressures will provide insight into the 
              evolution of cognition and complex communication systems.  Grey parrots
              Psittacus erithacus are ideal subjects; they  are among the very few avian
              species for which sufficient  cognitive and communicative laboratory data
              exist.  This  project will provide behavioral data from nature to test 
              Humphrey's hypothesis.  The objectives are to: (1) combine  conventional
              observations (including video and audio  recordings) and VHF radio-tracking
              with novel techniques  using Global Positioning System data; and (2) apply
              these  techniques to determine Grey parrot ranging patterns, social 
              organization, and vocal behavior to address hypotheses about  ecological
              explanations for cognitive abilities Greys  exhibit in the laboratory, the role
              of sociality in the  evolution of intelligence, and processes resulting in
              vocal  variation in birds.      This project will impact animal research
              technologies with  the development of hybrid GPS/VHF tracking.  Results will 
              benefit conservation efforts, and shed light on the  evolution of intelligence
              across diverse species and provide  insights concerning vocal learning in
              birds.
