Title       : LTREB, Community Ecology on Rocky Shores: Long-Term Research in the Subtidal
               Zone (Massachusetts, 1978 - 2003)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1998  
File        : a9811576

Award Number: 9811576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Sebens ks95@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9811576
Sebens

Rocky subtidal communities at three sites in Northern
              Massachusetts have now been under continuous study for up to 20 years.  Methods
              include photography of marked quadrats, transects of predator abundance, and
              measurement of selected aspects of the physical environment.  Since 1978, there
              has been a dramatic increase in sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis)
              population density and a decrease in most fish populations.  Dr. Sebens and
              collaboartors have also recorded the appearance and effects of several
              non-indigenous species; the predatory nudibranch Tritonia plebeia and the
              colonial ascidian Botrylloides sp. have been the most successful, and have had
              measurable effects on indigenous assemblages.  Other non-indigenous ascidians 
              (Botryllus schlosseri, Styela clava, Diplosoma sp.) appeared only rarely at
              these sites, and have not yet developed stable local populations. Tritonia had
              a severe impact on populations of the octocoral Alcyonium siderium, which still
              have not recovered.   The removal of Alcyonium by Tritonia and the doubling of
              sea urchin population density (both during 1984-1986) caused a major decline in
              most other invertebrates on vertical rock surfaces, and an increase in the
              extent of surfaces dominated by crustose coralline algae. Horizontal surfaces
              dominated by kelp and foliose red algae during 1978--1988 were reduced to
              urchin barrens (coralline-dominated) when urchins expanded into new areas in
              1989.  Botrylloides sp. established colonies on rock walls and horizontal
              surfaces, even where urchin grazing is intense, and thus may have defenses that
              deter urchins. The synergistic effects of urchin population increase, and the
              appearance of several nonindigenous species within one decade, has caused a
              major shift in invertebrate and algal assemblages at these sites. Continued
              high urchin densities could favor urchin-resistant spatial dominants, which
              include coralline algae, sea anemones (Metridium senile), sponges (Isodictya
              spp.), and nonindigenous species such as Botrylloides sp.
               
              These studies of subtidal rock surfaces (1978-1997) in northern Massachusetts
              have produced and tested hypotheses concerning the long-term stability and
              short term regulation of community structure on rocky substrata. The previous
              research focused on the interactions among species on rock walls, on population
              biology of several of the most common species, and on the effects of water
              movement on individual, population, and community processes. 
	The present
              project is an extension of the long-term research: an experimental and
              correlative approach will be used to address the interactions among predation,
              physical effects, larval dispersal, recruitment, and the resulting impact on
              community structure. The goals of the study are to: 1) identify important
              chronic and transient processes structuring the community (physical,
              biological), 2) determine which processes have strong direct and indirect
              effects (e.g. sea urchin predation) on community structure, 3) conduct
              quantitative studies of recruitment and its effects on the community, and 4)
              incorporate these findings into a model of species coexistence and community
              structure on isolated sub-units of a landscape, using multiple dispersal
              scales. Once complete, the long-term data set will be examined statistically
              (autocorrelation, cross-correlation, other time-series analyses) to determine
              which physical processes and which predator populations are most strongly
              correlated with changes in percent cover of the common space occupiers.  	     
                                                                                             
                                                                                    This
              project continue long-term studies during 4-6 trips annually, using
              photographic, video, and direct (SCUBA) sampling (quadrat, transect) at five
              field sites along 8 km of the Massachusetts coast. 

