Title       : Inference With Contextual and Individual Level Time-Dependent Covariates in
               Event History Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1998    
File        : a9811983

Award Number: 9811983
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64218              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan A. Murphy murphy@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Social scientists use event history models in order the understand the causes of
              variation in the duration and timing of many life events such as the duration
              of poverty spells, timing of retirement, timing of premarital birth, timing of
              drug abuse initiation, etc.  An endogenous time-dependent covariate such as
              amount of governmental support and person-tailored intervention programs may be
              used to explain this variation.  Since the value of the endogenous
              time-dependent covariate may be partially determined or selected by the
              subject, it is important to adjust for confounding.  Confounding may occur when
              both the time-dependent covariate and the duration or timing are outcomes of a
              common cause.  In this case the time-dependent covariate may be associated with
              the variation in the duration or timing, yet may not cause the variation.  Yet
              in designing intervention programs or social programs it is important to
              understand the causes of the variation in duration/timing.  In order to
              ascertain the proportion of variation in duration/timing caused by
              time-dependent covariate, confounding must be controlled.  However, proper
              adjustment for confounding of the effect of a time-dependent covariate on the
              outcome needs very careful thought.  Indeed, the traditional approach of
              controlling for confounding by including the confounder in the event history
              analysis model will often only introduce more confounding.  This project will
              (1) apply an experimental perspective to questions concerning the effect of a
              time-dependent covariate on duration/timing, (2) illustrate the confounding
              issues inherent in measuring the effects of time-dependent covariates, (3)
              illustrate how confounding may be eliminated, and (4) develop research
              methodology to eliminate confounding of the effect of time-dependent contextual
              covariates on hazard rates in multilevel models.  This research is supported by
              the Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program and the Statistics and
              Probability Program under the Mid-Career Methodological Opportunities
              Fellowship Announcement.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
