Title       : SGER: A Multi-User Neutron Diffractometer: Conceptual Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1998  
File        : a9811897

Award Number: 9811897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Jane Saunders                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. White shwhite@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The  objectives  of  this project are to (1) develop  a  conceptual  design for
              a single-circle neutron diffractometer/reflectometer for  structural   studies 
              of  membrane  and  other  partially   ordered  interfacial  systems to be
              operated at Center for Neutron  Research  at   the  National  Institute  of 
              Standards  and  Technology,  (2)  determine  the cost of the construction of
              the diffractometer,  and  (3)  develop  a  plan  for the construction and 
              operation  of  the  diffractometer through a multi-agency funding mechanism. A
              Planning  Group comprised of experts in neutron diffraction and reflectometry 
              and  neutron instrumentation has been assembled to accomplish these 
              objectives.  The  funds  requested will  be  used  to  support  the  Planning 
              Group's  activities in the  pursuit  of  the  objectives.  Neutron  diffraction
              has unique capabilities for structural studies  of  diverse  biological and
              physical systems. There is presently  a  world-wide  shortage of neutron
              facilities, especially for  studies  of  membrane  and  other  interfacial
              systems.  The  only  membrane  diffractometer  in  the  United States  is 
              located  at  Brookhaven  National  Laboratory's  High Flux Beam Reactor 
              (HFBR),  which  was  recently  shut down for an indefinite period of time. Even
               if  the  HFBR  restarts in the next several years, there is  a  need  for  a 
              second  diffractometer  in  order to meet  the  rising  demand  for  neutron
              instruments as well as to assure an uninterrupted supply of  neutrons  for
              membrane structural studies. The proposed  instrument  at  NIST will be
              designed to have significantly better capabilities  than   existing  
              instruments  and  will  be  the  first   membrane  diffractometer that uses a
              cold-neutron source.
