Title       : Analyzing Variations in the Skilled-Wage Premium: Linking Microeconomic Data
               with Macroeconomic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a9811179

Award Number: 9811179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305302             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth F. Ingram beth-ingram@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George R. Neumann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9811179  Ingram    One of the most striking features of the labor market in the
              U.S. over the past two decades is the decline in the hourly wage paid to
              workers who have low levels of educational attainment. The gap between the
              average wage paid to college-educated workers and the average wage paid to
              other workers grew steadily during the 1980s and has failed to decline despite
              the rise in the level of education of workers.   The purpose of this project is
              to explore the definition and behavior of skilled and unskilled labor hours and
              wages, and to use these improved measures and macroeconomic models to assess
              the significance of alternative sources of the increased skilled-wage premium. 
                  The first part of the project involves the development of a data set that
              will improve upon the precision with which the aggregate behavior of skilled
              and unskilled labor, and the wages paid to alternative levels of skill, are
              measured. The skill level of a worker is currently measured either in terms of
              years of higher education completed or by occupational status (blue or white
              collar). Both measures suffer from ambiguity and imprecision: the former fails
              to account for heterogeneity across educational institutions and students'
              abilities; and many blue- (white-) collar jobs require high (low) skill levels.
              The investigators combine data available in the monthly Current Population
              Survey and the Dictionary of Occupational Titles to map finely stratified
              levels of verbal, analytical and strength requirements into a broad range of
              occupations; this will yield relatively precise measurements of aggregate hours
              and wages for a broad range of skill levels. Beyond providing an enhanced
              measurement of the skilled-wage premium, this will enable a detailed analysis
              of the differential returns associated with various skill attributes (e.g.,
              verbal or quantitative skills), and will give rise to an aggregate time-series
              measure of human capital which parallels existing measures of aggregate
              physical capital    The s econd part involves the specification and estimation
              of general-equilibrium models of the macroeconomy designed to enable formal
              assessments of alternative sources of the increased skilled-wage premium; the
              differential impact of business-cycle fluctuations on skilled and unskilled
              workers; and the aggregate behavior and impact of skill-acquisition activity.
              The general equilibrium approach to be employed by the investigators will
              provide an enhancement to the current approach to studying the skilled-wage
              premium taken in the macroeconomics literature, which has focused on the demand
              side of the labor market, as well as the current approach taken in the
              labor-economics literature, which has focused on the supply side of the labor
              market. The models to be analyzed are flexible, admitting many possible sources
              of the skilled-wage premium; their formal estimation, using in part the data
              constructed in the first part of the project, will provide an enhanced
              understanding of the causes and cyclical implications of the increased
              skilled-wage premium, and promises to provide guidance concerning appropriate
              policy responses.
