Title       : Coordinating Specialists: A Challenge to the Quality Transformation of
               Construction Project Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1998 
File        : a9811052

Award Number: 9811052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300098             (Estimated)
Investigator: Iris D. Tommelein tommelein@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        The coordination of specialists is a challenging management task
              especially when  they are drawn from multiple, independent companies, each of
              them performing a specialized role in an extended value chain with no a priori
              guarantees for future collaboration. Construction projects offer a challenging
              combination of product development and value  chain production problems.
              Designing and building a biotechnology laboratory, a microelectronics plant, or
              a chemical processing facility involves a chain of specialists, from the
              architects and engineers who develop the design and specifications to the
              equipment and materials suppliers and finally the numerous specialty trade
              contractors who install the equipment. Learning how to transform such complex,
              temporary organizations into quality organizations poses interesting and
              challenging difficulties and can serve as a testing ground for the development
              of concepts and techniques having a broader range of application.   This
              research focuses on conducting a series of `Plan Do Study Act` experimentation
              cycles with Industrial Design Corporation (IDC), a major design/build firm with
              projects throughout the world and an outstanding record for constructing
              microelectronics facilities. The UC Berkeley/IDC team will jointly explore
              alternative processes for specialty  contractor selection and preparation, and 
              will test alternative processes for production planning and control during
              project execution. Techniques from lean manufacturing will be adapted and
              tested in the construction industry. Discrete event simulation computer models
              will be developed to mimic industry practices and allow for further
              experimentation with alternative production control techniques. The research is
              expected to produce models for specialty contractor management that can will be
              applicable to the broader range of issues that emerge from the task of
              coordinating specialists.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
