Title       : Quantification of Remodeling Rate from Scanning Electrons Microscopic
               Examinations of Immature Bone Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9811140

Award Number: 9811140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19968              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melanie A. McCollum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Longitudinal studies of modern human and Rhesus macaque crania have revealed
              the significance of bone remodeling during growth in the establishment of the
              adult form.  From these studies has emerged the regional growth field concept,
              which indicates that craniofacial form is generated by variation in a
              combination of bone remodeling fields.  Despite considerable explanatory
              potential, the regional growth field concept has received little attention in
              evolutionary studies.  This is due in part to the absence of reliable
              techniques for characterizing the activities of remodeling fields in
              archaeological and fossil samples.   In recent years a non-destructive method
              of characterizing surface remodeling activities in archaeological and fossil
              samples has become available.  The scanning electron microscopy (SEM)/replica
              technique involves examination of high-resolution replicas of immature bone
              under the SEM in order to identify the last active remodeling state of the
              bone.  The objective of this research project is to determine if quantitative
              information about the rate of bone remodeling can be extracted reliably from
              SEM images of dry bone surfaces.  Histological studies of immature cranial bone
              indicates that the rate of surface bone deposition is quantifiable on the basis
              of the density of vascular canals present on the bone surface, while rate of
              bone resorption is believed to be represented by the size of resorption 'pits'
              on the bone surface.  These surface bone features are visible and scorable
              under the SEM.  Rates of bone remodeling activity will be quantified using this
              approach along the nasal and oral surfaces of the bony palate of immature chimp
              crania.  If the SEM/replica technique proves capable of providing information
              on remodeling rate, it will have important implications in determining
              inter-specific variation in adult form, both in contemporary species, and in
              the fossil record.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
