Title       : An Archival Digital Libraries Repository
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9811992

Award Number: 9811992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $619980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector Garcia-Molina hector@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               More and more human knowledge is being stored electronically, in the form of
              files, databases and Web pages. Unfortunately, most data stores are not
              designed for preserving information over very long periods of time, as
              technologies and organizations evolve. Furthermore, the information is often
              stored in an un-coordinated and un-integrated fashion. This can lead to the
              loss of important components of the intellectual record. The goal of this
              project is to design and implement a modern, scalable digital library
              repository (DLR). The DLR offers its clients a variety of services for managing
              intellectual property, for safeguarding information, for payment of royalties,
              for accounting, and for importing information from other sources. The DLR
              employs a scalable and distributed architecture (ranging from tens to thousands
              of gigabytes, and tens to hundreds of sites); allows autonomous organizations
              to collaborate in setting up a shared repository; and preserves documents for
              hundreds of years or more. Research topics currently addressed include the
              identification of digital objects in a distributed and changing environment;
              the replication of digital objects for archiving; the management of metadata;
              distributed indexing mechanisms; and robust and scalable awareness schemes.
              This research will yield insights into the options available for repositories,
              and their associated performance, cost, functionality, and usability. The
              results may impact the ways libraries and organizations store and organize
              digital information in the future, leading to repositories where information of
              different types is better structured, managed in accordance to intellectual
              property laws, and available for future generations.
              
http://www-db.stanford.edu/archivalrep/

