Title       : U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Late Cretaceous Paleoecology of Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9811030

Award Number: 9811030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21060              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerta Keller gkeller@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9811030
Keller

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor Gerta Keller of the Department of Geosciences at Princeton
              University in Princeton, New Jersey and Professors Hassan El-Amin Mohamed and
              Abdel-Aziz A. Tantawy of the Geology Department at South valley University in
              Aswan, Egypt.  The two sides plan to study the rocks originally deposited in
              the Cretaceous Tethyan seaway and later exposed throughout Egypt.   The study
              can provide insight into the paleoecology, climate and sea level fluctuations,
              the biotic changes and attendant mineral and organic-rich deposits.  The main
              objective is to investigate these aspects of the late Cretaceous
              paleoenvironment based on an integrated multi-disciplinary study that includes
              a wide array of modern methods from paleontology, geology, mineralogy and
              geochemistry.  The results are expected to yield critical insights into late
              Cretaceous climate changes, sea level fluctuations and the progressive terminal
              decrease in biotic diversity that ultimately led to the mass extinction of the
              Cretaceous fauna 65 million years ago.

Scope:  This award will allow
              collaboration between an eminent US geologist with extensive research
              experience in the study of the Cretaceous period in North Africa and an active
              group at a new Egyptian University.   The Egyptian team has experience in
              studies in this field in Egypt in collaboration with geologists from Germany
              and Switzerland, and would be able to contribute significantly to this effort.
              This proposal meets the INT objective of increasing US-foreign collaboration in
              areas that benefit both sides.   This project is being supported under the
              US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
              in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities. 
