Title       : Dissertation Research: Conceptions of Gender-Based Harassment in France and the
               United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9811194

Award Number: 9811194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele Lamont mlamont@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Guided by theories from several subfields of sociology including the sociology
              of culture, social problems, and social movement framing analysis, this
              doctoral dissertation research project will examine the dramatic differences in
              the way "sexual harassment" is defined in France and the United States. It asks
              four central questions: 1) What are the major differences between sexual
              harassment definitions in each country? 2) How can such international variation
              be explained? 3) How is sexual harassment defined differently across distinct
              levels of discourse, e.g. law, media, corporations, and social movements? 4)
              How can such intra-national variation be explained? To answer these questions,
              multiple several types of data analysis will be performed, including content
              analysis of legal statutes, jurisprudence, internal regulation, and media
              reports. The study further draws on 58 in-depth interviews with a series of
              sexual harassment "specialists," or people who play an important role in
              defining this issue in the public realm: lawyers, activists, public figures,
              human resource personnel and union activists. Interviews will determine how
              respondents conceptualize sexual harassment. The study should also contribute
              to theory-building in cultural sociology, comparative sociology and sociology
              of gender. It should improve understanding of how civil rights and legal wrongs
              are collectively determined. Its cross-national project design will facilitate
              new insights regarding the role national legal systems, political structures,
              social history and cultural expectations play in this process. 
