Title       : Dissertation Research: The Field Naturalist Tradition and the Emergence of
               American Animal Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1998      
File        : a9811355

Award Number: 9811355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8066               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally G. Kohlstedt sgk@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project will focus on the development and
              transformation of the American tradition of field natural history, particularly
              field zoology, between the middle of the nineteenth century and the early
              1920's.  This tradition, originated by the systematic and biogeographical work
              of Louis Agassiz and Spencer F. Baird, emerged in the context of federal
              surveys after the early 1850's.  It found its institutional support in
              connection to the U.S. National Museum and several agencies that funded
              scientific research of relevance to the survey and management of natural
              resources: the U.S. Fish Commission, the Bureau of the Biological Survey, and
              several state natural history surveys established in the American Midwest. 
              This study will argue that during the last decades of the nineteenth century
              and the early decades of the twentieth this tradition of field zoology
              underwent a transformation as a result of - and in reaction to - institutional
              developments, epistemological challenges, and utilitarian concerns.   Focusing
              on the interplay between biogeographical interests and utilitarian concerns,
              and paying attention to the institutional and generational dimensions of that
              interplay, the research will improve our understanding of several issues that
              have concerned historians of biology in America.  It will balance the emphasis
              heretofore put by historians on the morphological tradition of post-Darwinian
              biology and its experimental transformation with attention to the studies of
              adaptation and geographical distribution during the second half of the
              nineteenth century.  It will also complete our views of the emergence of
              ecology in America, showing that many animal ecologists did not merely mimic
              their botanical counterparts, extending experimental methodologies into field
              study. They borrowed from their own tradition of observational natural history,
              particularly from the body of information of animals' habits and life histories
              put together by naturalists interested in the management of natural resources. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
