Title       : Team, Individual, and Organizational Learning from Experience in Two High-Hazard
               Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a9811451

Award Number: 9811451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ann H. Bostrom                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105955             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Carroll JCarroll@MIT.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Carroll  High-hazard industries such as nuclear power and chemical process
              plants need to learn and improve without sole reliance on trial-and-error,
              because serious accidents are too costly and dangerous.  These industries
              already place considerable attention and resources on learning from operating
              experience, including exchange of best practices, peer reviews, and
              self-assessment.  Yet there are frequent failures to improve or to sustain
              improvement, either because problems are misunderstood, or because change is
              not implemented effectively.  This research project focuses on developing a
              data base of several dozen incident review teams in four nuclear power plants
              and two chemical plants.  These teams are composed of representatives from
              multiple groups such as operations, maintenance, and engineering, immediately
              following discovery of a serious problem or performance trend.  Such team
              efforts are reserved for the most important and complex concerns each year. 
              Each team is responsible for gathering and analyzing information and then
              making recommendations for changes in plant equipment, procedures, training,
              organization, and so forth.  Using a series of questionnaires from team members
              and managers who are the sponsors or recipients of reports, and direct
              observation of teams in action, we address several interrelated issues at the
              group, individual, and organizational levels.  At the group level, we would
              like to understand how to put the right expertise and cognitive abilities
              together in order to produce a more effective report and more learning among
              the team members that is diffused across the plant after the team has completed
              its work.  At the individual level, we would like to understand how
              participation on an incident review team makes the team members more thoughtful
              about their own and others' work, and more complex in their thinking.  At the
              organizational level, the issue is how plant improvement depends upon the
              nature of the team report and its reception by management and plant employees. 
              We hope to develop new theories and practical information for management of
              high-hazard industries.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
