Title       : Response of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet to Middle Miocene Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a9811877

Award Number: 9811877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Marchant marchant@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 
Marchant OPP-9811877
This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology
              and Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports research to
              determine the response of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet to global climate
              change. One of the largest global climate shifts occurred between about 15.6
              and 12.5 million years ago (Middle Miocene time). During this time, dramatic
              global cooling and reorganization of ocean circulation patterns were recorded
              as a shift in the isotopic composition of oxygen in the oceans. This dramatic
              and permanent shift set the stage for modern oceanic and atmospheric
              circulation and ushered in the bipolar ice ages that have dominated climate
              records for the last 2.5 million years. How did Antarctica respond to the great
              climate shift at about 14 million years ago? Did growth of the Antarctic Ice
              Sheet in fact initiate this shift? If so, how will future fluctuations in the
              volume of East Antarctic ice influence atmospheric and oceanic
              circulation?

The recent (and unexpected) breakthrough in Antarctic geology
              that now allows us to address the fundamental problem of middle Miocene global
              climate change and ice sheet evolution is the discovery of Miocene-age volcanic
              ashes that are interbedded with surficial sediments in southern Victoria Land.
              For the first time, it is now possible to generate precise climate and
              glaciological reconstructions from direct examination of unambiguous,
              Miocene-age terrestrial deposits on the Antarctic continent. As the only place
              in Antarctica where pristine Miocene-age unconsolidated deposits are preserved
              at the ground surface, southern Victoria Land is unrivaled as a storehouse of
              Miocene glacial-geologic data. Key questions that now can be addressed include;
              What contributing factors on Antarctica led to abrupt global cooling at about
              14 million years ago? Does the middle Miocene shift in the isotopic composition
              of the oceans signify a major expansion of East Antarctic ice? Or, does the
              isotopic shift instead reflect a change in ocean temperature or circulation? A
              related question is when did hyper-arid, cold polar-desert conditions
              (signifying the development of a polar East Antarctic ice sheet) first evolve
              in Antarctica?

Precise chronological control will be based on 50
              laser-fusion isotopic analyses of in-situ volcanic ashes and 20 cosmogenic
              exposure-age analyses of ancient deposits. A coeval record of Miocene
              paleoclimate will come from textural changes in alpine drifts, the areal
              distribution of ice-marginal lakes, the abundance of dated patterned ground and
              ventifact pavements, and the geochemistry of buried soils and volcanic-ash
              deposits.


