Title       : U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Fatty Acid Flotation of Calcareous Phosphate
               Rock by Enzyme Oxidation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9811004

Award Number: 9811004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan D. Miller jdmiller@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9811004
Miller

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor Jan Miller of the Department of Metallurgical Engineering
              at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, Utah and Dr. Ahmed Yehia of the
              Mineral Technology Department at the Central Metallurgical Research and
              Development Institute in Cairo, Egypt.  The two scientists will study flotation
              mechanisms and technologies with the goal of improving phosphate rock flotation
              strategy.  Experiments will include bench scale flotation, enzyme catalysis,
              flotation of phosphate fines, column flotation, air-sparged hydrocyclone
              flotation systems, and immobilized enzyme utilization.  Fundamental studies
              will include adsorption measurements of enzyme at the surface of mineral,
              surface characterization of ore conditioned in fatty acids and enzyme solution,
              evaluation of the hydrophobic character of autoxidized surface.

Scope:  This
              award will allow collaboration between a well known US metallurgist with
              extensive experience in the study of material processing and an active group at
              Egypt's main governmental center of metallurgical research.   The benefit of
              this research would be significant to phosphate producing countries including
              the United States, Egypt and several other countries in the Middle East. 
              Especially important is the benefit to producers using relatively low-grade ore
              as in Egypt, and those who need to obtain the maximum product from the same
              grade of ore.  This proposal meets the INT objective of increasing US-foreign
              collaboration in areas that benefit both sides.   This project is being
              supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
              scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
              activities. 

