Title       : Evolution of a Mitochondrial Gene and its Intron in Parasitic and Nonparasitic
               Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a9811362

Award Number: 9811362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claude W. dePamphilis cwd3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9811362  dePamphilis      Support is requested to study the history of a Group I
              intron found at an  identical location in the mitochondrial gene cytochrome
              oxidase I (coxI) of  diverse flowering plants.  The intron is homologous with
              and has key  structural elements of a well-studied infectious intron in fungi. 
              The  intron occurs in numerous unrelated lineages of flowering plants, while 
              being absent from the vast majority of flowering plants examined.  
              Surprisingly, the intron is particularly concentrated in parasitic plants, 
              which have intimate symbiotic associations with other plants and fungi.   This
              pattern, and features of the biology of parasitic plants, suggests the 
              possibility that some parasitic plants are capable of incorporation of  foreign
              DNA sequences and/or may have played a role as an intron source in  genetic
              transfers to host lineages.  The proposed research will test 
              biologically-based hypotheses that may explain the presence and movement of 
              the coxI intron among plant lineages.  The data collected will define the 
              precise distribution of the intron across parasitic and nonparasitic plant 
              groups, the genic and cellular location of the sequences, and phylogenetic 
              comparisons of coxI intron and exon sequences.  A second mitochondrial  gene,
              atpA, will also be examined, to improve the phylogenetic resolution  and
              reliability of the coxI exon (ie., plant mitochondrial) history.      This
              research will represent the first comprehensive analysis of a plant 
              mitochondrial gene and its intron; the results will have important 
              implications for our understanding of organelle genetics, mobile genetic 
              elements, and fundamental problems of molecular evolution and systematics.   
              In addition, the broader significance of this project to society includes:  1)
              Training of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral scientists; 2)  Potential
              for the identification of invasive genetic elements in plant  organelle
              sequences, 3) Development of phylogenetic approaches to the study  of intr ons
              that may have broader application to understanding other  invasive elements in
              biology, agriculature, and medicine; 4) Contributing  to an understanding of
              parasitic plants, which could aid efforts to control  harmful parasitic weeds
              in agriculture.
