Title       : Monte Carlo Analysis: A New Paradigm not Requiring Apriori Probability
               Distributions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a9811051

Award Number: 9811051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188300             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Ross Barmish barmish@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9811051
Barmish
This is a proposal to set up a three year research
              project. The motivation for this proposal is derived from the recent results in
              the newly emergent area of Probabilistic Robustness. It is felt that a
              successful project would have an impact on many fields which rely on Monte
              Carlo simulation, The critical point distinguishing this proposed research from
              existing literature is as follows: Unlike classical Monte Carlo simulation, the
              new approach being considered requires almost no apriori information about the
              probability distribution for the uncertain parameters. In this new framework,
              the given data is exactly the same as in classical robustness theory with real
              parametric uncertainty; i.e., only a mathematical input-output model and upper
              and lower bounds for each uncertain parameter are assumed. This raises the
              following questions: What probability distribution makes sense to use in a
              Monte Carlo context? Is there a meaning way to 'prograrn" the random number
              generator for Monte Carlo simulation when no probability distribution is
              available? In the body of the proposal, these questions are examined in greater
              detail and the proposed research aimed at their resolution.

Preliminary
              results motivating the proposed research suggest that sampling of uncertainty
              should often be carried out in a way which is quite different from classical
              Monte Carlo schemes. For example, in the body, a case study involving a 2-stage
              amplifier is described. The sampling distribution turns out to require
              truncation of the probability distribution for the two uncertain capacitors.
              Such a distribution is not one which would normally be used in a Monte Carlo
              circuit analysis. The end result is that a prediction of the 'probability of
              successful operation" using a traditional Monte Carlo scheme is subjected to
              challenge. One of the main objectives of the research is to demonstrate
              applicability of the new ideas to many application areas and compare 'old style
              Monte Carlo" results with the results obtained using the new approach. It is
              felt that classical Monte Carlo analysis often leads to predictions which are
              unduly optimistic.

This situation (the availability of bounds but no
              statistics) is quite typical in the Systems Science area when one approaches a
              problem in a robustness context or via interval analysis methods. In summary,
              the proposed research concentrates on problems for which a reliable probability
              distribution is unavailable. Whereas Monte Carlo theory assumes a distribution
              as input to the theory, the proposed work involves finding the 'appropriate"
              distribution as the output of the theory; i.e., the theory first determines the
              appropriate distribution, and, only then is computer simulation carried
              out.

The starting point for the proposed research is a new type of paradigm
              to describe uncertainty - developed by the Principal Investigator in
              collaboration with his graduate student. Consistent with the example above,
              this new paradigm requires only apriori bounds on the percentage errors for the
              random variables. The only other assumption required is that large deviations
              from the mean are less probable than small deviations.  
***  

