Title       : Iron Limitation and the Silicate Pump in the California and Peru Coastal
               Upwelling Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a9811062

Award Number: 9811062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Hutchins dahutch@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This study will examine a novel concept: phytoplankton iron limitation in 
              coastal upwelling regimes. Recent work by Dr. K. Bruland shows that in  parts
              of the central California upwelling region, a narrow continental  shelf and low
              freshwater inputs can result in euphotic zone dissolved Fe  levels of <0.1 nM.
              These concentrations approach the very low levels found  in the oceanic High
              Nutrient Low Chlorophyll (HNLC) regimes.  Preliminary  biological data
              demonstrate that as in open ocean HNLC areas, Fe additions  along the Big Sur
              coast of California increase phytoplankton growth rates,  promote the dominance
              of large diatoms and allow nitrate depletion.  However, Fe availability has
              much less effect on silicic acid drawdown.  Silicic acid to nitrate (Si:N)
              drawdown in no-Fe control bottles occurs at  molar ratios of >2, but occurs at
              the normal nutrient-replete diatom ratio  of about one in +Fe treatments. These
              results suggest that Fe-stressed  diatoms will deplete Si from the water before
              N, and Fe limitation thus  appears to be a major driving force behind the
              `silicate pump`.  Drs. Ken  Bruland and D. Hutchins will return to the
              California area in 1999 to carry  out joint chemical/biological investigations
              of Fe limitation and it's  effects in Si:N utilization ratios. Dr. Bruland will
              measure Fe and  nutrient concentrations throughout the region (accompanying
              study). Dr.  Hutchins' group will use coordinated shipboard incubation
              experiments to  look at the biological and biogeochemical effects of Fe
              addition.  The Peru  upwelling has all of the characteristics that are
              associated with  Fe-limited areas off California- a very narrow shelf, low
              riverine inputs,  frequent HNLC conditions and very high Si:N drawdown ratios.
              However, the  potential for Fe limitation in the Peru coastal upwelling system
              has never  been tested using modern clean techniques.  Our Peru upwelling
              cruise in  2000 will emphasize broad regional coverage of the effects of Fe 
              availability on phytoplankton growth and Si:N drawdown ratios.  The  ultimate
              impact of this project may be to force a re-evaluation of our  entire picture
              of nutrient biogeochemistry in both the California and Peru  coastal upwelling
              regimes.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
