Title       : CAREER: Charge-Transfer-to-Solvent Transitions: Experimentaland Theoretical
               Studies of the Simplest Charge Transfer Reaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a9733218

Award Number: 9733218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin J. Schwartz Schwartz@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Benjamin J. Schwartz   of
              the University of California in Los Angeles in his transient   absorption
              studies of solvent effects on chemical reaction dynamics.    Prof. Schwartz
              will carry out femtosecond experiments in order to examine   the dynamics
              following excitation of the charge-transfer-to-solvent   states (CTTS) of
              solvated halide anions.  These experiments will test the   predictions of
              quantum non-adiabatic molecular dynamics simulations, thus   providing detailed
              information about the role of the solvent in this   simplest of charge transfer
              reactions.  Parallel experiments and   simulations studying the CTTS
              transitions of novel solvated alkali metal   anions will provide further
              insight into the role of the solute   electronic structure in controlling
              charge transfer reactions.  The goal   of these studies is to identify the
              solvent motions responsible for both   the solvation and non-radiative
              relaxation of solute electronic excited   states in solution.  The results will
              help to provide a complete   molecular picture of how the interplay between
              solvation dynamics and   non-adiabatic relaxation controls chemical reactivity
              in solution.  The   education plan of this CAREER award emphasizes the
              strengthening of   critical thinking skills in students.  In addition, a new
              curriculum   focusing on condensed-phase physical chemistry will be introduced.
                 The science targeted in these studies, electron transfer and solvent  
              reactions, is fundamental in the area of chemical dynamics, and the novel  
              combined theoretical and experimental tools that will be brought to bear   will
              provide unprecedented detail and scrutiny.  Given the ubiquity of   these
              processes in nature and in all condensed phase processes, these   studies will
              have far reaching implications.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
