Title       : CAREER: Studies in Hadronic Structure and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a9733343

Award Number: 9733343
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose L. Goity goity@jlab.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampton University
	      
	      Hampton, VA  23668    804/727-5000

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research and education projects will be  carried out under the
              support of a CAREER award for a period  of five years.       The research
              component is aimed at the theoretical  study of hadronic structure and dynamics
              at low and  intermediate energies.  In these domains of energy the  fundamental
              theory of the strong interactions Quantum  Chromodynamics (QCD) is in a
              non-perturbative regime making  the use of effective theories necessary.  Among
              the  effective theories to be utilized are Chiral Perturbation  Theory (ChPT),
              the 1/N expansion in QCD, and in some cases  dispersion relations.  The topics
              of research include: a)  low and intermediate energy spin structure of the
              nucleon,  in particular the study of the generalized Gerasimov-Drell-  Hearn
              sum rule that will be tested experimentally at TJNAF;  b) tests of chiral
              symmetry and applications of ChPT to  mesons and baryons (K-meson decays,
              Goldberger-Treiman  discrepancy, weak decays of baryons, decays of heavy mesons
               involving emission of low energy pions or K mesons, etc.);  c) studies
              involving the expansion in the inverse of the  number of colors in QCD (1/N
              expansion), in particular  applications to (excited) baryons with the aim at 
              understanding more clearly the pattern of masses, mixings  and decay widths; d)
              further study possible improvements to  the mentioned effective theory methods.
               The research  component addresses topics of high current experimental 
              significance at facilities such as TJNAF, and close contact  and collaboration
              with experimentalists at TJNAF will be  pursued.       The education component
              is aimed at improving the  teaching of graduate courses in Physics. In
              particular, the  improvement of material presentation in the class through  the
              use of computers.  Computers will be used to present  graphical demonstrations
              in class with the aim at enhancing  the intuitive understanding of the subject
              discussed.  Material for use in such demonstrations will be developed  first in
              a Quantum Theory course  and later in others, and  efforts will be made to make
              such material widely available  to other teachers.  Students will be encouraged
              to actively  participate in this initiative. The impact of this education 
              component is expected to be very significant in the further  development of the
              young Ph.D. program in Physics at Hampton  University.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
