Title       : CAREER: Enhancing Education Through Research Experiences, and Investigations of
               Gene Functions in Archaea at Extremely High Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9733303

Award Number: 9733303
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $469585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis W. Grogan dennis.grogan@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9733303  Grogan    The career plan combines teaching activities and basic
              research in ways designed to stimulate both scientific training and scientific
              discovery.   Teaching objectives.  The teaching activities seek to i) enhance
              the role of basic research in an existing undergraduate biology curriculum, ii)
              use participation in basic reseat to enhance the education of pre-college
              teachers, iii) better utilize experimental study of micro-organisms in teaching
              basic concepts of biology, and iv) equip graduate students with the basic
              skills and knowledge needed to pursue research in cellular, molecular, or
              prokaryotic biology.   Teaching methods.  New courses will be developed for the
              Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cincinnati.  The first will be
              a novel summer course in which local teachers and undergraduate students will
              work in teams to isolate unusual micro-organisms found in extreme environments.
               These micro-organisms will be characterized biochemically to demonstrate their
              diversity and biotechnological potential.  The second will be a regular
              laboratory course in the academic year; this course will give graduate students
              and advanced undergraduates practical experience in bacterial genetics. 
              Finally, two team-taught, graduate-level courses (one in microbiology and one
              in molecular biology) will be developed in collaboration with other faculty
              members in the Department.   Teaching significance.  Educators recognized a
              need for undergraduate students and science teachers to participate in true
              experimental science in addition to prepared laboratory exercises.  Summer
              courses offered at urban universities could provide access to special research
              experiences that would meet this need.  Basic research on micro-organisms,
              particularly those found in extreme environments, open up novel and interesting
              research opportunities in which a wide spectrum of students can productively
              participate.   Research objectives.  The research projects study aspects of
              cell division, genetic e xchange, mutation, and DNA repair at extremely high
              temperatures in Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, an archaeon from geothermal
              environments.   Research methods.  Genetic approaches are emphasized.  They
              include characterization of conditional-lethal mutants with defects cell
              division, and measurement of the effects of DNA damage on mutation and on a
              mechanism of natural genetic exchange.  Longer-term projects will seek to
              develop and improve molecular-cloning methods for thermophilic archaea and
              isolate new mutants of S. acidocaldarius defective in aspects of DNA repair.  
              Research significance.  The study of prokaryotes in geothermal environments has
              raised many fundamental questions relating to biodiversity and biotechnology,
              including the scope of evolutionary divergence represented by the Archaea, and
              how the proteins and nucleic acids of thermophilic archaea function under
              conditions that denature the corresponding molecules of well studied
              micro-organisms.  Genetic approaches that allow gene function to be monitored
              in vivo have not been used to address these questions.  Progress from the
              applicant's prior research now makes it feasible to investigate cell division,
              genetic exchange and recombination, mutation, and DNA repair in vivo at
              temperatures of about 80o C.  These molecular processes are important for the
              genetics of micro-organisms generally, and may have special importance for the
              survival and propagation of thermophilic archaea in extremely harsh conditions.
                Integration.  The unique micro-organisms and genetic elements that may be
              isolated by summer course participants will provide researchers with valuable
              new material with which to study thermophilic archaea at the molecular level. 
              At the same time, science teachers, biology majors and graduate students will
              learn the nature of scientific knowledge, useful laboratory techniques, and
              scientific problem-solving skills by conducting research on thermophilic
              archaea.
