Title       : CAREER: Modeling, Dynamical Analysis, and Control of Microcantilever Based
               Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a9733802

Award Number: 9733802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murti Salapaka murti@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9733802
Salapaka
Micro-cantilevers have revolutionized microscopy in the past
              decade.  Ingenious ways of using them have been deviced to probe and manipulate
              material at very small scale.  Research made possible by such structures is the
              reason for numerous articles in reputed journals such as Science and Nature. 
              They have found widespread use in diverse areas such as biology (DNA strands
              have been manipulated using micro-cantilevers) and semiconductor processing. 
              Some of the recent research which utilize micro-cantilevers are in the areas of
              nano-machining and electron spin detection.

Inspite of the importance of
              control design for such systems, a systematic study of the role of controllers
              has been neglected.  The proposed project will perform such a study where the
              primary objective is to obtain control-oriented models for micro-cantilever
              based devices, and the utilization of such models to design and implement
              controllers.  Based on such models a methodology to assess the limits of
              performance of such a device will be developed.  Initial research has indicated
              that vast advances can be made by such a study.

For effective design of
              controllers for such systems a good understanding of the underlying physical
              principles is required.  There are novel phenomena which affect the performance
              adversely but can aid the sign process.  As an example, thermal noise in
              systems utilizing micro-cantilevers can be the limiting factor in the
              achievable performance.  However, using thermal noise, nominal model and bounds
              on modeling errrors can be obtained in a straightforward manner.  Such
              phenomena will be studied and exploited for modeling.

Ongoing research has
              indicated that complex behavior is possible in the cantilever-sample dynamics. 
              Control design can play an important role in stabilizing desirable behavior
              that exist amidst the complex dynamics.  Increased speeds of operation and
              better resolutions are the important benefits of such a design, which will be
              pursued under this project.  Also, with increasing miniaturization the
              quantum-mechanical effects in the micro-cantilever start to become relevant and
              a need to control such effects becomes important.

Uncertainty in any model
              for a cantilever based device is unavoidable.  One of the reasons for such
              uncertainty is that the cantilever dynamics is determined by the material being
              probed by the cantilever.  Moreover, some disturbances present in such devices
              are characterized in a stochastic framework while others are described in a
              deterministic, time-domain setting.  Thus controllers which can handle
              performance specifications with respect to such disturbances in the presence of
              uncertainty can be particularly valuable.  The study of better techniques,
              software development and implementation of such controllers in a device which
              employs a micro-cantilever is proposed.

A course which educates the student
              in modeling, validation and implementation issues of design will be developed. 
              This course will comprise of an appropriate combination of theory and
              experiment.  Aspects relevant to micro-cantilever based devices will also be
              incorporated.  Lectures to be given by entrepreneurs will highlight the
              financial issues to be considered for the success of a project.  In another
              course, recent methodologies of
controller design which rely on convexity
              theory will be presented.  This course will unify most of the convex analysis
              techniques that are being utilized in the design of contollers.  Efficient
              computational tools to design such controllers will be given.  
***  

