Title       : CAREER: Interaction Between Cell Division Proteins during the Caulobacter Cell
               Cycle.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2001     
File        : a9733958

Award Number: 9733958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377294             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yves V. Brun   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Brun  Cell division is a complex process that involves many proteins whose
              action must be coordinated with the DNA replication cycle. It is clear that an
              understanding of the timing of assembly of the different components of the
              division machinery and how and when the different components interact will be
              required to explain how division is controlled and how it is coordinated with
              the DNA replication cycle. This research will specifically examine the function
              of FtsA and its interaction with FtsZ. FtsZ is a tubulin-like GTPase that
              regulates the decision of when and where to divide. FtsZ is a highly conserved
              protein that polymerizes into a ring structure associated with the cytoplasmic
              membrane at the site of cell division. FtsZ recruits other cell division
              proteins to the site of cell division and may constrict, providing mechanical
              force for division. FtsA is localized to the division site in a FtsZ-dependent
              manner. FtsA is not required for the initiation of cytokinesis but is required
              for completion of cytokinesis. The long-term goal of this project is to
              understand the function of cell division proteins and to build a picture of
              protein-protein interactions in the cell division machinery as they occur
              during the cell cycle. This work will be performed in Caulobacter crescentus
              where each cell division gives rise to two morphologically and functionally
              different progeny cells: a motile swarmer cell and a sessile stalked cell.
              Caulobacter cells can be easily synchronized and specific morphological changes
              during the differentiation pathway provide a convenient indication of the stage
              of the cell cycle. Because there is only one DNA replication cycle per
              developmental cycle, events can be unambiguously assigned to a specific stage
              of the cell cycle. FtsZ and FtsA have been identified in Caulobacter and
              genetic interaction between the two proteins has already been established using
              the yeast two-hybrid system. The effect of mutations in different regions of
              FtsA will be analyzed to gain a bet ter understanding of its function and the
              domains that contribute to it. The domains of interaction between FtsZ and FtsA
              will be defined using the yeast two-hybrid system and fusions to glutathlone
              S-transferase. The localization of FtsA and FtsZ and their interaction will be
              analyzed during the cell cycle using immunofluorescence and in vivo
              cross-linking. This will allow a determination of the timing of the
              localization and the interaction of these two important cell division proteins
              within one cell cycle and its correlation with the stage of chromosome
              replication and the timing of nucleoid segregation. The mechanisms of cell
              division constitute one of the most fundamental problems in microbiology. This
              investigation will lead to a better understanding of cell division and will
              allow a picture of protein-protein interactions in the cell division machinery
              as they occur during the cell cycle to be established. A better understanding
              of the mechanisms of cell division will help the development of novel drug
              targets. The research will be done both in a research laboratory by senior
              investigators and in a new Independent Research in Molecular and Genetics
              course that will provide much needed independent research opportunities for a
              large number of undergraduate students. Students will learn about the different
              stages and aspects of scientific investigation by performing research on cell
              division and cell differentiation in Caulobacter and in sessions on critical
              analysis of the literature, scientific writing, oral presentation, and research
              ethics.
