Title       : CAREER: Dendritic Approach to Career-Development: Dendrimers, Multidisciplinary
               Courses, and Girl Scouts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2000   
File        : a9733853

Award Number: 9733853
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheryl A. Tucker TuckerS@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the  
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on the   spectrofluorometric
              study of chemistry involving novel macromolecular   media, dendrimers. 
              Dendrimers are highly-branched, three-dimensional   polymers whose structures
              include cavity microvolumes which are being   investigated for use in areas
              such as chemical separations and drug   delivery.  Professor Tucker and her
              students will use a variety of   optical probes to study structure-function
              relationships in a   systematically varying family of dendrimers proposed for
              use in   separations applications.  This CAREER project includes the
              development   of a course entitled `Interviewing and Job Skills for Success in
              the   Sciences`.  Professor Tucker will also conduct weekend workshops for Girl
                Scouts entitled `The Magic of Chemistry`.  There is a great deal of interest
              in the development of novel chemical   compounds which effectively act to
              encapsulate other ions or molecules to   transport them into and out of target
              systems.  One such group of   compounds is the dendrimers.  Dendrimers are
              three-dimensional polymers   which are being evaluated intensely for use in
              chemical separations and   in drug delivery applications.  Professor Tucker and
              her students will   study the chemistry of dendrimers using optical
              spectroscopy to probe   structure-function relationships.  Graduate and
              undergraduate students   will gain insights through a course devoted to
              interviewing and job   skills in the scientific workplace.  Girl Scouts will be
              exposed to the   `The Magic of Chemistry` in an effort to bridge the science
              gender gap.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
