Title       : CAREER: Solid State Chemistry of Unusual Zintl Phases and Polar Intermetallics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2001     
File        : a9733587

Award Number: 9733587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold M. Guloy aguloy@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9178,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9733587  Guloy    The research component of this proposal aims to investigate
              ways  to tune the electronic structure and properties of Zintl phases  and
              layered intermetallic oxides.  The research plan outlines  unique strategies
              to:  1) apply and assess the Zintl concept and  its limits to the synthesis of
              `electron-deficient' Zintl phases  - a new class of inorganic pi-systems; 2)
              design and synthesize  new complex layered intermetallic-oxide intergrowth
              structures by  using layered intermetallic and oxide structures in a rational 
              building-block-multilayer approach.  Since unique structures and  properties
              are already apparent in normal Zintl phases and polar  intermetallics, it is
              anticipated that exploratory synthesis and  characterization will produce
              unusual crystal chemistry and novel  physical properties.  These unusual
              materials represent a  promising class of electronic and magnetic materials
              with  potential properties ranging from semiconductors,  thermoelectrics,
              superconductors and giant magnetoresistance.  The general aim of this research
              is to establish  useful structure(chemical bonding)-property  relationships and
              to improve our chemical  understanding of the region between metals and 
              nonmetals.  The educational plan of this proposal  includes the development of
              courses in graduate and  undergraduate levels that will emphasize the 
              importance of materials chemistry, inorganic solid  state chemistry, and
              descriptive chemistry of the  elements. Undergraduate and graduate training
              will be  supplemented by collaborative activities with other  educational
              institutions and industrial research  groups.  %%%  The challenge to synthesize
              new materials and  understand, control and predict the structures and 
              properties of solids continues to fuel the search for  new technological
              materials of relevance to the  industrial sector.  The discovery of new classes
              of  materials such as the Zintl compounds, together with  a deeper
              understanding of their diverse properties,  and the impact of  their
              development and application  forms the basis for undergraduate eductaion 
              activities being developed in this cutting-edge area  of solidstate chemistry
              and materials science.  ***
