Title       : CAREER: Querying Information Sources Across The Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a9733880

Award Number: 9733880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299984             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis Gravano gravano@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to help users find the information that
              they need over the Internet. Unfortunately, Internet information sources vary
              widely in the types of information and access interfaces they provide.
              Furthermore, the number of available sources is overwhelming to users.
              Therefore, using this wealth of resources effectively presents challenging
              problems. To address these problems, the research goals of the project include:
              (1) smart query processing over HTML documents, using information like query
              logs, citations, and user feedback to find the most useful documents for a
              query; (2) extraction of succinct summaries of information sources with varying
              capabilities and interfaces, so that the evaluation of user queries can focus
              on only the most useful information sources; (3) integration of query results
              from multiple heterogeneous information sources, so that users can query
              multiple sources and still receive a single, coherent query result; (4)
              integration of text, relational, and image repositories, so that users can use
              all available information regardless of its format. The educational objectives
              include the expansion of the curriculum in databases and information systems at
              Columbia University. In particular, a new course covers the latest trends in
              database and information systems. In summary, this project will develop the
              tools to provide users with seamless and transparent access to the large number
              and variety of Internet sources. In effect, users will be able to express their
              information need in simple ways, and receive the relevant data with no further
              involvement in the processing of their queries.    
              http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~gravano
