Title       : CAREER: Nanometer Scale Imaging and Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2001    
File        : a9733650

Award Number: 9733650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weihong Tan tan@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9179,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the  
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on the development of   new
              optical microscopy methods, based on near field optics, which allow   the
              direct, in vivo imaging of biological processes on the cellular and  
              sub-cellular scales.  Professor Tan and his students at the University of  
              Florida will develop a suite of analytical methods which hold the promise   of
              monitoring biological events with nanometer-range spatial resolution.   
              Optical sensors of this scale will be developed for representative   mineral
              and enzymatic species, calcium ion and glutamate.  This CAREER   research
              project will expose students to the interdisciplinary aspects of   biomedical
              sciences and chemical instrumentation.  Professor Tan will be   a key figure in
              the development of a joint bioanalytical chemistry   program between the
              Department of Chemistry and the University of Florida   Brain Institute.  One
              of the long standing issues in the area of cellular biology has been   the
              desire to observe chemical phenomena on the single-cell level.    Professor Tan
              and his students at the University of Florida are   developing imaging
              techniques based on near field optical methods which   address this very
              important area of research.  Instrumentation having   sub-micrometer spatial
              resolution and microsecond time resolution would   impact a number of
              disciplines.  The multidisciplinary aspects of the   instrumentation
              development portion of the project are complemented by   Professor Tan's new
              `Bioanalytical Chemistry` course for graduates and   advanced undergraduates
              and the establishment of a collaborative program   with the University of
              Florida Brain Institute.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
