Title       : PECASE: New Techniques for Optimizing the Quality and Capacity of Wireless
               Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9733204

Award Number: 9733204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venugopal Veeravalli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Due to the exponential growth in the demand for wireless communication services,
              new techniques for optimizing system quality and capacity are imperative. Our
              proposed research program strives to meet these challenges in the following
              areas: (i) Accurate channel modeling. New statistical models for multipath and
              shadow fading will be developed that are both accurate in describing the
              propagation environment and also useful in analysis. These models will provide
              a foundation for proposed optimization techniques.  (ii) Information theory for
              wireless links.  The goal here is to develop  useful information theoretic
              limits for wireless multiuser systems. An approach based on throughput analysis
              is proposed that will yield new insights into the optimization of wireless
              systems, particularly for  multirate applications. (iii) Optimization of
              Wireless Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) systems. Hybrid systems that
              combine the advantages of using long spreading sequences (R-CDMA) with those of
               short sequences (D-CDMA) will be explored. Techniques will also be developed
              for the accurate analysis of CDMA capacity and coverage for both single-user
              and multiuser detection systems. (iv) Dynamic resource allocation.  The three
              primary resources for wireless access -bandwidth, space and power - need to be
              allocated efficiently and dynamically in a mobile wireless environment. A major
              goal of the proposed research program is to develop a mathematical foundation
              for dynamic resource allocation. The proposed decentralized dynamic decision
              making (DDDM) framework will be essential to this development.    The
              educational objectives of the proposed program are: (i) to promote meaningful
              learning in the classroom; (ii) to promote ties with industry so students are
              exposed to real-world needs; (iii) to exploit new technologies to expand
              classroom boundaries; (iv) to design classes that will better prepare students
              for new opportunities in telecommunications; and (v) to incorporate research in
              all educational activ ities.
