Title       : CAREER: Development of an Intelligent Information Processor for Electric Power
               Distribution Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2001   
File        : a9733148

Award Number: 9733148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gwendolyn C. Owens                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel N. Schulz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9733148  Schulz  Meeting the engineering challenges of power system
              operations of the twenty-first century will require the advancement of modern
              technological techniques and systems as well as an adequate supply of well
              trained power engineers.  Proposed objectives of the project will impact two
              areas of power engineering: restoration of distribution systems during major
              storm outages and the 21st century power engineer.    A key concern of power
              engineers today is increasing the reliability of the supply of electric energy
              by decreasing the time it takes to restore power after an outage.  New
              integrated computer systems including distribution management and automated
              metering systems are providing more detailed information about the status of
              the distribution system.  The proposed project involves the development of
              heuristics using data from integrated computer systems.  These heuristics will
              be the foundation for an intelligent information processing algorithm for
              effective outage management during storms.  Utilities will benefit with
              improved reliability and lower restoration costs.  Customers will benefit by
              shorter outage times.  Such research will also provide an increased awareness
              of the contrasts between normal operations and storm operations.      The
              deregulation of the electric utility industry has created a need for
              industrially relevant problems appropriate for introductory engineering courses
              which incorporate public policy, environmental concerns, business and the
              global marketplace.  A set of four case studies of current power engineering
              problems will be developed to stimulate the students' interest in the many
              issues relating to the generation, transmission and distribution of electrical
              energy.  Each case study will have two versions: one geared toward sophomore
              and junior Electrical Engineers students and one geared toward  high school
              students.  These case studies will be tested at Michigan Technological
              University, Milwaukee School of Engineering, University of Minne sota,
              University of Missouri-Rolla and University of Washington.
