Title       : CAREER: Laser Spectroscopic Studies of the Dynamics of Recombinative Desorption
               and Bimolecular Surface Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2001    
File        : a9733701

Award Number: 9733701
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank M. Zimmermann fmz@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported by the  
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on the elucidation of   the
              mechanisms and dynamics of a number of molecular processes at solid   surfaces:
              diffusion, recombinative desorption, and bimolecular reactions.    Professor
              Zimmerman and his students at Rutgers University will utilize   state-resolved
              optical spectroscopy of desorbed species to probe the   dynamics of a number of
              gas-solid systems including hydrogen on silicon   and metal surfaces and the
              catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide at   transition metal and metal oxide
              surfaces.  This CAREER research project   will also seek to further exploit the
              use of `Peer Instruction` in the   undergraduate physics curriculum as a means
              of overcoming negative   preconceptions that students have about physics. 
              Professor Zimmerman   will also develop laser-based laboratory experiments for
              physics   undergraduates.  The elucidation of chemical reaction mechanisms of
              small molecules   adsorbed onto solid surfaces is a key element in improving
              the   performance of a number technologically important processes.  Professor  
              Zimmerman and his students at Rutgers University will use optical  
              spectroscopy to study the dynamics of  surface chemistry relevant to the  
              catalyst and microelectronics industries.  This CAREER project will   provide
              students with a fundamental knowledge of chemistry with   broadranging
              implications.  Undergraduate students will benefit greatly   by both the
              pedagogical and laboratory innovations that Professor   Zimmerman will instill
              in the physics curriculum.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
