Title       : CAREER: Pressure-Induced Amorphization and Materials Synthesis Under High
               Pressure Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2001     
File        : a9733956

Award Number: 9733956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Kruger krugerm@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9733956  Kruger    This is a CAREER Award project involving high pressure
              techniques  in two separate areas of research. An objective of the work is to 
              synthesize and study, novel and potentially technologically  relevant
              materials. The research employs pressure-induced  amorphization, the
              pressure-induced destruction of long range  crystalline order to produce an
              amorphous materials. X-ray  diffraction study of pressure-amorphized samples
              will yield the  pair correlation function, G(r). The pressure variation of this
               function will be correlate structures of the pressure-amorphized  glasses with
              the starting crystals, as well as with  conventionally synthesized, melt 
              quenched glasses. Raman scattering will be used to study the  boson peak of
              these glasses which will result in a deeper  understanding of the glasses as
              well as the boson peak itself.  Numerous theoretical studies have predicted the
              stability of  various phases of carbon nitride, some theoretical studies 
              indicating that certain phases should have bulk moduli rivaling  that of
              diamond. There is significant interest, both theoretical,  and practical, in
              realizing such materials. The PI will apply  high pressures and high
              temperatures to carbon-nitrogen mixtures  in order to synthesize some of the
              theoretically predicted  superhard phases of carbon nitride. Study of the
              equation of  state of the materials will help determine which phases are most 
              likely to be superhard, and hence should be made in larger  quantities for more
              detailed study. The education component of  this project involves extensive
              undergraduate research activity,  lectures at local high-schools, and mentoring
              activity associated  with the local student Chapter of the American Physical
              Society.  %%%  This is a CAREER Award project involves high pressure (up to 100
               million atmospheres) techniques to synthesize and study, novel  and
              potentially  technologically relevant materials. One  relatively recently
              observed technique employs compression alone  to turn a cry stal into a glass.
              In this way a variety of glasses  will be prepared. X-ray and optical
              scattering techniques will be  used to characterize the structural transition
              from the  crystalline to the glassy state. Relationships are sought between 
              the new glasses, the starting crystals, and traditional model  glasses. A
              second project involves the use of high pressures to  try to synthesis new,
              superhard materials. By analogy with the  graphite to diamond conversion, high
              pressures and temperatures  will be applied to graphite-nitrogen mixtures in an
              attempt to  synthesize some of the theoretically predicted superhard phases  of
              carbon nitride. The education component of this project  involves extensive
              undergraduate research activity, lectures at  local high-schools, and mentoring
              activity associated with the  local student Chapter of the American Physical
              Society.  ***
