Title       : CAREER: Integrated Synthesis of Mechanical Systems with Unconventional
               Actuations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a9733916

Award Number: 9733916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282425             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suresh G. K. Ananthasuresh gksuresh@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for a CAREER award.  The principal goal of this
              project is to develop systematic design methods for the shape synthesis of
              mechanical structures subject to unconventional actuation.  The following three
              synthesis problems will be addressed:  (1) Synthesis of novel micro- and
              meso-scale devices with embedded electro-thermal-compliant actuation such that
              they deform desirably upon applying an voltage differential between two points;
              (2) Synthesis of a structure for prescribed normal mode shapes; and (3) Shape
              synthesis of piezoelectrically driven structures.  In each case, the coupled
              interactions among the field equations of multiple energy domains will be
              modeled and used in conjunction with the numerical optimization methods to
              develop the optimal synthesis algorithms.  The educational plan includes
              involving undergraduates in research, and developing design-oriented graduate
              courses and a curriculum for graduate and undergraduate students in the rapidly
              growing area of Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS).  A new outreach
              activity of `Taking MEMS to high schools` is included as part of this
              integrated research and education activity to inspire and encourage high school
              students to pursue careers in science and technology.       If successful, this
              research will result in design methodologies for optimizing shape to exploit
              the full potential of materials and unconventional actuations used in modern
              mechanical systems such as MEMS and Smart Structures.  This will impact the
              MEMS, and micro-sensor and actuator industries making their products more
              competitive because of improved quality and lower cost.  The successful
              implementation of the educational plan of this project will result in
              mechanical engineering graduates with interdisciplinary skills for the 21st
              century.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
