Title       : CAREER: Telephone Call Centers: Human Factors in the Management of Queueing
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a9733739

Award Number: 9733739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251012             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noah F. Gans gans@wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Telephone call centers constitute a large, but hidden, industry in the United
              States   (US), and their use continues to grow rapidly.  They are used
              extensively for reservation-taking in the travel industry and for providing
              customer services in retail financial services and telecommunications. 
              `Inbound` call centers, which provide customer service and take orders for
              customer-initiated sales, are queueing systems: a customer phones in; if all
              customer service representatives (CSRs) are busy, she waits in queue; when a
              CSR becomes free she is switched to the CSR and service begins.  Relatively
              little research in the management science literature has been devoted to the  
              analysis of call center performance and control, and important features of call
              center   operations have not been addressed by this literature.  Many of those
              features have to   do with the fact that it is people, rather than `jobs,` that
              require service and that it   is people, rather than equipment, that do the
              processing.    Research questions include the following.  (1) How much does
              customer waiting time cost   an organization?  Little work has been done to
              model the costs that congestion incurs   through the erosion of consumer
              satisfaction.  (2) A typical center fields many types of   calls, and CSRs may
              be cross-trained in a number of types of call.  How should one train   workers
              for this environment?  Of the many workers that may be qualified to handle an  
              incoming call, to whom should that call be routed?  (3) Workers learn on the
              job and get   better as they accumulate experience.  They also `turn over`
              (quit or are fired).  In this   case, what are the tradeoffs among direct labor
              costs, costs associated with turnover,   and customer waiting costs?  The call
              center environment is a fascinating vehicle for these lines of research
              precisely   because it is an example of a relatively simple production system
              in which marketing,   human-resource, and operational problems are all
              intertwined.  We think of the telephone   call center as a simple model for
              more complex systems and believe that a better understanding   of call centers
              will ultimately offer insight into how important human factors should be  
              accounted for in the management of a broad range of modern service systems. 
              The project's educational plan also seeks to foster students' understanding of
              how human   factors should be accounted for in the management of service
              systems.  To achieve this   goal, research findings and insights will be
              incorporated into the curricula of a number   of introductory undergraduate and
              masters courses.  Similarly, integrative materials,   such as cases and
              simulation exercises, will be developed to help students in more advanced  
              courses to better understand these problems.  Finally, Ph.D. education and
              training will   help to promote the integration of traditional management
              science models with more   behaviorally-oriented decision sciences.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
