Title       : CAREER: Modeling 3D Flow and Soil Structure Interaction Using Optical Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a9733064

Award Number: 9733064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Magued G. Iskander Iskander@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award supports research on measurement of three-dimensional
              deformation patterns and flow characteristics within a soil continuum. Such
              measurements are usually limited by the fact that soil sensors do not provide a
              continuous image of the measured continuum.   Additionally, soil sensors
              exhibit static and dynamic characteristics that are different form those of the
              surrounding soils, and therefore can change the response of the measured
              continuum.  Tests conducted with a transparent material which has properties
              that closely model the geotechnical properties of natural soils can potentially
              circumvent these experimental problems if the response of a model transparent
              continuum can be measured using non-intrusive optical visualization techniques.
               The Principal Investigator has established methods for production and
              customization of a transparent synthetic soil that will meet model test
              requirements in terms of strength, deformation, and permeability.  This project
              will develop the technology (equipment and methodology) for performing optical
              tomography within soil continua.  Cross sections of the transparent soil mass
              will be illuminated using laser light and line scan cameras will be used to
              capture the reflected light.   Computer based digital image processing will be
              used to analyze the reflected light and construct continuous images of the
              spatial deformation patterns and flow paths within the transparent model soil
              mass.  This new technology will result in: better analyses and improved
              reliability of three-dimensional soil structure interaction and multiphase
              flow; and test results that can be used for the difficult validation of
              three-dimensional numerical analysis codes.  The project will also include
              development of advanced educational experiments to visualize the performance of
              infrastructure and environmental projects.  These low cost experiments can also
              be used to vitalize recruitment  efforts of high school students into civil
              engineering programs.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
