Title       : CAREER: Microbial Degradation of Aromatic Hydrocarbons Under Anaerobic
               Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9733535

Award Number: 9733535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred M. Spormann spormann@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9104,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9733535   Spormann   This project will investigate the biochemical and molecular
              mechanisms of aromatic hydrocarbon degradation by anaerobic bacteria.  Current
              work in this research group has revealed several novel biochemical reactions
              involved in the initial steps of anaerobic degradation of toluene, xylenes, and
              ethylbenzene.  Catabolic pathways for these compounds will be established and
              key enzymes of the novel pathways will be characterized.  A genetic analysis of
              the pathways will be initiated to understand how these catabolic genes are
              regulated and which environmental factors control their expression.  Further,
              it is proposed to isolate novel prokaryotes that degrade aromatic hydrocarbons
              under sulfidogenic and methanogenic conditions.   BTEX (benzene, toluene,
              ethylbenzene, xylenes) compounds are among the most water-soluble components of
              gasoline and are frequently released in the environment by spills and improper
              handling.  Contaminated sites often become anaerobic.  Investigating anaerobic
              BTEX degradation in terms of the biochemistry involved, the molecular
              mechanisms that regulate expression of catabolic genes, and the microbial
              ecology of the hydrocarbon-degrading organisms will advance our fundamental
              knowledge of microbial metabolism, and will also be of practical use for
              evaluating and enhancing intrinsic bioremediation.     The teaching activities
              are integrated with the research activities and have related focus.  An
              Environmental Microbiology curriculum is currently being established to convey
              a comprehensive understanding of microbial activities in nature.  An emphasis
              will be the mutual interactions between microorganisms and their environment,
              how microbial activities control the physical-chemical properties of an
              environment, and in turn, how this affects microbial activities, ranging from
              the elemental cycles of carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, oxygen and iron to microbial
              metabolism of compounds of geochemical and of anthropogenic origin.
