Title       : CAREER: Accurate and Robust Admission Control in Integrated Services Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9733610

Award Number: 9733610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Knightly knightly@ece.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ATM and next generation IP networks will provide the fundamental  building
              blocks for integrated services networks: the ability to  reserve network
              resources on behalf of bursty real-time applications.  However, provisioning
              network resources accurately is quite challenging  in the real-world
              environment characterized by heterogeneous and highly  bursty traffic streams
              which exhibit rate variations over multiple time  scales.  The goal of this
              research is to design accurate and robust  admission control and resource
              management algorithms that scale to  large internetworks.  In particular, we
              plan to study the following  three problems. First, in a shared public network,
              applications cannot  be trusted to adhere to their specified traffic parameters
              and  therefore must be policed. However, deterministic policing must not 
              preclude statistical resource sharing, which is essential for efficient 
              resource utilization. We are designing an accurate envelope-based  resource
              allocation algorithm that enables the network to statistically  multiplex
              traffic streams while simultaneously enforcing applications'  specified traffic
              parameters.  Second, many applications will be unable  to specify their traffic
              parameters in advance so that the network must  somehow reserve resources even
              for applications with unknown resource  requirements.  We are developing a
              measurement-based service that  adaptively measures the envelope of the
              aggregate traffic flow to  predict future resource requirements and performance
              parameters for  such ill-characterized applications.  Finally, internetworks
              are  characterized by a large number of heterogeneous components so that a 
              resource management scheme must scale to such realistic environments.  We are
              devising end-to-end resource management techniques that exploit  coarse-grained
              representation and allocation of network resources.
