Title       : CAREER: In Situ NMR Techniques for the Study of Environmental Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2001    
File        : a9733188

Award Number: 9733188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Raftery   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,9178,9198,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the  
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on developing nuclear  
              magnetic resonance (NMR) methodologies for the study of environmental  
              catalysis.  In particular, the surface chemistry involved in the thermal   and
              photocatalytic decomposition of volatile organic compounds (VOCs)   will be
              investigated using new NMR probes which permit study of these   reactions in
              situ.  Professor Raftery and his students will use NMR   methods to study the
              structure of various adsorbed species, their   proximity to active sites on the
              solid catalyst surfaces, and monitor   dynamic surface processes.  This CAREER
              project includes the use of   group-based, interactive and Web-based learning
              tools as a means to   better connect classroom and laboratory experiences and
              provide a   contextual framework to introducing emerging technologies in  
              undergraduate and graduate curricula.  The study of catalytic reactions of
              volatile organic compounds (VOCs) at   the surface of a wide range of materials
              is important to a number of   energy and environmentally-related technologies. 
              New spectroscopic tools   are required to gain intimate knowledge of the
              dynamics of the gas-solid   interactions to better tailor processes to the
              reduction of air polution,   for example.  Professor Raftery and his students
              at Purdue University are   developing such methodologies for the study of the
              thermal and   photocatalytic degradation of VOCs, which could have implications
              in   reducing ozone-depleting emissions.  The use of of group-based,  
              interactive, and Web-based teaching methods will be used at both the  
              undergraduate and graduate levels to enhance students' connectivity   between
              their experiences and fundamental science.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
