Title       : CAREER: Maintaining Power Quality Through Simulation, Experimentation And
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a9733184

Award Number: 9733184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254941             (Estimated)
Investigator: Annette R. von Jouanne avj@ece.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9733184  Von Jouanne   Power Quality (PQ) is becoming an ever increasing
              concern with the growth of both sensitive and disturbing loads in the
              residential, commercial and industrial levels of the power system, and the
              current movement toward deregulation in the electric utility industry.  With
              the increased attention on high efficiency and controllability of industrial
              processes, as well as reduced weight, volume and cost of consumer products, the
              application electronic converters is showing a rapid rise.  While solid-state
              power electronic equipment, such as Adjustable Speed Drives (ASDs), provide
              efficient conversion of electric power, the switching-mode operation causes PQ
              problems such as harmonic distortion of voltages and currents leading to
              several adverse effects including the malfunction of sensitive electronic
              equipment, equipment overheating, lower operating efficiency (and higher
              losses) and interference with communication systems.  PQ related disruptions,
              ranging from system malfunction and hardware damage to costly data loss and
              downtime currently, cost U.S. companies more than $25 billion annually.   In
              response to these concerns, the objective of the proposed career plan is to
              develop a strong PQ program at Oregon State University (OSU) as follows: 
              Simulate distributed nonlinear load effects on the power system/industrial
              facility network.  Experimentally analyze critical PQ situations by subjecting
              representative loads to typical poor PQ conditions generated by a programmable
              AC source.  Evaluate ASD ride-through capabilities (multiple makes and ratings
              up to 300hp) through voltage sags, static capacitor switching and input
              distortion.  Investigate and develop improved PQ compensators and ASD ride
              -through devices.  Develop a novel "Standard PQ Guide" for industry and utility
              personnel to use in the design of new or existing facilities to ensure a high
              PQ environment and compliance with IEEE 519.  Disseminate this information
              through a series of courses and practical worksh ops for industries and
              utilities, and incorporate it into both the undergraduate and graduate course
              curricula.   The unique contribution of the proposed research and education
              plan is two-fold.  Results of the power system/power electronic simulations and
              experimental analyses will contribute to the development of a novel "Standard
              PQ Guide" (manual).  This Guide will significantly aid design engineers and
              utilities in harmonic compensation, and compliance with existing and upcoming
              PQ standards, as well as future planning.  Using the PQ Guide will help
              engineers get up to speed on PQ issues as well as 'clean up' existing
              facilities to significantly reduce costly downtime.  With the recent and
              continuing growth of the semiconductor manufacturing industry in the Pacific
              Northwest, utilities and industries have expressed the need for assistance in
              improving their PQ.  The proposed PQ Guide will address this need.     The
              second novel contribution is the dissemination of the results of the proposed
              PQ work through a series of innovative industry, utility and university
              seminars.  These seminars will include theoretical PQ analysis in a classroom
              setting combined with a unique hands-on laboratory experience in the Motor
              Systems Resource Facility (MSRF).  These seminars will also include instruction
              on how to use the proposed PQ Guide.  No other PQ courses offer the "hands-on"
              opportunities that the PI is proposing here, which will greatly enhance the
              effectiveness of the learning experience.  The PI has conducted several
              successful seminars addressing PQ issues.     The proposed career plan includes
              specific plans to stimulate and educate a new generation of energy systems
              engineers on the importance of PQ.
