Title       : CAREER: Impact of Physiological State nd Macro-Nutrient Ratio on Microbial
               Surface Thermodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a9733969

Award Number: 9733969
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Strevett strevett@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Strevett  9733969  A quantitative understanding of microbial migration in 
              geological formations is critical to predict the  dissemination of microbes in
              the environment and to evaluate  the efficacy of microbially mediated in situ
              pollutant  degradation. The key event that retards the movement of 
              micoorganisms in the saturated zone is their interaction  with the matrix
              surfaces, which may result in adhesion. This  interaction is determined by the
              surface thermodynamics of  the microorganism and the matrix.    This research
              is designed to measure thermodynamic  properties of cell surfaces for selected
              subsurface  bacterial genera at different physiological states, electron 
              donor/acceptor ratios and carbon/nitrogen ratios. The  bacteria selected for
              this study include Escherichia coli,  Pseudomonas fluorescens, Bacillus
              subtilis, Lactobacillus  casei and Staphylococcus aureus. It is the goal of
              this  research to provide a comprehensive and accurate  quantification of the
              dependence of surface thermodynamics  on bacterial physiological state,
              electron donor/acceptor  ratio and carbon/nitrogen ratio. A
              mechanistically-based  model will be developed for microbial transport; the
              model  will account for micro scale hydrodynamics, individual  surface
              thermodynamic interactions between cell surface and  the grains, including
              their dependence on physiological  state of the microorganism, and Brownian
              diffusion. The  resulting model will provide a tool for evaluating and 
              predicting microbial transport in porous geological  formations with greater
              certainty than is currently  possible.    The objectives of the educational
              plan are to: 1) increase  opportunities for physically impaired students in 
              engineering and science and 2) provide a forum to bring  research into the
              classroom and teaching into the  laboratory. Targeted recruitment  and
              retention strategies  at the undergraduate and graduate levels will create 
              visibility for engineering and science disciplines to  physically impaired
              students throu gh guest lectures and  summer research scholarships. A support
              system for these  students will include mentoring programs, financial support 
              and appropriate laboratory facilities. The second objective  will be met
              through  multidisciplinary laboratory oriented  courses to provide an
              opportunity for cooperative learning  through the incorporation of fundamental
              principles, applied  science and real-world problem-solving.  ***
