Title       : CAREER: Modeling and Control of IC Engines with Variable Valve Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9733293

Award Number: 9733293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna Stefanopoulou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9733293
Stefanopoulou
Over the last two decades there has been a significant
              evolution in powertrain control systems, largely driven by government
              regulations aimed at improving fuel economy and reducing emissions.  One way to
              potentially meet these performance requirements is to optimize the exhaust and
              intake valve motion in a spark ignited engine.  The additional actuation can be
              realized with a camless valvetrain and results in a nonlinear and highly
              multivariable engine.

The proposed project is a combination of research in
              the area of engine modeling and multivariable control.  We will develop a
              phenomenological model for the nonlinear and multivariable engine by
              characterizing the essential modifications that variable valve motion
              introduces in the structure of the conventional engine model.  The developed
              model is intended to fill the gap between the analytical thermodynamic engine
              models and the steady-state engine models that are currently used for studying
              camless engines.  We will identify the inherent system limitations as they
              arise from fundamentallly discrete plant properties, subsystem interactions and
              contstraints imposed by sensor/actuator fidelity/authority.  A rigorous
              methodology of translating the system limitations to performance tradeoffs and
              their implication to the control design parameters will be developed.  Finally,
              we will study the impact of controller architecture on the engine dynamie
              response.  Our intent is to improve the understanding of the possible
              detrimental consequences of subsysem interaction, and the potential of
              coordinated, multivariable feedback for alleviating these limitations.

This
              project will allow students to integrate various aspects of fluid,
              thermodynamic and systems theory for the development and the control design of
              the variable valve motion engine.  Our pedagogical objective is to expose
              students to the highly interdisciplinary area of powertrain control.  Students
              can play an important role in developing potential solutions to cleaner
              automobiles.  Meanwhile, they will enhance their understanding in the area of
              multivariable feedback control theory by their active participation in the
              forefront of advanced engine technologies.  The proposed research project and
              its pedagogical aspects stress cross-disciplinary involvement and combine
              system theoretical concepts and engineering design criteria in the analysis and
              synthesis of technologies important to our national competitiveness.  
***  

