Title       : CAREER: Synthesis and Characterization of Poly(N,N-dialkylaminoisoprene)s
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a9733837

Award Number: 9733837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348697             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie S. Ashby vsashby@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9733837  Sheares    Synthesis and Characterization of
              Poly(N,N-dialkylaminoisoprene)s    This CAREER award will exploit a new
              synthetic route developed in  our laboratory for the synthesis of
              N,N-dialkylaminoisoprene  monomers to produce functionalized homopolymers and
              copolymers.  The polymer polarity, in addition to the potential for 
              quaternization and crosslinking, will be utilized to produce  materials of both
              scientific interest and industrial utility.  Potential applications include new
              cationic polyisoprene-based  elastomers and new polymer blends.  Additionally,
              there is  potential for the poly(N,N-dialkylaminoisoprene)s to be used in  the
              modification of existing materials such as polystyrene-  polybutadiene rubber. 
              Changes in adhesion, processability,  solubility, microstructure, morphology,
              thermal and mechanical  properties will lead to tailor-made products.  In this
              research,  a fundamental understanding of the behavior of polar, diene 
              monomers in anionic, free radical solution and free radical  emulsion
              polymerization processes will also be gained.  %%%  The goals for this project
              are not only scientific, but are also  educational.  These include the training
              of graduate students and  the teaching of undergraduates and high school
              students.  Specifically, graduate students will design and synthesize 
              materials using a structure-property approach.  Undergraduates  and high school
              student researchers will examine intriguing,  practical problems that can be
              answered with this chemistry.  Multidisciplinary collaboration with engineers,
              material  scientists, and other chemists will be an additional educational 
              experience for students.  Finally, it is expected that the  research results
              will be incorporated, where appropriate, into  the teaching of undergraduate
              and graduate courses to help  students appreciate the utility of basic concepts
              . This project,  a combination of scientific research and educational training,
               should have a significant impact in the area of tailor-made,  fu nctionalized
              materials. In the process, students will gain  excellent technical and creative
              skills in the field of materials  science.  ***
