Title       : CAREER: Stabilizing Containment for Networks and Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a9733541

Award Number: 9733541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ted Herman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The basic research component of this project is concerned  with transient faults
              and unexpected environmental changes  that occur in distributed systems and
              networks.  Transient  faults include spontaneous data corruption and any
              temporary  deviation from software specification. The project explores  how
              effects of transient faults can be contained within  desired boundaries of time
              or application-specific  objectives. Using methods of stabilizing algorithms,
              which  automatically recover from transient state disruptions,  issues of
              containment will be studied. Basic research  investigations will yield new
              algorithms for tolerating  transient faults and will demonstrate the inherent
              resource  conflicts between stabilization and containment objectives.  Another
              goal is to alleviate compute-intensive and  complexity disadvantages often
              associated with stabilizing  algorithms, using methods of encapsulation and
              probabilistic  approaches.  The potential significance of the new  stabilizing
              containment techniques will be demonstrated by  case studies: interfaces
              between software layers that  contain effects of faults are simplified;
              optimistic  treatment of faults improves efficiency of recovery;  distributed
              programs can manipulate objects while limiting  contamination due to temporary
              object corruption.  The  impact of the basic research and its case studies will
              be to  bring stabilization and containment techniques closer to  widespread
              application in new generations of distributed  systems.  The plan's applied
              research and educational  components emphasize student projects implementing
              recent  distributed computing algorithms.
