Title       : CAREER: Imaging and Visualization Technologies for Geotechnical/Geoenvironmental
               Site Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9733595

Award Number: 9733595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Raschke sara@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award supports research leading to the development of a new
              methodology and modeling techniques for performing geotechnical and
              geo-environmental site characterizations.  The Principal Investigator will
              build on the previously developed Vision Cone Penetrometer (VisCPT) system
              capable of capturing and recording continuous video images of the subsurface
              materials in real time.  This research will develop a suite of image processing
              and analysis programs for both qualitative visualization (including virtual
              specimens shown at low and high magnification) and quantitative
              characterization (including development of a Soil Image Classification system
              that can identify subsurface stratigraphic units difficult to detect using
              existing methods).  Sophisticated image processing and analysis algorithms,
              such as texture classification and segmentation using wavelets, co-occurrence
              approaches, etc., will be applied for soil characterization.  A
              three-dimensional `Geoscience Modeling Environment` will be created for
              visualizing site data obtained from various measurements.  The educational
              objective for this project is to develop a curriculum that emphasizes the
              importance of site investigation and characterization for engineering problems.
               A new, flexible course module, including integrated computer methods, on site
              characterization will be developed that can be adapted for training students at
              various educational levels.  Development of novel, stimulating, educational
              experiences, which are targeted to students at different stages of intellectual
              development, is essential to attracting underrepresented groups into science
              and engineering.  The theory and application of the computer programs will be
              examined through analysis of several real or simulated case histories.  The
              impact of uncertainty on design and analysis will be stressed.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
