Title       : Career: Multichannel Deconvolution Techniques in Multiuser Wireless
               Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9733048

Award Number: 9733048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michail K. Tsatsanis mtsatsanis@voyan.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Future wireless systems based on Code Division Multiple  Access (CDMA) schemes
              will impose stringent interference  rejection requirements at the receiver's
              front end. The  development of appropriate signal processing algorithms to 
              suppress multiuser interference is an essential factor in  the success of third
              generation wireless networks. The  objective of research is to explore the
              connections between  interference rejection problems appearing in wireless, 
              multiuser communications and classical signal processing  concepts like array
              processing and multichannel  deconvolution. By developing those links and
              establishing a  DSP framework for multiuser communication problems, we will 
              facilitate the application of a large body of DSP algorithms  and research
              results to those problems. Similarly, the  integration of communication and DSP
              links in the Electrical  Engineering curriculum provides the students with a
              global  understanding of DSP aspects of wireless communication  systems.  The
              first research goal is to develop appropriate  discrete-time models for
              multiuser CDMA systems with chip  rate sampling, and identify the analogies
              with well  established array processing models. The second objective is  to
              develop simple, adaptive, linear receivers based on these  models, which are
              self-recovering, yet attain a performance  comparable to that of the trained
              MMSE receiver. These blind  solutions borrow ideas from standard array
              processing  techniques like Capon and MVDR beamforming. The educational  goal
              of this work is to promote linear deconvolution ideas  as a significant and
              unifying component in the systems  thread of the EE curriculum. This component
              is introduced in  various courses through laboratory and design work. The 
              approach is based on developing an innovative lab  infrastructure which allows
              remote experimentation and  capitalizes upon the campus networking resources. 
              Additionally, a focus on ``signal processing for  communications'' is being
              developed in the graduate and  under graduate curriculum through course
              development and  restructuring.
