Title       : CAREER: Environmental Heterogeneity, Population Structure, and Larval Life
               History Evolution of Rana sylvatica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9733276

Award Number: 9733276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Newman robert_newman@und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1045,9150,9169,9178,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Newman  9733276    This project is based on two premises: 1) that unique
              insights into fundamental ecological and evolutionary processes can be gained
              by integrating molecular genetic techniques and ecological field studies; and
              2) that science and environmental education and training at all levels (grade
              school through graduate school) can be integrated synergistically with high
              quality basic research.  The focus of the research is the impact of
              environmental variation on adaptive evolution and population growth.  The range
              of variation experienced by a population depends on geographic and temporal
              patterns of variation, relative to movement patterns of individuals.  Over an
              extended period of time, many factors determine whether populations adapt to a
              wide range of conditions or to a narrower range of local conditions.  These
              factors include the distribution of populations, relative survival and
              reproductive success in different locations, and interbreeding among these
              locations.  These factors also help determine the extent to which local
              abundance of populations is affected by environmental variation over a wide
              area, or is more a function of local habitat quality.  These questions are
              fundamental to our understanding of basic population processes, and are
              critical to more applied concerns such as conservation of species in fragmented
              habitats or altered landscapes.    The research will focus on wood frogs of the
              northern Great Plains. This region contains numerous, diverse wetlands, or
              prairie potholes, that support a variety of wildlife.  Prairie pothole wetlands
              vary in several environmental factors, such as pond duration and water
              chemistry, that affect survival and reproduction. The surrounding landscape is
              equally diverse, including fragments of relatively undisturbed grassland, more
              disturbed grazing land, and large tracts of intensively managed agricultural
              land.  The research will quantify environmental variation in the wetlands used
              for breeding, variation in tadpole growth and dev elopment as a function of
              habitat characteristics, and dispersal of frogs between wetlands.  In order to
              determine long-term patterns of interbreeding, DNA "markers" will be used to
              quantify patterns of genetic similarity of frogs from different wetlands.   
              The project also offers an excellent opportunity to integrate research with
              scientific training and environmental education at all educational levels.  The
              integration of research and education is a natural one; the best way to learn
              ecology and to gain an appreciation for the process of knowledge generation and
              application is to be involved in research.  Students with exposure to research
              will be better prepared for higher education and potential careers in science,
              and just as importantly, they will become more insightful citizens.  Each year
              during the spring semester, two graduate students, two undergraduates and two
              students from a local high school will participate in a course in wetland
              ecology.  The course will be followed by a summer of research activities. 
              During the fall semester students will prepare written reports and develop
              presentations on wetland ecology that they will deliver to K-12 science classes
              in their school district.  The University of North Dakota Biology Department
              curriculum--as well as science education in rural North Dakota--will both be
              enhanced, thus benefiting the next generation of farmers and rural landowners.
