Title       : CAREER: Role of Exopolysaccharides in Rhizobium meliloti/ alfalfa Symbiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a9733532

Award Number: 9733532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan E. Gonzalez jgonzal@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9733532  Gonzalez              Bacterial exopolysaccharide is required for
              establishment of the nitrogen fixing symbiosis between Rhizobium meliloti and
              its host plant Medicago sativa (alfalfa), but the precise role of
              exopolysaccharides in this interaction is not well defined. Succinoglycan, the
              acidic Calcofluor-binding exopolysaccharide of Rhizobium meliloti strain 1021
              is required for effective nodulation. R. meliloti mutants that fail to
              synthesize succinoglycan form empty nodules that are devoid of bacteria and
              bacteroids and unable to fix nitrogen. Rm l021 has also the cryptic ability to
              produce a second exopolysaccharide (EPS II) that suppresses the symbiotic
              defects succinoglycan-deficient strains on alfalfa nodule invasion. A common
              theme emerging from these studies is that small quantities of low molecular
              weight exopolysaccharides are sufficient to mediate successful invasion by R.
              meliloti mutants which fail to produce exopolysaccharides, implying that low
              molecular weight exopolysaccharide may act as a signaling molecule during this
              process. A low molecular weight EPS II fraction consisting of 15-18 EPS II
              disaccharide subunits efficiently allowed nodule invasion by non-infective
              strains when present in amounts as low as 7 picomoles per plant, suggesting
              that low molecular weight EPS II may act as a symbiotic signal during
              infection.  This  project will perform genetic and biochemical analyses of
              exopolysaccharide production by R. meliloti and identify the genes involved in
              the production of the biologically-active low molecular weight form of EPS II.
              This project will also investigate the roles of succinoglycan and EPS II in
              symbiosis.  The results will set the stage for the identification of the
              putative plant receptors for the biologically-active Rhizobium
              exopolysaccharides and their role in symbiosis.  Polysaccharides are
              increasingly being recognized as important determinants of virulence in both
              plant and mammalian pathogens.  Succingoglycan is one of the best-characterized
               bacterial polysaccharides and has already advanced understanding of the
              synthesis and biological roles of polysaccharides in other bacteria, including
              human pathogens.  Basic studies of polysaccharide biosynthesis might eventually
              contribute to the design of enzymatic steps in the synthesis of complex
              carbohydrates to control linkage specificity and stereochemistry.  These
              studies may lead to insights into the possible broader use of oligosaccharides
              as signals in biological systems than has generally been recognized.  These
              studies promise to lead to a better understanding of plant-bacterial symbiosis
              which is necessary for biological nitrogen fixation.
