Title       : Expectations, the Stock Market, and Investment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9733979

Award Number: 9733979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212472             (Estimated)
Investigator: Owen A. Lamont owen.lamont@gsb.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9733979  Lamont    The goal of this CAREER project studies how asset prices both
              reflect and affect future economic activity.  This interdisciplinary research
              seeks to integrate techniques and ideas from both macroeconomics and asset
              pricing.  The theme is strengthening the connection between economics and
              finance, both at the academic and applied level.  The educational plan seeks to
              integrate finance and macroeconomics training by exposing students to the close
              connection between asset prices and economic events and expectations and by
              using real-world, real-time applications in which students would study either
              specific companies or specific episodes (such as bond price reactions to
              inflation news).   Financial economists have developed techniques to optimally
              form portfolios and hedge or replicate specific sources of asset return
              variation.  By fostering greater interaction between finance and economics, a
              primary goal of this research is to harness this expertise to address economic,
              and specifically macroeconomic, issues.    The research project examined
              reported capital expenditure plans between 1947-1994.  These plans, from a
              Commerce Department survey, measure expected investment in different industries
              and across different horizons of between one and four quarters into the future.
               These data are used to investigate the determinants of investment plans and
              the revisions to investment (actual minus plan), including the role of the
              stock market, interest rates, credit conditions, corporate profits, and tax
              changes.  A second research project investigates the relationship between
              future economic variables and current forecasting portfolio returns.  A
              "forecasting portfolio" is a portfolio of stocks that have been specifically
              chosen to have maximal predictive power for future economic variables, such as
              inflation or output.  Stock returns contain economic information because they
              reflect changes in both expected future returns and expected future cash flows.
               Since these revisions in expe ctations are correlated with revisions in
              expectations about other economic variables, current stock returns and future
              economic variables are correlated.          ??
