Title       : CAREER: The Role of Ecosystem Rooting Depth in Predicting Global Carbon and
               Water Fluxes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1998       
File        : a9733333

Award Number: 9733333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Jackson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT

JACKSON
9733333

This project will execute a five-year
              research, teaching, and outreach plan that combines long-
term interests in
              ecology, global change, and science education. The research examines
              the
importance of root distributions, particularly deep roots, for carbon and
              water cycling in terrestrial
ecosystems. A subset of the hypotheses to be
              tested are:
	1) The introduction of deep-rooted shrubs into grasslands lends
              to carbon storage in the vegetation
		and in soil layers beyond the maximum
              rooting depth of grasslands.
	2) Shrub encroachment results in the movement of
              soil fauna to deeper layers, enhancing carbon
		cycling at depth and
              transferring nutrients and carbon deeper in the profile.
	3) Water uptake in
              shrublands will come from deeper soil layers than in grasslands, resulting
              in
		increased productivity and decreased seasonality of
              evapotranspiration.
The three research activities in the proposal are
              deep-soil coring in the field, controlled
experiments in 3-m-deep tubes, and
              integration through modeling. The field work compares ecosystem
properties of
              adjacent deep- and shallow-rooted systems along a precipitation gradient in the
              central
United States (including four Long Term Ecological Research sites
              (LTERs)). Fenceline comparisons
are used to examine the effects of altered
              rooting depth in the absence of initial differences in soil
properties. A
              series of 10-m-deep soil cores have been successfully sampled at the CPER LTER
              and at
Vernon, TX. The studies in 3-m-deep tubes provide a controlled
              counterpart to the field experiments;
water and nutrients will be applied at
              precise depths so that the importance of deep roots can be
examined
              mechanistically. The modeling integration builds on the experiments to examine
              the
consequences of root distributions and soil depth for C and water cycling.
              It also fits well with other
research projects in my lab, including Task 1.3.1
              of Global Change in Terrestrial Ecosystems ("Root
distributions and carbon and
              water fluxes") and an accompanying activity at the National Center
              for
Ecological Analysis and Synthesis to improve the representation of
              belowground processes in global
models.
	Teaching and outreach activities
              take advantage of a large demand for ecology and science
education at the
              University of Texas at Austin. In 1994 the university created a new
              undergraduate
major - Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation (EEC) - providing
              an excellent opportunity for teaching
and mentoring among the 400
              undergraduates now enrolled. The courses that are taught (Plant Ecology,  Field
              Ecology, Plant Physiological Ecology, and Global Environmental Change)
              integrate well with the needs of those students and lead to numerous benefits
              for the research program. Foremost is the synergy of being able to involve
              talented undergraduates in research, while supplementing their
traditional
              classroom education. Ten undergraduates have done such research projects in my
              lab since
1995, with seven additional work-study students. It is in this
              mentoring that the dual roles of scientist and teacher truly blend - students
              learn science by the professor's example, and research progresses in the
              process.

