Title       : PECASE: A Difference Infrared Spectroscopic Study of a Nucleotide Binding
               Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a9733566

Award Number: 9733566
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gina M. MacDonald macdongx@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1076,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9733566  MacDonald  This CAREER plan integrates research and educational
              components and involves undergraduate chemistry and biology majors as well as
              high school teachers in all aspects of the project.   The goal of the research
              is to gain further insight into the regulations and mechanism of a protein
              involved in DNA repair and recombination.  Fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
              difference spectroscopy will be used to investigate the relationship between
              protein structure and function in the Escherichia coli protein, RecA.  These
              studies should result in a greater understanding of all allosteric changes in
              RecA that are responsible for regulating DNA strand exchange, a process crucial
              to DNA recombination and repair.  RecA function is regulated by nucleotide
              binding.  Initial studies will focus on the binding of adenosine triphosphate
              (ATP) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) to RecA.  Vibrational spectroscopy will
              be used to identify specific changes in protein structure induced by the
              binding of ADP (RecA conformation with decreased affinity for DNA), and ATP
              (RecA conformation with a higher affinity for DNA).  These studies will be
              performed under a variety of conditions in order to investigate how nucleotide
              binding affects protein structure in both the active and inactive RecA
              nucleoprotein filaments.  These studies will provide the groundwork for future
              RecA studies such as (1) how the previously studied changes in RecA structure
              are affected by other proteins known to interact with RecA in vitro and (2)
              time-resolved studies that follow nucleotide binding and strand exchange in
              real time.      High school teachers, as well as James Madison University
              undergraduates in chemistry and biology ,and secondary education minors, will
              play instrumental roles in both the educational and research aspects of this
              CAREER grant.  A larger number of participants can be involved  in research
              efforts by providing two types of projects (1) biochemical and difference
              infrared studies of RecA (2) research effor ts that utilize departmental
              equipment and can be incorporated into the new project oriented biochemistry
              laboratory.  Students involved will gain valuable research experience, learn
              current biochemical and spectroscopic techniques, and have a greater
              understanding of the scientific method.  The undergraduate participants will
              contribute to a greater understanding of structure-function relationships in
              RecA and an exciting new biochemical laboratory.  Including current and future
              high school teachers in this project will ultimately help to attract the next
              generation of scientists.
