Title       : CAREER: Developing the Infrastructure for the Widespread Use of Simulation in
               the Analysis of Construction Operations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a9733267

Award Number: 9733267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julio C. Martinez julio@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal:  97-33267  Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
              University  PI - Julio C. Martinez  "CAREER: Developing the Infrastructure for
              the Widespread  Use of Simulation in the Analysis of Construction  Operations" 
                  This CAREER award supports research leading to the  development of a new
              infrastructure needed for the  widespread adoption, acceptance, and use of
              simulation as an  analysis and design tool for construction operations.  The 
              project addresses a national priority for Federal research  and development for
              industries that produce constructed  facilities.  It will allow for significant
              improvements in  planning with substantial reductions in the cost and time 
              spent building them.  Consequently, it will enhance the  international
              competitiveness of U.S. industry and reduce  total life cycle costs.      The
              Principal Investigator will build on the previously  developed advanced
              programmable tool and simulation  programming language for construction
              operations, to create  a comprehensive and exemplary special-purpose simulator
              for  earthwork operations.  The language will also be used to  create an
              advanced general-purpose simulation tool that does  not require programming. 
              These tools will complement  existing ones to cover the entire spectrum of tool
               complexity and modeling power needed to simulate  construction operations at
              all levels.  The common  representation vehicle across all tools will solidify
              the  use of Activity Cycle Diagrams as the universal means of  describing
              construction operations.    The educational aspect of the project is
              intricately related  to and dependent on the research.  It includes the 
              development of multimedia tutorials, active learning games,  workshops for
              educators, and an undergraduate construction  simulation course.  Its aim is to
              educate future  construction practitioners at various levels, from educated 
              users of special-purpose simulators to builders of models  for complex
              operations, to builders of special-purpose  simulato rs.  With adequate numbers
              of suitable educated  personnel at each level of proficiency, it will be
              possible  to construct all facilities in a computer without expending  any
              resources.  Construction operations will be planned so  well that they will
              flow smoothly and with no surprises.  The ever scarcer resources needed for
              construction will be  used as efficiently as possible.
