Title       : A Bioorganic Investigation of Protein Glycosylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2001    
File        : a9733765

Award Number: 9733765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368667             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall L. Halcomb halcomb@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9179,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As a focus of this research, conformationally constrained glycopeptides   will
              be used as probes of the recognition of glycoproteins by the  
              glycotransferases that construct core structures of O-linked  
              oligosaccharides. The tranferase chosen for detailed study is that  
              responsible for biosynthesizing  Core 1 disaccharide (Core 1 GalTase).    Core
              1 GalTase is known to selectivity glycosylate GalNAc motifs in   particular
              protein backbone sequences and secondary structures. Compounds   which
              correspond to conformationally locked, low energy rotamers around   the
              torsional  angle x2 of the parent GalNAc, will be synthesized and  
              incorporated into peptides.  These glycopeptides will then be evaluated   as
              substrates or inhibitors of Core 1 GalTase.  The findings will be used   to
              elucidate the three dimensional array of peptide and carbohydrate  
              determinants in the substrate that constitute the binding epitome for   Core 1
              GalTase and to develop a model for how this equates with   information transfer
              from protein to carbohydrate domains.  The primary   focus of the educational
              will be the development of a bachelors/masters   degree program with offerings
              in synthetic chemistry, analytical   chemistry, environmental chemistry and
              biotechnology.  With this Faculty   Early Development (CAREER) award, the
              Organic and Macromolecular   Chemistry Program is supporting the research and
              educational activities   of Dr. Randall L. Halcomb of the Department of
              Chemistry at the   University of Colorado, Boulder.   Professor Halcomb will
              focus his   research efforts on combining the tools of organic chemistry with  
              biochemistry and structural biology to design and synthesize   conformationally
              constrained glycopeptides as probes of the recognition   of glycoproteins by
              the glycotransferases that construct core structures   of O-linked
              oligosaccharides.  Glycoylation is a ubiquitous modification   of proteins and
              is associated with a number of processes within the cell   and at the cell
              surface, such as protein transport, cell adhesion and   signal transduction. 
              The education plan will center on the development   of a bachelors/masters
              degree program in chemistry.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
