Title       : CAREER: Generative Designer Assistance Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2001   
File        : a9733434

Award Number: 9733434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208934             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda C. Schmidt lschmidt@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This CAREER award provides funding for the creation of a prototype
              generative designer assistance tool that combines a function-based generation
              strategy with the geometric modeling capabilities of today's computer-aided
              design systems.  The prototype tool will integrate an existing boundary solid
              modeler with a graph-based function modeling system, providing a platform for
              the transformation of a functional description of a design into a solid model
              of the components that comprise a potential design solution.  Function-driven,
              hierarchical design algorithms with optimization modes, will be developed to
              transform an initial functional description of a design into an entire space of
              functionally feasible and physically valid designs.  A supporting algorithm to
              recognizing emergent functions and function sharing opportunities will be
              proposed and tested.  This award also funds the expansion of a current
              graduate-level course, Mechanical Design Formalisms, with new modules examining
              creative design methods to answer the question, `Is one design method more
              creative than another?`.  An undergraduate version of the Formalisms course
              will be offered in Year Two of the award.  In addition to coursework, this
              award fund the continuation of an undergraduate research project to develop a
              Mechanical Design Learning Tool, targeting students in grades three through
              six.  Through a visual interface, students will manipulate icons representing
              simple mechanical components in order to solve problems like `create a rolling
              cart`.  The tool will feature animation sequences that illustrate the
              mechanical concept discovered by correct icon manipulation.       Successful
              generative design tools will assist designers in completing routine or, on a
              more interactive basis, challenging design tasks.  Their design interpretation
              techniques can be used to preserve a company's design knowledge, a significant
              goal for a design environment characterized by geographically dispersed design
              teams and paperless design databases. Generative design tools will have impact
              beyond use by experienced designers.  They are training tools for novice
              designers and tools for engineering students in design classes.  Generative
              design tools also embody the foundational principles necessary for building
              design learning tools suitable to engage elementary students in learning
              mechanical engineering concepts.  The proposed work's impact will reach into
              the university classroom, eventually providing design learning tools to
              students of all ages, engaging them in engineering pursuits at pre-college and
              college ages.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
