Title       : CAREER: Investigations of the Formation and Evolution of Stars in Young Embedded
               Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9733367

Award Number: 9733367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Lada lada@astro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1076,1187,1207,1215,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9733367  Lada    The recent results from near-infrared wavelength imaging
              surveys have of stars have suggested that most stars in our Galaxy form in the
              environments of dense, embedded stellar clusters.  The extent to which these
              new results should alter our current understanding of star formation physics is
              unclear.  However, one would expect to find fundamental differences in the
              formation and early evolution of young stars in such dense regions as compared
              to more isolated regions.  Therefore, establishing the properties of young
              stars in embedded clusters is essential to understanding the process of star
              formation and early stellar evolution and to estimate the overall likelihood of
              the existence of planetary systems in our Galaxy.   An extensive and systematic
              broad-band infrared and millimeter wavelength study of 11 young embedded, or
              partially embedded, stellar clusters will be conducted.  The stellar clusters
              range in age from 1 to 70 million years, and span a range of environment from
              gaseous hydrogen regions to reflection nebulae.  The main goals of the research
              are: 1) to construct and compare the near-infrared wavelength luminosity
              functions and Hertzsprung-Russell diagrams for each cluster and to investigate
              the shape and universality of the stellar initial mass function (IMF) and  2)
              to determine and compare the frequency and mass distributions of circumstellar
              disks in each cluster.  In addition to providing a rich data base for
              investigations of the star forming histories of young clusters, the
              observations will provide, for the first time, a complete and statistically
              significant census of circumstellar/proto-planetary disk sources in cluster
              environments.  The comparison of the results of the analysis of the data for
              the stellar clusters with different ages will allow one to estimate the
              relative timescale for the disk phase of evolution within dense stellar
              environments.  The duration of the disk phase is of particular importance, for
              it sets the time scale for planet format ion.  The results can be compared to
              existing studies of young stars forming in relative isolation  This will be
              done in order to determine the differences in the formation and evolution of
              stars and their disks in differing astrophysical environments.     An integral
              part of this project is to carry out an educational and outreach plan that
              encourages, teaches, and mentors high school, college undergraduate and
              graduate students towards careers in the physical sciences.  The plan also
              emphasizes a science outreach program directed toward college level
              undergraduates, the general public and young children.  Specifically, it is
              planned to: 1)  Develop non-traditional teaching methods via the use of
              computers for the introductory level astronomy undergraduate course at the
              University of Florida; 2) Develop a new course on the origins of the solar
              system, stars, and life.  This course will integrate the results from recent
              research projects into the course material.  The course will be developed for
              both an undergraduate and graduate level.  3) A journal club on star formation
              and related topics will be organized;  4) Students will be involved at all
              levels in the research activities;  5) A women's career day symposium will be
              organized for the purpose of encouraging women high school students to consider
              careers in the physical sciences.   6) Two regular public lecture series will
              be organized, one for adults and one for children, on astronomical topics to
              encourage an interest and appreciation of astronomy and science in general
              among the public at all age levels.  ***
