Title       : CAREER: Correlations Between Local Structure and Electron Transport in
               Transition-Metal Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9733862

Award Number: 9733862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor A. Tyson tyson@adm.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9733862  Tyson      This  is  a CAREER award to an African-American scientist 
              at  an  urban  university  with  a  large  enrollment  of  students  from 
              underrepresented groups. The project will study high  temperature 
              superconducting  materials such as yttrium  barium  copper  oxide  (YBCO),  and
               its praseodymium- and terbium-doped  variants.  The  critical  temperature and
              ground state resistivity  of  YBCO  are  altered   significantly   by  exposure
                to   optical   radiation  (photodoping), by application external of pressure,
              by changes in  the  oxygen  content  and  by  the  replacement  of  yttrium  
              by  praseodymium  or terbium. However, the relation of these  changes  in 
              electron  transport  to local local atomic  order  is  poorly  understood.  The
               project  addresses this  issue  by  correlating  transport  properties  with
              changes in  the  local  structure  of  oriented  bulk materials, oriented films
              and single  crystals  as  determined by x-ray absorption spectroscopy. This
              should  provide  fundamental information about the superconducting state in 
              these  multinary  oxide  materials. The project will integrate  work  at  NJIT 
              laboratories with off-site research at national synchrotron  light 
              laboratories.  Graduate, undergraduate,  and  high  school  students will
              conduct the research. The educational component  of  the  project will expose
              undergraduates, high school students and  teachers  to  modern research
              techniques. The PI is developing  a  research and teaching program targeted at
              Newark area high school  students  and  NJIT undergraduates. It involves an 
              undergraduate  laboratory  with  advanced experimental methods  and 
              techniques,  which  link  basic science training with research  on  transition 
              metal oxides.  %%%  This  is  a CAREER award to an African-American scientist 
              at  an  urban  university  with  a  large  enrollment  of  students  from 
              underrepresented groups. The research will investigate the atomic  structure 
              in several high-temperature supercon ductor  materials.  Among other
              applications, these materials show promise to lead to  low-loss  power 
              transmission lines at  temperatures  approaching  room  temperature. The
              mechanism for superconductivity  in  these  materials is still not understood.
              To shed light on this problem,  the   project  attempts  to  determine  what 
              atomic   structural  characteristics  are  correlated with the 
              superconductivity  and  other  transport  properties  in these  materials.  The
               research  program  integrates  work  at  NJIT  with  off-site  reserach  at 
              national   research  laboratories,  such  as  synchrotron   light  sources. 
              Graduate, undergraduate, and high school students  will  conduct  the 
              research. The educational component of the  project  will expose
              undergraduates, high school students and teachers  to  modern  research
              techniques. The PI is developing a research  and  teaching program targeted at
              Newark area high school students and  NJIT undergraduates. It involves an
              undergraduate laboratory with  advanced  experimental methods and techniques,
              which  link  basic  science training with research on transition metal oxides. 
              ***
