Title       : CAREER: Modeling and Control Methods for Complex and Uncertain Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1998       
File        : a9733043

Award Number: 9733043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn L. Beck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9733043
Beck
A major challenge in the design of high performance control
              systems is dealing with the effects of system nonlinearities and uncertainty. 
              Examples of uncertainty include unmodeled dynamics, external disturbances, and
              parameter variations.  The main methodology used to account for uncertainty
              integrates structured uncertainty descriptions into the system models,
              resulting in what are commonly referred  to as uncertain systems.  During the
              last decade, a large body of control research has been focused on uncertain
              system design and analysis, and a variety of techniques are now available. 
              Unfortunately, both the modeling and design processes for uncertain systems
              typically result in large complicated models.  Due to the complexity of these
              models, design and analysis can be extremely difficult and in some cases
              intractable.  Furthermore, the modeling process itself for these uncertain
              systems is ill-defined; as a result there have been relatively few real
              engineering applications of these methods.  Thus, although the uncertain
              systems framework and many of these associated design methods are ideally
              suited for a number of applications areas, very few real applications have been
              pursued and a noticable gap has developed between both the pace and extent of
              the theoretical development and the practical use of this theory on engineering
              problems.

One relevant but relatively unexplored application area for this
              theory is modeling and control of power systems.  Currently, the methods used
              by industry for power systems control design consist mainly of system
              linearization around worst-case loading conditions followed by conventional
              linear methods for analysis and design of the control settings.  These design
              tools rely on standard time domain and frequency domain analysis procedures, in
              addition to modern state-space techniques.  The resulting control designs are
              tested for robustness over a range of operating conditions using numerous
              detailed time domain simulations of the nonlinear system.  This approach is
              practical, and has for the most part served the intended purpose, however,
              there are no systematic procedures and no guarantee that either robust
              stability or performance criteria will be met using this approach. 
              Furthermore, due to economic and environmental factors, there is an  increasing
              need for power systems to behave robustly over a larger range of operating
              conditions than standard linearization techniques can accommodate.  The design
              and analysis techniques developed over the last decade for uncertain systems
              provide for guaranteed robustness over varying operating conditions. 
              Additional applications in bioengineering systems will be pursued including the
              development of uncertain and time-varying models for automating intravenous
              anesthetic delivery during surgery and for describing human postural sway and
              balance control.

The principle objectives of the proposed research are: (1)
              to develop systematic modeling and model reduction techniques for nonlinear,
              time-varying and parameter-varying systems which can be incorporated into the
              existing uncertain systems framework; (2) to utilize practical applications for
              this development, emphasizing power systems; (3) to develop computational tools
              for implementing these methods, and to apply the techniques in order to
              facilitate the control design process for these systems; and (4)  to develop a
              general educational program that provides research opportunities for both
              graduate and undergraduate students in linear and nonlinear systems modeling
              and control, and  which contains both applied and theoretical aspects.  
*** 
              

