Title       : CAREER: Comparative Structural Enzymology: Catalytic Mechanisms of Thiamin
               Diphosphate-Dependent Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a9733552

Award Number: 9733552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam S. Hasson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9733552  Hasson  This project focuses on the study of the structure and
              mechanism of  benzoylformate decarboxylase (BFD), in the context of the
              homologous thiamin diphosphate (TDP)-dependent enzyme family.  This family has
              salient features that predispose it to become a paradigm for comparative
              structural enzymology.  The overall architecture of BFD closely resembles that
              of other family members, and cofactor and metal-binding residues are extremely
              well conserved.  Surprisingly, none of the active-site residues that are not
              directly bound to cofactor are conserved, even between BFD and pyruvate
              decarboxylase.  The results of this comparison represents a challenge to the
              usual expectations and understanding of enzyme evolution, and suggests that
              cofactor chemistry and the nature of the reaction intermediates have been
              dominant forces in the evolution of TDP-dependent enzymes.  To appreciate the
              full implications of these preliminary studies, the mechanisms of BFD and
              related enzymes must be understood in detail.  The goals of this project will
              be attained through a combination of X-ray crystallographic structure
              determination, site-directed mutagenesis, kinetic analysis, and protein
              chemistry.  The objectives are (i) to determine the roles of various
              active-site residues of BFD; (ii) to probe the catalytic mechanism through the
              characterization of inhibitors; (iii) to understand the assembly of the
              mandelate pathway in a multienzyme complex; and (iv) to develop a hands-on
              computer laboratory course for undergraduates that can be implemented widely at
              other institutions, so that a generation of students can be given an
              appreciation of the fascination of structural enzymology and the tools to use
              publicly available structural information to inform their future careers.   
              The beauty and power of an enzyme lies in the ability of the structure of its
              polypeptide chain to perform a particular function.  Appreciation of these
              qualities in an enzyme must be accompanied by an understanding of how struct
              ure and function relate.  Such an understanding can often be augmented by study
              of how enzymes have varied during evolution.  This proposal aims to cultivate a
              basic understanding of enzyme structure in undergraduates, and to perform a
              study of a specific enzyme (benzoylformate decarboxylase) in the context of the
              family of enzymes to which it belongs, in order to increase understanding of
              cofactor-dependent catalysis and evolution of catalytic activity.
