Title       : CAREER: Effects of Electronic Alignment in Laser Induced M-H2 and M-CH4
               Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2000  
File        : a9733744

Award Number: 9733744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359465             (Estimated)
Investigator: Solomon Bililign Bililign@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Solomon Bililign of North Carolina A&T University is supported by the  
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program in his studies on the effects of  
              electronic alignment in laser-induced metal-hydrogen (M-H2) and   metal-methane
              (M-CH4) reactions.  Specifically, he will investigate how   the electronic
              structure and electronic orbital alignment of a metal atom   affects the
              structure and chemical reactivity of M-H2 and M-CH4   complexes.  Far wing
              absorption spectroscopy will be extended to study   the continuum or scattering
              state of a transient bimolecular collision   complex and investigate
              depolarization, chemical quenching, and reaction   in LiH2, ZnH2 and ZnCH4
              complexes.  The ultimate goal of these studies is   to gain new understanding
              and detailed knowledge about the physical and   chemical binding of some metals
              with hydrocarbons.  The educational   activities associated with this CAREER
              award include outreach programs to   schools in the community, links to
              industry, short term projects for   undergraduates and course development
              related to the research project   both at the undergraduate and graduate
              levels.    The interactions of hydrogen or carbon-hydrogen bonds with metal
              atom   sites is of great interest and importance to areas such as homogeneous
              or   heterogeneous catalysis and organometallic chemistry.  C-H bond  
              activation by metal atoms is one of the most important and basic   reactions in
              chemistry and may lead to more efficient and less costly   catalytic reactions.
               Despite this importance, we do not yet have a   complete understanding of some
              of the simplest metal-atom-hydrocarbon   reactions.  These detailed studies
              will bring new understanding and   detailed knowledge about the physical and
              chemical binding of metals with   hydrocarbons.  In addition, this research
              program at a historically black   university will provide a very basic research
              infrastructure for the   training and education of underrepresented members of
              society and should   prove to be very effective in attracting African Americans
              and other   underrepresented groups to advanced research in science.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
