Title       : CAREER: Large-scale convex optimization with applications to VLSI and control
               systems design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1998       
File        : a9733450

Award Number: 9733450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lieven Vandenberghe vandenbe@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9733450
Vandenberghe
The project is devoted to research and teaching in the
              area of optimization applied to computer-aided design and electrical
              engineering.  The research component focuses on recent interior-point methods
              for nonlinear convex optimization, and their application to VLSI and control
              systems design.  These new optimization methods generalize similar
              interior-point methods for linear programming (LP) that were developed in the
              eighties and that have been used with great success in practice.  Their recent
              extension to nonlinear convex optimization, and to the semidefinite programming
              (SDP) problem in particular, has had immediate practical and theoretical impact
              in several fields, notably control theory and combinatorial optimization.

In
              control, it has been observed that various analysis and synthesis problems can
              be formulated as semidefinite programming problems, and hence numerically
              solved with great efficiency.  There has been intensive research on identifying
              control problems that can be cast as SDPs, as well as rapid progress in the
              area of interior-point methods for solving those problems.  As a result of this
              activity, several software implementations have become available, which have
              proven useful for small and medium-sized problems.  The proposed research aims
              at developing more powerful general-purpose codes that exploit the problems
              structure in the SDPs encountered in control, and are capable of solving
              large-sclale problems.  This would significantly extend the practical use of
              linear matrix inequality techniques in computer-aided control system
              design.

À Wire and gate sizing via semidefinite programming.   The objective
              here is to develop, implement, and test a new method for sizing circuits to
              which the conventional delay optimization techniques, which are based on the
              Elmore delay, do not apply.  This includes circuits with a non-tree topology,
              e.g., clock distribution meshes, and circuits with coupling capacitors, e.g.,
              due to coupling between interconnect wires.

À Placement via nonlinear convex
              optimization, in particular timing-driven placement and placement combined with
              gate sizing.  New methods for nonlinear convex optimization make it possible to
              use more complex cost functions and to handle new types of constraints, at a
              cost comparable to existing techniques.

À Circuit partitioning via
              semidefinite programming.  Here the objective is to analyze and test the use of
              semidefinite programming in spectral partitioning methods for various NP-hard
              circuit partitioning problems.  Spectral partitioning methods are heuristics
              that use a relaxation solved via the eigenvalue decomposition of the Laplacian
              matrix associated with the circuit.  Interior-point methods make it possible to
              efficiently optimize this special bound over a family of matrices, and hence to
              obtain a better heuristic.

The education component of the project involves
              the development of a sequence of graduate courses in optimization for
              engineering students, covering linear and convex programming, large-scale and
              combinatorial optimization, dynamic programming, and graph optimization.
*** 
              

