Title       : CAREER: Statistical modeling and real-time correction of nonuniformity in array
               sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1998   
File        : a9733308

Award Number: 9733308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Majeed M. Hayat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dayton
	      300 College Park
	      Dayton, OH  454690104    937/229-2919

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research component of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
               Award is addressing the problem of real-time correction of image degradation
              in  infrared and laser imaging systems used in satellite imaging, aerial
              surveillance  and reconnaissance, astronomical imaging, and target recognition.
               The types of  degradation considered are due to the non-ideal characteristics
              of array sensors  and atmospheric turbulence.  The most limiting degradation in
              the performance of  array sensors arises from the spatial and temporal
              nonuniformities in the  sensors' responses.  This research employs a
              statistical real-time-correction  approach that avoids the need for costly
              calibration-based correction techniques  that require the camera to steer away
              from the target for the duration of the  calibration.  The model-based
              statistical approach undertaken for nonuniformity  correction is adapted to
              restore images degraded by atmospheric turbulence.  The  fundamental question
              of determining the optimal exposure time (or number of  frames) needed for a
              given system in the presence of quantum noise is also being  addressed.  The
              algorithms developed in this research will be implemented in real  systems
              through the investigator's collaborative efforts with the government and 
              industry.    The educational component of this research includes activities
              designed to  motivate and excite undergraduate engineering students and
              strengthen the  structure of the Dayton Area Graduate Studies Institute (DAGSI)
              Program that is  a vital component of the Dayton-Area higher education system. 
              These educational  activities include: (1) demonstrating the practical research
              findings to  undergraduate and graduate students by improving certain existing
              engineering  courses; (2) offering periodical seminars available to nine local
              higher-  education institutions and the DAGSI program through an interactive
              video  network; (3) enhancing the practical training of students through
              collaboration  with the local industry an d government laboratory; and, (4)
              actively involving  the research assistants in this research in undergraduate
              education.
