Title       : Career: Theory and Applications of Reversible Cellular Automata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a9733101

Award Number: 9733101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227065             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jarkko J. Kari jjkari@cs.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Reversible Cellular Automata (RCA) are locally computed parallel  one-to-one
              mappings of cellular space onto itself.  They provide  a solid theoretical
              model for massively parallel non-dissipative  computation.  This project
              investigates the theory of RCA and  closely related Quantum Cellular Automata
              (QCA), and introduces  new applications in image compression and cryptography. 
              The main  theoretical goal is to understand the structure of RCA and find  new
              representations of RCA in terms of simple local operations.  The
              representations should allow easy generation of new RCA rules  that can be used
              in the applications.  Most useful  representations are ones that allow desired
              properties to be  programmed directly into the RCA.  Quantum CA are
              generalizations  of RCA.  The first goal is to find a correct definition of QCA
              in  the sense that it is realizable in the actual physical world with  quantum
              interactions.  The definition should be also general  enough to allow
              implementations of arbitrary quantum algorithms.  Then the relation between QCA
              and homogeneous arrays of finite  quantum gates will be determined.  Image
              compression applications  arise from analogy to subband coding.  Reversible
              Cellular  Automata are interpreted as non-linear versions of perfect 
              reconstruction filter banks.  Energy compaction by linear  transforms is
              replaced by the idea of information compaction by  RCA.  The new compression
              techniques will be most suitable for  efficient lossless compression but also
              lossy image compression  applications are considered.  In addition, analogy to
              RCA theory  provides new insight into the theory of higher dimensional filter 
              banks.  In cryptography the project continues investigating the  feasibility
              and security of RCA based cryptosystems.  Applications to image compression and
              cryptography, together with  related results on finite automata in fractal
              image generation  and compression will be introduced to the computer science 
              curriculum through standard computation theory cou rses.  They  provide
              practical examples of how automata theory can be useful  in seemingly unrelated
              fields, and increase student motivation to  study challenging theoretical
              concepts.  A new graduate course  and seminar on image compression will be
              developed with emphasis  on algorithmic aspects of compression in addition to
              the  traditional signal processing approach.
