Title       : CAREER: Data Rectification, Process Monitoring, Fault Diagnosis, and their
               Integration by Multiscale Empirical Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2000   
File        : a9733627

Award Number: 9733627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bhavik R. Bakshi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Bakshi - 9733627    Efficient operation of chemical processes rely on
              the extraction of information about the process from measured data, the
              integration of various operations tasks, and engineers trained in advanced
              techniques for process operation.  Efficient operation also requires engineers
              trained in topics such as advanced process operation, statistical and
              stochastic modeling methods, communications and teamwork skills, and the
              capability to view a chemical process as an integrated system.  This CAREER
              award project strives to improve the efficiency of chemical process operations
              by integrated research and educational activities directed towards achieving
              these goals.    A new and general multiscale method will be developed for
              extracting empirical models from measured data.  This method will transform any
              linear or nonlinear empirical modeling method to a multiscale modeling method. 
              The multiscale modeling will be used to develop multiscale data rectification,
              process monitoring, and fault diagnosis techniques that perform better than
              existing methods.  The multiscale approach will allow efficient integration of
              these operations tasks, leading to better utilization of measured data, more
              efficient operation, and efficient computation for large-scale operation. 
              These methods will be applied to several practical examples in collaboration
              with various industries and federal laboratories.  This research represents an
              effort to develop a general approach for multiscale empirical modeling, most
              existing uses of wavelets are for multiscale analysis or stochastic modeling.  
               The results of the research will be disseminated via existing and new courses
              in the Chemical Engineering Department at Ohio State University, in industrial
              short courses, and may be included in a textbook on process operation.  New
              in-class and laboratory experiments and web-based resources will be developed
              for improved education in process operation.  Ways of improving students'
              communication and teamwork sk ills will also be studied. Modules will be
              developed to integrate the principles of process design and simulation across
              the curriculum, and to train chemical engineers to take a systems view of a
              process, as opposed to a unit operations view.                Abstract -
              Watkins - 9734177    The demands of present and future microelectronic and
              optoelectronic device fabrication place stringent requirements on metal
              deposition schemes.  These include high film purity, low temperatures and
              rapid, controllable deposition rates.  The PI postulates that these objectives
              can be met via Chemical Fluid Deposition (CFD), a new approach to metal
              deposition that involves the chemical or thermal reduction of soluble
              organometallic compounds in supercritical carbon dioxide at low temperatures
              (40-80oC) to yield continuous films on inorganic or organic substrates.    CFD
              exploits the unique, and adjustable, physicochemical properties of SCF
              solvents, which lie intermediate to those of liquids and gases, to circumvent
              the limitations of both vapor and liquid phase techniques.  In CFD, precursor
              transport and reduction occurs in solution at significantly lower temperatures
              and higher reagent concentrations than those of vapor phase techniques such as
              chemical vapor deposition (CVD).  While CFD is a solution-based process, the
              "gas-like" transport properties of the SCF and its miscibility with gaseous
              reducing agents such as hydrogen, render the process unencumbered by issues of
              poor mass transfer and poor deposition rates associated with liquid phase
              reductions.  Preliminary experiments demonstrate that high-purity, continuous
              platinum and palladium films can be deposited from SCF solution onto silicon
              wafers and other inorganic substrates at temperatures up to 170oC below those
              employed in CVD.    The research program will focus on the deposition of thin
              films from carbon dioxide solution by the hydrogenolysis of
              dimethylcyclooctadine platinum (II) and the deposition of copper films by
              reduction of copper(II)bis (hexafluoroacetylacetone) and
              copper(II)bis(2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-3,5-heptanedionate).  The precursors were
              chosen to facilitate a direct comparison of film quality and reduction kinetics
              in CFD to those of existing techniques and the potential utility of the metal
              deposits in microelectronics copper and catalytic platinum devices.    The
              educational portion of the work are to: (1) train graduate students who will
              work at the interface of engineering and materials chemistry, (2) provide
              undergraduates with opportunities for research experience, (3) develop a
              two-course series in materials processing that addresses the interests of
              students and is reinforced by the expanding materials research efforts in the
              Department of Chemical Engineering, and (4) incorporate research problems and
              active learning principles into the classroom and assist in the implementation
              of interactive teaching tools across the curriculum.
