Title       : CAREER: Structure-Topology-Property Correlations in Carbon Nanotubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2000   
File        : a9733028

Award Number: 9733028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323539             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pulickel M. Ajayan ajayan@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9733028  Ajayan    The  goals  defined  in  this Faculty  Early  Career 
              Development  project are aimed at developing the knowledge base that is needed 
              to  predict physical properties of carbon nanotubes as a function  of  
              dimensions,  structure,  defects,  and  dopants.    In-depth  systematic
              experiments are planned to study in the following:  1)  the   effect  of 
              topological  defects  on  structural  symmetry,  electronic structure and
              reactivity of nanotubes, 2) the  effects  of defect mobility in nanotubes
              during high temperature annealing  and  electron irradiation, 3) the effect of
              substitutional  boron  doping on the structure, topology and properties of
              nanotubes, 4)  the  effect of structure and topology of nanotubes on wetting
              and  the formation of interfaces in nanotube-based nanocomposites, and  5) 
              correlation of the information obtained on the structure  and  topology  of 
              carbon  nanotubes to transport  measurements.   The  studies    will   be  
              carried   out   by   spatially    resolved  characterization and measurement
              techniques on pure  single-shell  nanotubes,  pure  multi-shell  nanotubes, 
              doped  nanotubes   and  nanotube-oxide  layer composites.  State of the  art 
              microscopy,  spectroscopy,  and four probe conductivity measurements  will  be 
              done  on  isolated nanotubes for correlating structure,  topology  and
              properties.  Some of the measurements will be pursued through  industrial and
              international collaborations.  The main thrust  of  the  educational  plan is
              to use innovative teaching  methods  to  prepare  students  for  a  modern  and
               technologically  advanced  society. Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is at the
              forefront  of  undergraduate  educational  reform  and  in  its  commitment  
              to  introduce flexibility and innovation into the curriculum, most of  the 
              courses  are  being  recast into interactive  formats.   The  proposed 
              educational activities reflect the synergy between  the  long  term 
              educational  goals of the PI  and  the  institutional  a pproach  to  improving
              educational methods.   A  wide  range  of  activities  are planned achieve the
              educational goals:   some  of  these   include  developing  computer  based 
              structural  models,  demonstrations, short simulations and effective team
              problems for  interactive  courses,  use  of  multi-media  facilities  in   the
               classroom,  developing  modules  for  the  nanomaterials  course,  involving 
              undergraduates  in  key research  projects,  arranging  formal  and  informal 
              seminars to  increase  science  awareness,  encouraging  industrial  stays and 
              international  exchanges  for  students  and  promoting materials science and
              engineering  as  a  viable career opportunity among secondary school students
              in  the  area.  %%%  The    basic    aim    of    this   proposal    is    to  
               study  structure-topology-property  correlation  in  carbon   nanotubes. 
              Carbon  nanotubes  represent the most  striking  example  of  how  carbon 
              structures can be tailored to exhibit a variety of useful  properties by
              changing local symmetries and topology.   Only  six  years  after their
              discovery, the new knowledge available in  the  field  indicates  that 
              nanotubes can  be  used  in  a  range  of  applications, for example as
              nanoprobes and nanoscale  electronic  devices.  It  is  expected that the
              comprehensive study  proposed  here  will  lead  to  better utilization of 
              nanotube  properties  leading  to  the development of unique functional
              nanostructures.  In  addition,  the  PI  will use innovative teaching  methods 
              to  prepare  students  for  a  modern  and  technologically  advanced  society.
               ***
