Title       : CAREER: of Computational and Data Access Scheduling in NOWs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9733658

Award Number: 9733658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott T. Leutenegger leut@cs.du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Networks of workstations (NOWs) have been emerged as a primary infrastructure
              for scientific computing.  NOWS are currently used to provide desktop
              sequential computing and visualization, high throughput opportunistic computing
              of batched sequential jobs, and dedicated  parallel computing.  In addition, we
              envision NOWs being used to store and retrieve data sets using scientific
              database management systems (DBMSs), provide opportunistic computation of
              parallel programs, allow interactive visualization of large disk resident data
              sets.  The current state of knowledge provides most of the tools to enable this
              envisioned NOW usage, but lacks the needed scheduling policies.  To remedy
              this, this project will:    * Devise new scheduling algorithms to handle mixed
              workloads of workstations jobs, batched opportunistic sequential jobs, and
              batched opportunistic parallel jobs.    * Characterize scientific DBMS
              workloads and develop designs on how best to integrate scientific DBMSs into
              the NOW.    * Determine how best to integrate indexing techniques to provide
              support for interactive visualization of large disk resident data sets.    *
              Develop system wide scheduling policies that are cognizant of all aspects of
              NOW usage.  The goal of such policies is to provide good aggregate performance
              of all concurrently running applications including computation, visualization,
              and data access.    The proposed work will develop comprehensive analytical and
              simulation models of NOW performance, including all of the above factors, to
              determine how to optimize overall performance and will develop a working
              prototype of the system.
