Title       : CAREER: A Survey for High Redshift Galaxy Clusters: A Research and Education
               Resource
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9733111

Award Number: 9733111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201425             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Zaritsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1207,1217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9733111  ZARITSKY    The largest existing sample of high redshift (0.4 .< z <.
              1.1) galaxy clusters will be compiled and analyzed to provide information to
              address issues in cosmology, large-scale structure, cluster evolution, and
              galaxy evolution.   The number density, luminosity function, richness
              distribution, and structural properties of clusters are excellent
              discriminators among cosmological models, particularly so at high redshifts
              where many of the standard models predict rapid evolution of galaxy clusters. 
              The sample of hundreds of clusters that will be compiled will also provide the
              best available measure of the high-redshift cluster correlation function and
              possibly outline distant analogs of the local "Great Wall" of galaxies.   The
              information gained from analyzing the magnitudes and colors of thousands, and
              spectra of hundreds, of distant cluster galaxies will constrain models of
              galaxy evolution at a redshift where there are currently very few constraints. 
              The information will also help to  place limits on the formation epoch of
              cluster galaxies.  The identification of a large sample of high-z brightest
              cluster galaxies (BCGs), and the data from observations of these clusters, will
              allow us to study BCG evolution and the connection between BCGs and the cluster
              environment.  A novel search technique for high-z clusters will enable the
              compilation of data from a unique sample of hundreds of clusters and use the
              results of the analysis of the data to address these issues.   Recent results
              from spectroscopic and photometric observations have demonstrated the success
              of the technique.     The educational efforts are divided into four areas: (1)
              enhancing the education of undergraduates through course development that
              utilizes current technology and research-grade data, (2) establishing a central
              clearinghouse for web-related instructional materials that publicizes the
              efforts of those who are attempting to develop the Internet into an effective
              teaching tool for astronomy, (3) gradua te student mentoring, and (4) public
              outreach.   The public outreach will be both to adults through public lectures
              and to elementary school children through the continuation of a two-year
              partnership with a local teacher through Project ASTRO.  The first project will
              be the creation and implementation of Internet-based laboratory projects that
              allow undergraduate students to directly manipulate research-quality data drawn
              from many sources, including the survey of clusters of galaxies.  There are
              several laboratory projects already written and available on the Web and which
              have been used in courses.  The second project is to establish and maintain a
              central location on the Internet where instructors can share material they
              develop.   There will be an informal discussion group organized for mentoring
              of graduate students.  There will also be involvement in the summer public
              visitor lectures at Lick Observatory and in the Astronomical Society of the
              Pacific's Project ASTRO for grades 4-9.    ***
