Title       : CAREER: Geomimetic Coordination Polymers: Teaching Nature- and Students - New
               Tricks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2001      
File        : a9733341

Award Number: 9733341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342893             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Keller KellerS@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9178,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9733341  Keller    Proposed experimental work is aimed at synthesizing
              solid-state  metal-organic framework structures that are topologically  similar
              to silicate minerals such as quartz and/or zeolites, and  are expected to
              exhibit properties characteristic of the  structures after which they are
              modeled, viz.,  chirality and  non-linear optical activity, or microporocity,
              respectively.  Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
              spectroscopy and mass spectrometry will be used to study the  evolution of
              solution species into extended solids.  Preliminary  results suggest that
              non-covalent interactions such as hydrogen  bonding can often determine the
              final structure.  Due to the  multidisciplinary approach involving, for
              example, inorganic and  organic synthesis, X-ray crystallography, and materials
               characterization, research and education will be integrated into  a unique
              educational experience well-suited to the instruction  of both graduate and
              undergraduate students, who comprise  collectively, the scientists of the next
              century.  In addition,  significant enhancement of the more general
              undergraduate  science education experiences will be realized  through the 
              incorporation of technology, history, and "real-life" examples.  %%%  A basic
              theme of this integrated research and education program  is the design and
              preparation of solid materials in which atoms  and molecules are arranged in
              particular ways.  For example, the  construction of scaffold-like materials
              that will contain  cavities capable of absorbing specific guest molecules or
              ions  (like a molecular sponge)  may find important uses in  environmental
              remediation or remote chemical sensing.  ***
