Title       : CAREER: Building a Bridge Between Research and Education in Materials Chemistry:
               A Career Development Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9733275

Award Number: 9733275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Songping D. Huang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9150,9162,9178,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9733275  Huang    This proposal aims to develop solid-state synthetic routes to
              a  new generation of borophosphate-based second-order nonlinear  optical (NLO)
              materials with superior optical properties (large  NLO coefficients, high
              optical damage thresholds, lower  absorption cutoffs, and phase matching at
              shorter wavelengths).  Crystal engineering strategies will be used to produce
              novel  supramolecular NLO host-guest assemblies derived from metal-  organic
              coordination polymers and NLO-active organic  chromophores. Because of the
              robust, infinite structures  provided by polymeric inorganic host matrices,
              such materials  may have enhanced mechanical, thermal and temporal stability, 
              critical properties that have hampered commercial application of  many
              otherwise promising organic molecule-based NLO materials.    The education plan
              is centered on developing a coherent program  for offering education and
              technical training in materials  chemistry at both undergraduate and graduate
              levels, and on  increasing Hispanic minority participation in chemistry.  A 
              materials chemistry laboratory course for upper-level  undergraduate students
              will  focus on strengthening the teaching  of solid-state and materials
              chemistry for chemistry majors,  thus better preparing the them for tomorrow's
              job market.  Talented Hispanic students at the undergraduate level will be 
              provided research experience and encouraged to pursue research  careers in
              materials chemistry. This plan is anticipated to have  a direct impact on the
              nation by increasing the number of highly  trained and well-qualified Hispanic
              scientists.  %%%  The proposed research is aimed at synthesizing novel
              nonlinear  optical (NLO) materials for applications such as optical  switching,
              information storage, and laser frequency conversion  related to technology
              areas that include telecommunications and  computing. Furthermore,  the design
              and synthesis of new classes  of optical materials may lead not only to further
              technological  innovations in these  areas, but also to totally new 
              technologies.  This integrated research and education program  will educate and
              train students to better compete for job  opportunities in these fast-breaking
              areas.  ***
