Title       : CAREER: Traffic Characterization and Resource Allocation for Transporting Video
               Streams Over Broadband Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9733143

Award Number: 9733143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marwan M. Krunz krunz@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Broadband networks are being designed to transport diverse traffic streams  with
              various quality-of-service (QoS) requirements. Accurate characterization   of
              these streams is essential to devising efficient resource allocation  
              strategies that guarantee acceptable QoS without underutilizing network  
              capacity. This project is focused on characterizing compressed video traffic  
              and investigating resource allocation schemes for transporting video traffic  
              over computer networks.  New traffic models for VBR video streams will be  
              developed under three  strongly related compression algorithms: JPEG, MPEG-1,  
              and MPEG-2. The modeling methodology will be based on the class of 
              M/G/infinity  processes, whose versatility will be exploited to capture various
              forms of   traffic correlations. Video sources (single and aggregated) will be 
               characterized at both an entry node and after being multiplexed with other  
              streams (i.e., the departure traffic from a multiplexer).  Models for the  
              various layers in hierarchically encoded MPEG-2 video will be developed. The  
              multiplexing performance under video models will be investigated.   
              Corresponding resource allocation strategies for transporting video traffic  
              over broadband networks will be developed.  The impact of correlations 
              persistence on the queueing  performance under video traffic  will be
              investigated. Several priority scheduling strategies at a multiplexer   that is
              fed by several MPEG-2 input streams will be studied.    In connection with the
              proposed research program, several educational  goals will be pursued. New
              courses on broadband multimedia networks  which integrate in their curricula
              several aspects of the PI's research   agenda will be developed. The
              pedagogical approach in these courses will   be a balanced mix of theory and
              practice and will combine classroom  instruction  with research-oriented
              semester projects, hence exposing students (graduate   and senior
              undergraduate) to the intriguing realm of research. Team work will    be
              strongly encouraged in course projects, as it prepares students to future  
              work environments in industry.  In an effort to outreach to industry, 
              networking courses taught by the PI will be broadcast over the VideoCampus  
              facility to several industrial sites in the area, allowing many interested 
              engineers and managers to take these courses on their premises. The PI plans  
              to organize a weekly seminar on various topics in networks research,   which
              will feature presentations given by students, faculty, and invited   speakers
              from industry and academia.
