Title       : CAREER: Environmental Engineering Education and Research in Support of
               Risk-Based Decision-Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2001      
File        : a9733621

Award Number: 9733621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Young tyoung@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9733621  Young  The objective of this research is to (i) establish the 
              mechanisms of desorption resistance for organic chemicals in  soils and
              sediments, (ii) develop predictive models and  improved experimental techniques
              for assessing desorption  rate limitations and (iii) quantify the potential
              risk  variation resulting from desorption resistance by  incorporating these
              predictive models into contaminant  transport and risk assessment models. The
              presumptive  mechanism underlying this research is that desorption  resistance
              arises when organic compounds migrate to remote  locations within rigid,
              condensed natural organic matter  networks (NOMs) that significantly impede
              diffusion out of  the matrix. This hypothesis will be tested by examining 
              organic chemical desorption equilibria, rates, enthalpies  and activation
              energies from natural materials containing  diverse NOM types and quantities
              into both aqueous and  supercritical carbon dioxide solvents. Predictive models
              of  the desorption process will be developed by correlating NOM  structural
              characteristics with model parameters. Desorption  rate limitations will be
              incorporated into existing  transport models, forming the basis for revised
              risk  assessment models that can be used to estimate the impacts  of the
              phenomenon on soil cleanup standards.    The educational plan seeks to
              illustrate the importance of  fundamental physical-chemical process models by
              linking them  with chemical transport and risk assessment models. Chemical 
              equilibrium and rate models will be linked to transport  models for groundwater
              and surface water and, subsequently,  to risk assessment models. Training on
              how policy-makers and  managers analyze engineering design options, using tools
               such as risk and cost-benefit analysis, is being integrated  into courses.
              Case studies will be prepared using the soil  risk assessment model developed
              in this research.
