Title       : CAREER: An Investigation of Protein Dimer Interactions by Exploiting the Unique
               Properties of Chemokines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9733907

Award Number: 9733907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. LiWang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9733907  LiWang  Chemotactic cytokines (chemokines) are a family of structurally
              interesting proteins that have been subdivided into two subfamilies, each
              showing different dimer structures.  The research hypothesis for this project
              is that since chemokines from both subfamilies have similar monomer subunits
              and yet have completely different dimer interfaces (with a relatively high
              sequence identity) there are likely to be changes in sequence that will allow
              one stable dimer type to be turned into the other dimer type.  Therefore, the
              specific aims involve mutation of a representative member of each subfamily: 
              First, human MIP-1( will be rationally mutated such that this chemokine forms a
              stable dimer that more closely resembles the dimer of human IL-8.  The next
              goal is to rationally mutate IL-8 such that it forms a stable dimer that more
              closely resembles that of MIP-1(.  After initial analysis and perhaps several
              rounds of mutagenesis, a detailed structure determination by NMR of the most
              promising mutants will be carried out.  The teaching aims are to give students
              a greater understanding of the relevance of Biochemistry coursework in modern
              basic science research, pharmaceutical research and in medicine; to establish a
              class project in a senior-level Biochemistry course that provides an
              opportunity for students to attempt to solve a real research problem; and to
              improve classroom participation.  In addition, a plan is presented to continue
              the modernization of the graduate level NMR curriculum, and to implement
              problem sets that use actual, entire multidimensional data sets.  The
              chemokines provide a unique opportunity to investigate the details of protein
              dimer and multimer formation.  This research will allow a detailed analysis of
              the interesting structural properties of chemokines and will also be valuable
              in learning the details of protein-protein interactions in general.  The
              teaching goals will allow the gradual development of a better educator in the
              biochemical sciences, and inclu de exploring several ways in which to make
              modern biochemistry accessible to students, both in lecture and with the
              introduction of a project requiring research into recent scientific advances. 
              In addition, teaching will be improved at the graduate and undergraduate level
              by introducing the use of computers for molecular graphics and for the
              interpretation of actual multidimensional NMR data sets.
