Title       : CAREER: The Synthesis of New Polymers and Materials using Living
               Polymerizations: Well-Defined Hybrid Organic/ Inorganic Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a9733786

Award Number: 9733786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy E. Patten patten@indigo.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9733786    Patten      Nanoclusters have garnered much interest due to their
              unique size-  dependent properties and, consequently, their potential for 
              technological applications.  The next important step in  exploiting the
              properties of nanoclusters is their incorporation  into and ordering within
              film-forming materials.  The principal  investigator will study methods to
              prepare well-defined hybrid  inorganic / organic nanoparticles in which the
              cores are  (semi)metal oxide nanoclusters and the exterior layers are vinyl 
              polymers, such as polystyrene, poly(methyl methacrylate) and  poly(methyl acry
              ate).  In particular, silica, will be studied  for the purposes of methods
              development, and then these methods  will be applied to other (semi)metal oxide
              nanoclusters  exhibiting magnetic and optical properties.  This project will 
              initially investigate methods to attach initiators for living  radical
              polymerizations to the surfaces of the nanoclusters and  then use these
              surface-modified nanoclusters as initiators for  such polymerizations.  The
              anticipated product material will be a  nanocluster core with well-defined
              polymer chains grafted from  the surface.  Because living polymerizations will
              be used to  graft the polymer chains, the structure and composition of the 
              polymer arms become a tool to investigate methods for ordering  the
              nanoclusters within the polymer film.  The principal  investigator will
              therefore develop methods for the end-  functionalization of polymers prepared
              using living radical  polymerizations.  One proposed method involves the block 
              copolymerization of vinyl monomers with cyclic ketene acetals  followed by
              hydrolysis to yield carboxylic acid-terminated  polymers.  These
              end-functionalization methods will be used to  place a variety of functional
              groups at the surface chain ends of  the nanocluster star polymers.  The
              grafting of block copolymers  from the surfaces of nanoclusters will also be
              studied.  The  microphase separation behavior of the resulting starblock  c
              opolymers will be exarnined to determine whether nanoclusters  can be ordered
              within polymer films using this strategy.  %%%  The principal investigator will
              integrate these research efforts  with the educational goal of incorporating
              polymer science into  the chemistry curriculum at UC Davis.  Because most of
              the major  US chemical producers have significant business efforts in  polymers
              and polymeric materials, chemistry students have a high  probability of moving
              into careers in polymer research,  development and manufacturing.  Thus, the
              addition of this  subject to the curriculum will provide students with valuable
               training and skills that will enhance their employment prospects  in an
              increasingly competitive chemistry job market.  ***
