Title       : CAREER: Innovative Experimental Mechanics for Heterogeneous Construction
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9733769

Award Number: 9733769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric N. Landis landis@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9733769  Landis       The primary theme of this career development plan is to 
              promote, advance, and apply innovative experimental analysis  techniques to
              heterogeneous construction materials.  This  theme applies to both the research
              and the educational  components of the plan.  Concrete and portland
              cement-based  materials are the focus here, but many of the concepts and 
              techniques developed will be applicable to wood, rock,  composites, and other
              materials with a heterogeneous  microstructure.              The objective of
              the research is to quantify specific  microstructural damage and failure
              mechanisms in cement-  based materials through advanced experimentation and
              data  analysis.  In order for there to be significant advances in  our ability
              to model and predict failure mechanisms, we must  have a quantitative
              understanding of the physical  microstructural processes involved.  The
              research addresses  this need for quantitative microstructural property versus 
              performance data.              The overall objective of the educational work is
              to  update experimental mechanics and data analysis treatment in  the
              undergraduate and graduate civil engineering curriculum,  and to highlight the
              role of mechanics and materials in the  different civil engineering
              subdisciplines.  This objective  will be realized through the integration of
              new classroom  and laboratory modules into existing undergraduate and  graduate
              courses.  The cornerstone of the education program  will be an innovative
              freshman level construction materials  course in which the common themes of
              problem analysis and  design are introduced to new engineering students using 
              materials as the vehicle.  The laboratory component of this  course will be
              designed to reveal relationships between the  material's microstructure and
              performance properties.              The link between the research and
              education components  is the innovative use of the laboratory.  The ease of 
              numerical simulations has in varying degrees altered the use  of  experimental
              analysis in both education and research.  The goal of this workplan is
              therefore to emphasize the  importance to mechanics and materials of working in
              "real"  rather than "virtual"  laboratories.              As this work is
              multidisciplinary, collaborations with  experts in digital image processing,
              cement microstructure  and x-ray physics and planned.  ***
