Title       : Career: Protein Engineering of a Recombinant Diiron Hydroxylase via Mutagenesis
               and in vivo Selection to Target the Creation of New Catalytic Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9733734

Award Number: 9733734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian G. Fox bgfox@biochem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Abstract -  Molecular Biochemistry    Brian G. Fox (University of Wisconsin) 
              MCB 97-33734  CAREER: Protein Engineering of a Recombinant Diiron Hydroxylase
              via Mutagenesis and in vivo Selection to Target the Creation of New Catalytic
              Properties.    1. Technical    This study examines a recombinant form of
              bacterial toluene 4-monooxygenase (T4MO), which is a four protein complex
              consisting of an FAD and  2Fe-2S  containing NADH oxidoreductase (tmoF, 36
              kDa); a Rieske ferredoxin (tmoC, 12.3 kDa); a catalytic effector (tmoD, 11.6
              kDa); and a diiron hydroxylase (T4MOH, 212 kDa, dimeric quaternary structure
              composed of the tmoA, tmoB, and tmoE gene products). The objectives are to
              create, select, and characterize new isoforms of the T4MO complex by
              bioengineering the diiron active site, which is contained entirely within the
              tmoA gene. A combination of targeted and random mutagenesis coupled with
              selection through in vivo complementation is used to alter the regiospecificity
              of aromatic oxidation in a targeted manner, to oxidize entirely new classes of
              hydrocarbon substrates, to produce new variations of catalytic reactivity, or
              to enhance catalyst stability.  The T4MO complex offers many unique
              opportunities to study diiron enzyme catalysis, to investigate the role of
              protein-protein interactions in catalysis, and to study the energetics of
              electron transfer between the Rieske ferredoxin and diiron redox centers.  It
              oxidizes many aromatic, aliphatic, heteronuclear, polynuclear, and halogenated
              hydrocarbons. Because hydrocarbons are the preeminent chemical feedstocks and
              about 60% of all industrial transformations involve some form of oxidation or
              reduction, this study is relevant to environment and biotechnology. This
              research is integrated into discovery-based undergraduate teaching, involving
              state-of-the-art molecular biology/biochemistry techniques.    2. Non-technical
                 Bacterial toluene 4-monooxygenase (T4MO) is a four protein complex
              containing two iron atoms in the catalytic active site.  Many key biochemical
              principles are inherent in the function of this multiprotein complex, including
              the role of metal ions in catalysis, protein interactions, electron transfer
              processes, substrate specificity, and others.  This enzyme oxidizes many
              aromatic, aliphatic, and halogenated hydrocarbons.  Hydrocarbon oxidation is an
              important topic because hydrocarbons are the preeminent chemical feedstocks and
              about 60% of all industrial transformations involve some form of oxidation or
              reduction. This study is aimed to create, select, and characterize new and
              improved isoforms of T4MO through bioengineering, using a variety of
              biochemical, catalytic, and physical approaches. This study is integrated also
              into discovery-based undergraduate teaching, involving state-of-the-art
              techniques such as DNA isolation and sequencing, expression vector
              construction, protein expression, protein purification, and structure/ function
              characterizations.  The objective is to contribute to the utility of T4MO
              complexes as biocatalysts, gaining significant knowledge of their function, and
              providing a stimulating focus for teaching the theory and practical application
              of modern biochemical techniques.
