Title       : CAREER: Orbital Dynamics of Solar System Dust
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9733789

Award Number: 9733789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas P. Hamilton hamilton@astro.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1206,1215,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9733789  Hamilton    The research goals are focused on understanding the origin
              and evolution of micron to millimeter sized dust in the solar system.  The
              current distribution of dusty material around planets and in interplanetary
              space is a result of the delicate balance of many dynamical processes.  Micron
              and millimeter sized dust grains are created, their orbits evolve, and they are
              destroyed on very short timescales.  Insight into these fundamental processes
              can be gained by analyzing, interpreting, and modeling the detailed impact data
              from the dust detectors aboard the Ulysses, Galileo, and Cassini spacecraft. 
              In particular, the objectives of this research are to use these unique data
              sets to: 1) discover the source of the intriguing dust streams near Jupiter; 2)
              modernize and strengthen dynamical arguments which suggest that dark dust from
              Saturn's distant satellite Phoebe coats Iapetus' leading hemisphere; and 3)
              characterize the distribution and dynamics of dust in distant circumplanetary
              orbits.  A multipronged approach, which includes data analysis, analytical
              calculations, and numerical simulations, will be applied to these and other
              related problems in dust dynamics.  This study will lead to an improved
              understanding of many fundamental features of the solar system, and will
              highlight the important processes active in shaping our solar system today. 
              Moreover, since most of the processes currently acting on dust were also
              important in the early solar system, the results of this investigation will
              help clarify aspects of planetary formation.    The educational component of
              this proposal describes innovative ways to bring the exploration of orbital
              dynamics into the undergraduate classroom.  The orbital motions of the planets,
              their moons, artificial satellites, and planetary spacecraft are topics that
              continue to fascinate students of all ages.  Students are also intrigued by the
              use of computers and the information on the Internet and the World Wide Web. 
              The intrinsic appeal of t hese topics will  be used to interest  students by
              designing and implementing easy-to use interactive computer programs to teach
              the fundamentals of orbital motion.  Drawing upon previous experience in
              setting up and using several of these interactive programs in a classroom
              environment, and upon the proven principles and methods of' active learning,
              innovative class exercises for undergraduate students at all levels will be
              designed.  Exercises for upper level undergraduate Astronomy majors will be
              designed to expose students to the methods of scientific inquiry and to aspects
              of  ongoing research.  The exercises will also provide ways for students to
              test and to better appreciate important analytic derivations, and will allow
              them to explore their own interests in orbital dynamics independently. 
              Exercises intended for large introductory Astronomy classes will emphasize the
              spirit of scientific inquiry and will be designed to address concepts that
              students traditionally have difficulty grasping.  The programs will be
              available on the World Wide Web, which offers unbeatable access for students. 
              In addition, the programs will be computer platform independent, which will
              allow students to focus on astronomical issues rather than on computer
              languages and/or operating systems.  These highly desirable properties will
              allow the PI to design effective teaching tools for use in undergraduate
              classrooms.  ***
