Title       : CAREER: Dynamic Sonar Perception and Navigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9733040

Award Number: 9733040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Leonard jleonard@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9733040  Leonard  The objective of this career development plan is to foster 
              the interest of the next generation of students in the  special challenges and
              rewards of ocean engineering, while  advancing the state of knowledge in the
              critical areas of  sonar perception and navigation.  The realization of the 
              full potential of future ocean technologies will require new  engineers with
              the motivation to approach difficult marine  problems and an understanding of
              the complexities of ocean  system design.    Autonomous navigation using sensor
              measurements of  environmental features provides a compelling goal to focus 
              research in sonar perception and navigation.  Building a map  of an unknown
              environment while using that map to navigate  is a difficult problem at the
              frontier of robotics research.  Current data fusion methods are not robust or 
              computationally tractable for this problem.    To realize this capability for
              marine robotic systems using  sonar, three objectives will be pursued:  (1)
              feature  extraction methods which exploit knowledge of the underlying  physics
              of sonar, (2) uncertainty management techniques that  incorporate noise, data
              association ambiguity, and  navigation error, and (3) adaptive echolocation
              strategies  that permit efficient detection and characterization of  objects. 
              To investigate these topics, graduate and  undergraduate students will
              participate in algorithm  development, data acquisition and processing, and 
              experimentation in controlled environments.  Innovative  experiments that
              biomimic dolphin echolocation will be  performed in a testing tank at MIT. 
              Collaborations have  been established to provide maximum research impact.   
              The educational plan involves teaching and mentoring in  subject areas that are
              closely related to the research.  The  undergraduate teaching responsibilities
              of the principal  investigator include a sophomore-level introductory course 
              in ocean science and technology, a two semester capstone  design sequence, and
              a freshman advising  seminar based on  the sonar systems of bats, dolphins, and
              robots.  Innovations in pedagogy will promote active learning,  teamwork, and
              communication skills.  Case studies will guide  discussion of contemporary
              topics in oceanography,  acoustics, and design.  Novel laboratory exercises
              will  demonstrate principles from acoustics and marine robotics.  New
              Matlab-based tools will enable students to manipulate  ocean data.  ***
