Title       : PECASE: Accuracy of Thin Slice Judgements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a9733706

Award Number: 9733706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nalini Ambady na@wjh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1076,1092,1187,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The research in this CAREER proposal is directed towards improving our
              fundamental understanding of the accuracy of perceptual judgments based on very
              minimal information - brief `thin slices` or glimpses of behavior (such as
              2-second silent video clips). Recent research suggests that people can make
              surprisingly accurate judgments from such slices. For example, judgments of
              thin slices of behavior have been found to predict important outcome variables
              in social and clinical psychology as accurately as judgments of thicker slices.
              The goal of the proposed research is to advance the field by elucidating some
              of the mechanisms that affect the real-life accuracy of perceptual appraisals,
              evaluations, and personality judgments from minimal information. The proposed
              work will integrate theoretical and empirical approaches from the areas of
              perception, cognitive science, education, communication, social cognition,
              ecological, cultural, and personality psychology. Specifically, the research
              program will explore (a) potential cognitive mechanisms that might be related
              to the accuracy of thin slice judgments; (b) potential affective mechanisms
              that might be related to the accuracy of thin slice judgments; (c) the
              automaticity of such judgments, (d) the efficacy and accuracy of such judgments
              in relation to judgments based on thick slices with considerably more
              information; (e) the stability of such judgments over time and across
              situations; and (f) the stability and generalizability of such judgments across
              cultures. Accuracy will be evaluated in relation to criteria that have
              considerable importance and ecological validity, such as indices of teacher
              effectiveness. The methods used to examine these mechanisms are diverse and
              include experimental, correlational, and meta-analytic techniques. The
              educational objectives of this CAREER proposal are (a) to develop courses to
              actively engage graduate and undergraduate students in research on
              interpersonal perception and communication using thin slices; (b) to design and
              conduct workshops to train educational and healthcare professionals in
              communication and interpersonal skills, and (c) to develop new assessment tools
              using multimedia technology.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
