Title       : CAREER: The Laboratory Experience: Introductory Physics through Independent
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9733898

Award Number: 9733898
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rena J. Zieve zieve@physics.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Zieve  9733898    This is a CAREER Award to a female scientist and is composed
              of  two subprojects. One component employs the controlled  introduction of
              structural defects to modify the phase diagram  and vortex behavior of the
              superconducting heavy fermion system  (U,Th)Be13. This system exhibits multiple
              superconducting phases,  as well as magnetism, and should provide clues to
              understanding  other unconventional superconductors, such as the high-Tc 
              superconductors. Columnar defects will be created through heavy-  ion
              irradiation, and point defects through both irradiation and  substitution.
              Low-temperature thermodynamic and magnetic  measurements will be used to
              identify the superconducting wave  function(s) of the system. The educational
              component involves  facilitating undergraduate research through a less
              technically  demanding set of experiments. These involve the study of packing 
              arrangements of solid objects. Vibrating a container of beads  anneals them
              into the densest possible arrangement in two  dimensions, but not in three
              dimensions. This project will  examine the dimensional crossover by varying
              container size and  shape, and will test different annealing  procedures to
              determine  the interaction of dimensionality and dynamical processes.  %%% 
              This a CAREER Award to a female scientist and is composed of two  subprojects.
              One component investigates materials known as "heavy  fermion" superconductors.
              These superconductors carry electric  current with no energy loss, like
              ordinary superconductors, but  in addition exhibit unusual magnetic behavior.
              Structural  imperfections of the atoms in the sample will be deliberately 
              introduced in order to modify their electrical and magnetic  properties. The
              resulting changes in the onset temperature of  superconductivity and the
              magnetic behavior of the superconductor  are expected to shed light on the
              atomic origins of the  superconductivity. This could lead to new
              superconducting  materials and a better understanding of superconductors  in 
              practical applications. The educational component will introduce 
              undergraduates to research through a less technically demanding  set of
              experiments. These experiments involve studies of how  objects arrange
              themselves in two and three dimensions. Shaking  solid objects, such as glass
              beads, causes them to pack in the  densest way possible if the objects are
              constrained to a single  layer. However, this does not occur if they are
              stacked in three  dimensions, as in a jar of coffee beans. To understand the 
              transition from two-dimensional to three-dimensional behavior,  arrangements of
              objects only a few layers thick will be studied.  The general problem of
              packing is relevant to the fabrication of  new composite materials, where high
              density components often  impart special properties to the overall material.   
                      Technical abstract
