Title       : Adaptive Perceptual Coding of Visual Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9733897

Award Number: 9733897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lina Karam karam@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The ability of humans to analyze, capture, and recall visual  information
              significantly outperforms their ability to  analyze and recall other types of
              sensory information. This  fact makes humans rely heavily on their visual sense
              for  extracting information and learning about their surrounding,  and for
              planning and executing purposeful acts. As a result,  the need to reliably
              process and transmit visual data has  become central to many applications. In
              particular, with the  rapid development and migration of end-user applications
              and  services towards transmission media which place high  constraints on
              bandwidth, such as the Internet and wireless  media, there is a growing need
              for the development of new  efficient image and video compression techniques,
              which  offer reduction in bit-rates and improvement in quality at  low
              bit-rates. Although the importance of exploiting human  perception has long
              been recognized within the signal and  image processing community, the previous
              research efforts in  image and video compression have concentrated on
              developing  methods to minimize not perceptual but rather mathematically 
              tractable, easy to measure, distortion criteria. While non-  perceptual
              distortion measures were found to be reasonably  reliable for higher bit-rates
              (high quality applications),  they do not correlate well with the perceived
              quality at  lower bit-rates and they fail to guarantee preservation of 
              important perceptual qualities in the reconstructed images  despite the
              potential for a good signal-to-noise ratio  (SNR). Our research interest is in
              developing adaptive  perceptual-based image and video coding systems, which 
              discriminate between signal components based on their  perceptual relevance for
              achieving robustness and increased  performance in terms of quality and
              bit-rate. Achieving this  objective requires having reliable tools for
              predicting the  sensitivity of the human visual system to distortions. The 
              main objectives of this research can be summarized as  follows: 1 . Investigate
              the spatio-temporal masking  properties of the human visual system, and develop
              reliable  techniques to adaptively measure the masking characteristics  and
              perceptual relevancy of the different components  contained in the visual
              source material.2. Derive a reliable  tractable perceptual distortion metric
              for assessing visual  quality at a local or global level.  3. Investigate
              adaptive quantizer designs based on the  derived perceptual distortion
              metric.4. Develop and  investigate robust perceptually-based lossless and lossy
               image and video coding techniques, with emphasis on  audiovisual applications
              disseminated through highly  constrained-bandwith communication systems. The
              research  program is complemented by the education plan, in which a  Signal and
              Image Processing Outreach Program is being  developed to stimulate the interest
              of middle and high  school students and undergraduates in engineering and 
              science. Another main component of the educational plan is  to integrate the
              research part into the educational process  by incorporating some of the
              research activities in  undergraduate and graduate courses as well as in 
              undergraduate-oriented research projects, and by introducing  new courses
              related to the research effort. Another goal is  to research efficient ways to
              make use of technology in  education.
