Title       : CAREER: Micromachined Microwave and Optical Integrated Circuits- Design
               Methodologies for High Performance Communication Circuits and Packages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9733963

Award Number: 9733963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rhonda Franklin Drayton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9733963  Drayton  High performance in communication systems that handle large
              complex data formats from wireless and multimedia services is becoming
              increasingly difficult to achieve high frequency @ designs.  This is due to the
              limited speed/bandwidth capability and cross-talk/interference immunity of
              electronic designs.  As data size and structure increase, communication systems
              must operate faster.    Faster speeds can be achieved in two ways: (1) by
              increasing the operating frequency or (2) by using photonic circuits. 
              Increasing the operating frequency of electronic systems has an upper
              performance limit, particularly in terms of cross-talk and interference. 
              Photonic circuits, on the other hand, can achieve higher speeds hence wider
              bandwidth and offers excellent cross-talk/ interference immunity. 
              Unfortunately, the delivery of disparate data types at very fast rates has been
              achieved in telecommunication applications using photonic devices, but these
              designs types are not readily available for microwave applications.    This
              proposal will focus on developing innovative package and circuit design
              methodologies for HF circuits using a multidisciplinary approach.  This
              approach will involve three general areas: (1) advanced materials, such as
              polymers and M-V's, (2) advanced processing techniques, such as micromachining,
              and (3) design methods for microwave and optical integrated circuits. 
              Collectively, these areas will be used to address the research and educational
              needs for novel HF circuit designs and for HF designers of future communication
              systems.    The goals of this research plan are    - to explore the use of
              novel photonic designs to achieve functions traditionally performed by
              microwave circuits;    - to use polymers and III-V materials with
              micromachining techniques to develop packages and circuits based on the
              microwave and optical integrated circuits;    - to develop methodologies for
              packages and circuit components;      - to develop circuit components
              implemented in silico n platform for system-level integration,    - to study
              how photonic waves interact with high frequency electronic circuits (f >
              microwaves)      The goals of the education plan are    - to offer modem
              applied problems into conventional learning environments (i.e. the classroom
              and laboratory);    - to provide interactive learning methods in our classroom
              environment via hands-on laboratory and classroom interactions;      - to use
              multi-disciplinary approaches to solve classical and modem applied problems;   
              - to provide up-to-date learning opportunities through distance learning tools
              (i.e. internet and Web-based learning modules) to re-educate practicing
              engineers and other researchers in the field.    This plan will impact the
              development of novel design methodologies for HF applications.    The
              multi-disciplinary approach will allow advanced materials and novel fabrication
              processes to be investigated during the development states of design,
              potentially yielding low cost approaches.  Furthermore, the implementation of
              microwave and optical integrated circuits to achieve microwave functionality
              will allow the realization of more flexible design schemes in mixed signal
              platforms.            A-1
