Title       : CAREER: A Career Application in Bioengineering Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a9733928

Award Number: 9733928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Meaney dmeaney@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9733928  Meaney  Cells in the human body are aware constantly of their  outside
              environment and often respond to even small changes  in surrounding mechanical
              forces.  However, the exact nature  and course of these mechanically initiated
              changes remains  largely unexplained.  If better understood, the adaptation  of
              cells to mechanical stress could be better controlled to  understand and direct
              cell growth, maintenance, and the  restoration of cell function.    The
              underlying premise of the research and educational  activities of this CAREER
              award is that critical new  advances in the control of cell function are
              accomplished by  combining molecular based control of biological systems with 
              an engineered modulation of the external mechanical forces  sensed by the cell.
               An experimental approach is used to  understand how mechanical forces are
              sensed, or transduced,  by neuronal cells of the brain and spinal cord.  The
              focus  of research  in this CAREER award is on understanding how  changes to
              the structural architecture of the neuron can  affect the sensing mechanisms
              for the cell.  By developing  structure-function relationships for normal
              neurons, we seek  to extend these studies and accomplish our long term 
              objective of using these sensing mechanisms to assist in the  repair or
              recovery of the diseased or injured neuron.    The central aim of the
              educational plan is to bring elements  of cellular bioengineering research to
              the undergraduate  level and form a stronger interface with the clinical 
              sciences in the bioengineering undergraduate program.  These  two elements as
              critical for bioengineering undergraduates  to experience, since they both
              bring undergraduates closer  to the process of creating new knowledge through
              basic  research and viewing the practical applications of basic  bioengineering
              research in medicine.  It is expected that  the exposure to research based
              laboratories and modern tools  in biomedicine at the undergraduate level will
              help prepare  students for careers where  research is a more pervasive  element
              and is constantly translated into improvements in  health care technology.  ***
