Title       : PECASE: Neurally Inspired Silicon Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1999     
File        : a9733425

Award Number: 9733425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Diorio diorio@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This PI will study the physical and information-theoretic constraints that
              underline computation and computing machines.  For the educational component of
              the CAREER award, her will develop a new course, entitled `Computation and
              Computing Machines,` which will challenge students to consider the general
              notion of a computing machine.  First will introduce the requisite concepts in
              quantum physics, biology, integrated-circuit technology, information theory,
              and thermodynamics.  Using these concepts, He will the attributes and the
              Stations of present-day digital computers.  He will conclude by considering the
              foundations and promise of neurally inspired, quantum, and DNA computers.   His
              research goal is to build silicon integrated circuits that employ the
              computational principles used in nervous tissue. he has have already developed,
              in a standard CMOS process, a family of single-transistor devices called
              synapse transistors; these devices, like neural synapses, implement long-term
              analog memory, allow bi-directional memory updates, and learn from an input
              signs without interrupting the ongoing computation.  Although believe that a
              single device cannot model the complex behavior of a neural synapse completely,
              my synapse transistors do implement a local learning function.  He will model
              in silicon, the adaptive and learning behavior of living organisms, His
              approach is bottom-up: He will begin by fabricating synapse-transistor arrays
              that mimic some of the attributes of nervous tissue, including high device
              density, low power consumption, panel computation, and local weight adaptation,
              and he will investigate local learning in these arrays.  He will also develop
              circuits that model and axonal delays, and learn the delay values locally.  He
              will then use these arrays and delay circuits to investigate
              action-potential-based computation in silicon.  His future research will use
              the knowledge and devices gained under the CAREER award to construct large
              scale systems that, by using the computational and adaptive properties of
              nervous tissue, find good solutions to ill-posed problems.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
