Title       : CAREER: Development of a Computer-Based Methodology to Assist in Environmental
               Systems Analysis and Decision Making and Its Applications in Watershed
               Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2001   
File        : a9733788

Award Number: 9733788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259980             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Ranji Ranjithan ranji@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9733788  Ranjithan  The objectives of this research are to 1) investigate ways 
              to enhance the capabilities of genetic algorithms (GAs) for  complex
              environmental systems analysis, 2) develop and  integrate into existing courses
              an interactive training  module to assist in teaching the fundamentals of GAs
              and  their potential uses in environmental systems analysis, 3)  explore
              applications of the methodology in watershed  management through a series of
              realistic case-studies and 4)  integrate the case-studies and their findings in
              courses  related to environmental systems analysis and watershed  management.
              Environmental management problems are inherently  complex because the governing
              physical, chemical and  biological processes and their interactions are
              nonlinear  and difficult to represent in convenient mathematical  equations,
              further complicated by the multitude of other  important issues that must be
              considered, such as economics,  environmental impact and reliability. A major
              component of  this work is optimization for generation and identification  of
              efficient alternative solutions. Traditional optimization  procedures impose
              severe restrictions in using complex  nonlinear relationships common to
              environmental problem  solving. Genetic algorithms have been shown to be
              powerful  in addressing this issue and have the potential to make  significant
              improvement to the state-of-the-art. New  operators and procedures will be
              developed with the goal of  extending the use of GAs to present a limited set
              of  alternative solutions to complex problems, each of which  satisfy all
              quantified constraints, but which are otherwise  as far apart as possible in
              the decision space. In this way  a manageable number of alternatives can be
              evaluated that  constitute a wide assortment of choices on the less  quantified
              parameters. The academic plans include the  development of teaching modules and
              interactive techniques  for both students and practitioners; training aids will
               permit students to learn to use  the tool and to compare its  results with
              those of other adaptive optimization  techniques. To ensure that the proposed
              systems  methodologies are applicable in practice, an array of  realistic
              applications associated with watershed management  has been identified and will
              be investigated in  collaboration with practitioners and other researchers. An 
              extensive case study of the Neuse River Basin in North  Carolina will be
              included.  ***
