Title       : CAREER: Atomic Mechanisms at Interfaces and Defects in Semiconducting Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2001   
File        : a9733895

Award Number: 9733895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel D. Browning browning@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9733895  Browning    The objective of this CAREER project is to develop a 
              comprehensive research and education program linked to the next  generation of
              semiconducting materials and devices. The project  strives for an atomic level
              understanding of structure-property  relationships in semiconducting materials,
              and a parallel  materials science education program. The research will utilize 
              recently developed correlated atomic resolution Z-contrast  imaging and
              electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) techniques  in a scanning transmission
              electron microscope (STEM) to probe  internal interfaces and defects in
              semiconductors with the goal  of determining atomic structure, composition and
              electronic  structure at individual atomic sites. Electronic and optical 
              properties of individual interfaces or defects will be modeled  and the overall
              material properties constructed from fundamental  atomic properties. Unlike
              traditional high-resolution imaging  techniques, where images and simulations
              must be matched, this  approach allows real materials defects and interfaces to
              be  investigated. Research will include GaN and SiC, ITO/n-GaAs,  ZnSe/Fe
              magnetic multilayers, and the effect of nitrogen on the  oxidation of Si and
              SiGe for VLSI. The project involves  established collaborations with university
              materials growth  groups and with industry, incorporating feedback between
              growth  and characterization related to advanced device concepts and 
              developments. Atomic scale research studies of semiconductors are  ideal for
              the integration of research and education. Links  between the operation of an
              everyday object such as a CD-player  or computer, and the atomic structure of
              its components, will be  used to emphasize basic features of materials science,
              and the  excitement of discovery. Similar project based learning ideas  will
              also be incorporated into the undergraduate curriculum. The  PI will be
              teaching a new course in experimental materials  physics, where the focus will
              be on fundamental character ization  and applications of materials. Running
              parallel to this will be a  graduate course, where experiments will be carried
              out at higher  levels of sophistication, and related to real world
              applications.  %%%  The project addresses leading edge research and education
              issues  in a topical area of materials science having high technological 
              relevance.  The research will contribute basic materials science  knowledge at
              a fundamental level to electronic materials and  advanced device concepts. An
              important feature of the program is  the emphasis on education, and on the
              integration of research and  education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and  technologically significant research area.  ***
