Title       : CAREER: Topological Excitations in Two Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9733949

Award Number: 9733949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheena Murphy sheena@mail.nhn.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Murphy  9733949    This  is a CAREER Award to a female scientist. The research
              deals  with  special  types  of electronic excitations  which  occur  as 
              spatially  extended  quasiparticles in  two-dimensional  electron  systems.  It
               is  often  advantageous to  sort  such  excitations  according  to whether or
              not they have a non-zero winding  number  or   twist.   Excitations  possessing
               a  twist  are   known   as  "topological excitations" and include solitons,
              vortices,  domain  walls and dislocations. They cannot decay for the same
              reason you  cannot untwist a phone cord without picking up the receiver:  the 
              excitation  or  winding  can only be removed  by  a  large  scale 
              reorientation of the entire system. This translates to long  term  stability 
              as  evidenced  by the use of a topological  excitation  known  as a soliton as
              a signal carrier in transcontinental fiber  links.  The  concept  of  a 
              topological  excitation  has  proven  exceptionally useful in physics: Rather
              than attempt to  describe  the  behavior  of  the entire system, a more
              manageable  approach  focuses  on  just the stable configuration of these 
              excitations.  Thus  the tornadoes in a storm, the dislocations in a crystal  or
               the  domain walls in a ferromagnet are studied to obtain a  great  deal about
              the system at hand. This proposal details an extensive  study of the
              topological excitations occurring on two-dimensional  electronic systems in a
              magnetic field.  %%%  This  is  CAREER Award to a female scientist. The
              research  deals  with special types of electronic excitations known as
              topological  excitations.  These excited electron states  possess  a  kind  of 
              twist, like a screw. Previously studied as mathematical oddities,  they  have 
              recently  been  found in  nature  in  two-dimensional  semiconductor 
              structures, known as Quantum Hall  systems.  These  stable  excitations are
              more than a new language  for  many  body  electron   interactions,   they  are
               real   spatially   extended  quasiparticles.  The   experimental goal of  this
               proposal  is  a  greater  understanding of the role of topological excitations
               in  two  dimensional  electronic systems. The second  focus  of  this  CAREER 
               proposal  is  the  adaptation  of  novel   instructional  approaches, 
              commonly used at the introductory  level,  to  upper  level  physics courses.
              While introductory physics education  has  benefited  from  these  new
              techniques,  there  has  been  little  application to more advanced
              undergraduate material. The plan  is  to  introduce concept based questions in
              conjunction  with  group  learning  techniques  into  the more advanced 
              curricula  and  to  facilitate  this  introduction by the development  of  a 
              concept  question website.
