Title       : PECASE: Seismic Hazard Mitigation: Innovative Directions in Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a9733272

Award Number: 9733272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley J. Dyke sdyke@seas.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9733272  S. Dyke    The focus of this CAREER research project is to develop 
              innovative and implementable techniques for mitigating the  devasting
              consequences of severe seismic events.  In  particular, the work will
              concentrate on the implementation  of supplemental damping devices. 
              Semi-active devices are  considered here because they address most of the
              concerns  brought forth about structural control, and are expected to  advance
              the near-term acceptance of  this technology.  Specifically, magnetorheological
              (MR) dampers are new semi-  active devices that are particularly suitable for
              civil  engineering applications.  They offer mechanical simplicity,  low power
              requirements, environmental robustness, and  demonstrated potential for
              developing forces sufficient for  full-scale applications at a reasonable cost,
              and can be  viewed as fail-safe in that they become passive dampers  should
              control hardware malfunction.    A number of important issues pertinent to
              practical  implementation will be examined.  Ultimately, guidelines  which can
              be used by design engineers to employ these  devices in new construction and
              retrofit applications will  be developed.  The control of both linear and
              nonlinear  structures, and the use of single and multiple control  devices will
              be considered,  The performance of the MR  damper will be compared to the
              active and passive systems  for a wide array of excitation types and
              amplitudes.  Analytical and experimental investigations will be carried  out in
              parallel, using the facilities available in the  earthquake engineering
              laboratory at Washington University  which has recently funded the construction
              of this  experimental facility.    The primary objective of the educational
              program to provide  students the Department of Civil Engineering with an 
              understanding that structures are dynamic systems, and for  the implications of
              this in their analysis and design,  At  the undergraduate level, an
              experimental facility will be  provided in which students can study  the
              response of  structures to dynamic loads, incorporating, "hands-on" 
              experiments into the cirrocumuli to introduce basic concepts  in structural
              dynamics and providing opportunities will be  created for students to
              participate in research projects in  the laboratory.  At the graduate level, a
              new course in  experimental methods for dynamic testing will be developed  to
              enable providing students to participate in state-of-the-  art research and
              integrating experiments into the advanced  structural dynamics course. 
              Throughout the program, n-line  exercises will be developed to assist students
              innprparing  for the laboratories.  The educational and research components of
              the project are  designed to complement and enhance each other.  The 
              laboratory facilities, and experiments developed therein  will provide the
              necessary tools to facilitate the  cirrocumuli development.  This integrated
              approach will  provide students with an understanding of the dynamic nature  of
              structures through illustrative experiments and state-of-  the-art research
              projects.  Furthermore, students at all  levels will be introduced to this
              emerging technology.
