Title       : CAREER: Cooperative Client/Server Database Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9733642

Award Number: 9733642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257680             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex Delis ad@naxos.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              We witness an ever-increasing demand for servers that handle continuously
              accumulating volumes of data. As a result, there is a constant need to develop
              systems and techniques that effectively support such data. In this direction,
              Client/Server Database Systems (C/S DBSs) have helped considerably by
              exploiting transient caching and harnessing networked system resources.
              However, they have not been able to deliver highly scalable behavior. To this
              end, cooperative processing methods are investigated and options offered by
              emerging network technology are explored in order to achieve higher
              scalability. More specifically, this project examines: techniques that
              facilitate multi-client cooperation; the effects of high-speed and Gigabit
              networks on the design of C/S DBSs; and access methods for spatial and
              multi-dimensional data in C/S environments. The project results will include
              techniques for cooperative query processing and analysis of their tradeoffs,
              flexible transaction protocols in the presence of high-speed networks and
              experimental evaluation of their behavior, as well as indexing methods for C/S
              environments. As organizations manage increasing volumes of data, such
              techniques will help ease the strain corporate data servers currently
              experience. In addition to student supervision, the educational plan includes:
              introduction of two new courses, participation in outreach programs, and
              further development of a newly established laboratory.    
              http://naxos.poly.edu/~ad
