Title       : CAREER: Aerosol Droplet Combustion Synthesis of Nonequilibrium Nanoscale
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a9733234

Award Number: 9733234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Helble helble@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Helble    This is a fundamental exploration of combustion aerosol
              synthesis to generate chemically complex nanoscale ceramic materials.  In
              combustion aerosol synthesis, ceramic precursors are dissolved or dispersed in
              a combustible carrier; when this carrier is atomized into a high-temperature
              flame, each droplet can become a "microreactor" for nanoscale ceramic particle
              synthesis.  The high temperature, exothermic droplet combustion reactions
              enable the generation of chemically complex, crystalline materials without need
              for further heat treatment.  The first material to be examined is
              yttria-stabilized zirconia because of its applicability as a thermal barrier,
              coating, catalyst, and catalyst support.  A range of yttria compositions is
              considered to determine whether the nanoscale material, with its high
              concentration of surface atoms, shows the same transitions in phase behavior as
              does conventional stabilized zirconia.  Synthesis issues explored include the
              control of reacting aerosol droplet size, particle formation through the
              condensed-phase reaction and nucleation within the reacting droplet, and
              particle formation through the vaporization and subsequent condensation of
              ceramic compound vapors.  Key issues are the ability to minimize agglomeration
              of nanoscale particles and the ability to control their chemical composition.  
               Advanced ceramic materials consolidated from nanometer-scale ceramics have the
              potential to provide improved mechanical, optical, and electronic behavior over
              their larger-grained counterparts.  Potential applications include barrier
              coatings, catalysts, structural materials, and cores of superconducting wires. 
                Educational efforts include development of an aerosol science course using
              interactive learning and, in conjunction with the Boston Museum of Science,
              development of a hands-on interpretive module addressing the nanoscale world as
              a realm between atomic and macroscopic regimes.
