Title       : Career: Bilinear Shape-Constrained Regression in Blind Source
               Separation/Equalization, and Signal Processing for Chromatographic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9733540

Award Number: 9733540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolaos D. Sidiropoulos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The explosive growth of wireless communications has  generated competitive
              pressure to fulfill the promise of  seamlessly integrated personal
              communication services.  Meeting quality-of-service constraints for advanced 
              multimedia services over wireless is an important challenge.  Wireless channels
              are rapidly-varying, rate-limited, and  subject to severe degradation due to
              propagation and  multiuser interference. This has sparked considerable 
              interest in blind signal separation techniques, capable of  separating and
              estimating the users' signals without  assuming knowledge of the channel.
              Interestingly,  mathematically similar problems appear in chromatographic 
              analysis (CA) and flow injection analysis (FIA) in  chemometrics, with
              applications in quality control for  manufacturing, a Federal Strategic Area. 
              The research  component of this program involves the study of blind signal 
              separation problems, posed as a (system of) bilinear  regression(s) subject to:
              (i) factorization constraints;  (ii) uni- or oligo-modality, convexity, or
              support  constraints on the columns of certain factors (these exploit 
              direction-of-arrival (DOA) diversity afforded by antenna  arrays, without
              requiring DOA estimation; unimodality is  well-motivated in the context of
              CA/FIA, and so is  smoothness of factor profiles); and (iii) modulation-induced
               (e.g., finite-alphabet) constraints. The emphasis is on the  development and
              performance analysis of associated  optimization algorithms, and applications
              thereof in  communications and chemometrics. Cross-fertilization between  the
              two application domains is an integral goal of this  program. The educational
              component of this program includes:  (i) the development of introductory and
              advanced courses on  optimization theory and algorithms for signal 
              processing/communications -oriented undergraduate and  graduate students; (ii)
              the development of a suite of MATLAB  routines for laboratory/Web instruction;
              (iii) the creation  of undergraduate signal processing research and education 
              opportunities; and (iv) greater emphasis on innovative  instruction through
              proper utilization of multimedia tools  to complement traditional modes of
              instruction.
