Title       : Model Uncertainty, Model Selection, and Robustness with Applications in
               Environmental Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1998      
File        : a9733013

Award Number: 9733013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merlise A. Clyde clyde@stat.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9188,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
              Proposal Number: DMS   PI: Merlise A. Clyde  Institution: Duke University 
              Project: Mode Uncertainty, Model Selection, and Robustness, with   Applications
              in Environmental Sciences    Abstract:    Finding models to describe data and
              relationships among  variables is a fundamental problem in statistics and
              science. Linear   regression and its generalizations are some of the most
              commonly used   statistical methods for data analysis.  As scientists collect  
              increasingly larger data sets, the fear of over-fitting the data by   using all
              measured covariates leads to the standard approach of  selecting a single
              ``best'' model based on a subset of the  covariates, and then proceeding with
              scientific inferences and  predictions as if that were the true model.  This
              typical analysis  ignores the uncertainty about which variables should be
              included in  the model, potentially leading to overconfident inferences.  Model
               uncertainty often significantly outweighs other sources of  uncertainty in
              problems, but is generally ignored in standard  statistical practice and
              teaching.    This research focuses on Bayesian methods for incorporating model 
              uncertainty into data analysis and decision making.  In Bayesian  model
              averaging, predictions and inferences are based on a set of  models rather than
              a single model; each model contributes  proportionally to the support it
              receives from the observed data.  Novel methods of identifying promising models
              for use in Bayesian  model averaging are studied.  These can increase the
              applicability  of Bayesian methods to realistic problems that involve a large 
              number of variables.  One of the major applications of the  research is to
              estimate the effect of particulate matter on  mortality in the elderly
              population and assess the potential  impact of the EPA's new National Ambient
              Air Quality Standards  for particulates.  This and other case studies will be
              used to  develop a new course in modern Baye sian statistical methods for 
              environmental and biological science students at Duke University.
