Title       : CAREER: Structural Basis of Bacterial Conjugation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9733655

Award Number: 9733655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel F. Schildbach joel@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Schildbach  9733655    F factor, like all conjugative plasmids, directs its
              transfer from one bacterium to another, even between species.  While the
              genetics of F factor have been studied extensively, little is known about the
              structural basis of conjugal transfer.  The investigator is mounting a
              long-term effort to describe F factor conjugation in molecular detail.  The
              initial research will concentrate on a complex of three proteins and plasmid
              DNA that facilitates DNA cleavage with strand and sequence specificity.  Of
              these proteins, only plasmid-encoded TraI possesses nucleolytic activity. 
              Integration host factor (IHF) and plasmid-encoded TraY are required for
              efficient TraI activity, although their roles are unknown.  To better define
              TraY activity, the investigator will identify TraY amino acids involved in DNA
              recognition through site-directed mutagenesis, and will characterize the F
              plasmid DNA sequence bound by TraY.  The binding of IHF and TraY to DNA will be
              assessed for cooperativity, and for its effect on DNA conformation. 
              Crystallization of TraY will also be attempted, in preparation for eventual
              structure determination by X-ray crystallography. This research, coupled with
              teaching in lecture and seminar courses, is intended to demonstrate to graduate
              and undergraduate students the value of examining biological systems using
              interdisciplinary studies that include structural biology.    Conjugation is an
              efficient mechanism for transferring DNA between even unrelated bacterial
              species.  Consequently, acquisition of antibiotic resistance genes by
              pathogenic bacteria frequently occurs through conjugal transfer.  Drugs that
              inhibit conjugation, given in concert with regular antibiotic treatment, may
              render antibiotics more effective and may reduce the incidence of antibiotic
              resistance.  Design of such inhibitors requires an understanding of the
              structures and mechanisms of the proteins and DNA involved in conjugation.  The
              proposed activities will provide understanding of one step i n bacterial
              conjugation, as well as instill in students an appreciation of the value and
              design of such studies.
