Title       : CAREER: Cavity QED of Semiconductors with High-Q Dielectric Microspheres
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a9733230

Award Number: 9733230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hailin Wang hailin@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9733230  Wang    This  is a CAREER Award which combines research and education 
              in  semiconductor  quantum optics. The research program  will  extend  cavity 
              quantum electrodynamics (QED) studies into the domain  of  semiconductors by
              developing a novel approach based on  composite  semiconductor-microsphere 
              systems that  can  take  advantage  of  extreme  three dimensional photonic
              confinement in  a  dielectric  microsphere. Dynamics and radiative processes in
              the systems will  also be investigated by using various techniques of
              time-resolved  photoluminescence.  The  objective is to understand  how 
              radical  modifications  in  vacuum  fluctuations  can  change  fundamental 
              spontaneous  emission processed in semiconductors. The  education  program  
              includes   developing   a   university-wide   photonics  curriculum  and 
              initiating  an  industrial  internship   program  affiliated  with the Oregon
              Center for Optics to  better  prepare  students for growing job markets in
              photonics-related industries.  The  education  program  also includes creating 
              a  new  graduate  course  on  semiconductor quantum optics to bring  down 
              barriers  between quantum optics and condensed matter physics.  %%%  This  
              CAREER  Award  combines  research  and  education   in   a  technologically 
              important  area  of  optics  and   semiconductor  physics.  The  research 
              program centers on  fundamental  optical  processes in a novel semiconductor
              optical devices where the size  of the optical resonator approaches the optical
              wavelength. These  studies  should  improve our understanding of physical 
              behaviors  and  limit of devices such as micro-lasers and may also  lead  to 
              new  concepts for devices such as ultralow threshold lasers.  The  education 
              program includes developing an undergraduate photonics  curriculum to make
              photonics education accessible to students  in  other disciplines and
              initiating an industrial internship program  to  better prepare students for
              growing job markets in photonics-  related ind ustries.  ***
