Title       : CAREER: Probing the Structure of the Salmonella Chromosome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9733332

Award Number: 9733332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497883             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anca M. Segall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Segall  9733332  Many lines of evidence have shown that the structure of the E.
              coli and Salmonella bacterial chromosomes affects interactions with various
              enzyme complexes. Several probes of structure, including homologous
              recombination, transposition by Tn7 and Tn 10, and site-specific deletion
              mediated by the resolvase protein of the delta gamma transposon, have uncovered
              the presence of chromosomal "barriers". However, neither the nature of these
              barriers nor the basis of their action is known. Since these barriers are
              likely to affect all systems that interact with chromosomal DNA (repair,
              replication, and transcription functions as well as interactions between the
              chromosome and extrachromosomal elements like viruses and transposons), it is
              important to understand their nature and effects, and if and how they are
              regulated.  The first stage is to unequivocally identify and define the
              barriers or structural elements.  This research addresses this question in a
              systematic and more extensive manner than has been attempted in the past. The
              experiments are geared to understanding the three-dimensional structure of the
              chromosome within the bacterial cell, and how this structure is affected by
              some basic features of cell physiology. The probe that is being used is the
              site-specific recombination system of phage lambda, which has several features
              that make it a flexible and sensitive tool for the task at hand, and which will
              yield data complementary to that obtained by the probes used previously. The
              questions that are being addressed are: 1) Do all chromosomal sequences have
              equal access to each other?  2) Do circular extrachromosomal sequences
              (specifically plasmids) have equal access to all chromosomal locations? 3) Do
              loci that are easily accessible to extrachromosomal DNA but are poorly
              accessible to other chromosomal loci define regions that constrain the
              structure of the folded chromosome?    One of the most limiting aspects of
              educating biology students today is hands-on laboratory traini ng not in a
              classical classroom context, but in a real-life research laboratory. Students
              with well-developed skills in this area are extremely sought-after, but too few
              of them have the opportunity to enter research labs and receive the necessary
              training in problem-solving skills and proficiency in lab methods, experimental
              design, and data analysis. To begin to correct this problem five summer
              research workshops are being formed for undergraduates where students will work
              in teams on different facets of a research problem.  Students will be involved
              in  the design, performance, and analysis of the experiments, and will learn
              modern molecular techniques. The workshops should benefit students most
              profoundly by exposing them to carrying out experiments under a more realistic
              setting than can be duplicated in larger laboratory courses in which  students
              do set lab exercises.   In addition, some of the experiments on chromosome
              structure will be adapted and introduced into one new and one ongoing
              laboratory course.
