Title       : CAREER: In Situ Microscopy and Spectroscopy of Dynamic Behavior on Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2000  
File        : a9733821

Award Number: 9733821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jochen Lauterbach   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Lauterbach - 9733821    Prof. Jochen Lauterbach or Purdue University
              will follow mesoscopic spatio-temporal dynamics of catalytic surfaces with
              in-situ high-resolution methods based on imaging ellipsometry, IR vibrational,
              and second-order non-linear optical spectroscopy. The main objective is to
              identify periodic phenomena that occur because of nonlinear coupling of effects
              due to mesoscopic features such as surface heterogeneity or site diversity. The
              potentially synergistic effects will be exploited to conceive new catalysts
              based on tailored surface heterogeneity. CO and hydrocarbon oxidation
              simultaneously with NOx reduction will be studied on Rh-BaO-Pt catalyst
              surfaces microfabricated with spatially resolved compositional difference, or
              CeO2 on Pt and Cu foils, under reaction conditions resembling automobile
              exhaust catalysis. External forcing of reaction-diffusion systems will be
              effected by pulsed IR laser heating, leading to better understanding of
              resonant forcing effects on CO oxidation, and to unsteady state reactor
              operation in general. Modeling and simulation of reaction, diffusion, and
              pattern formation will also be carried out. A second reaction system to be
              investigated is spatially resolved photoinduced polymerization, which may lead
              to new compositionally modulated thin polymeric films. UV-initiated,
              mask-shadowed, gas-phase polymerization of acrolein, methacrolein, and styrene
              on various transition metal surfaces (Ag, Cu, Pt), will be followed up to a
              micron thickness by SSHG, which is sensitive to interfacial structure.
              Likewise, the bonding, electronic, and structural details during the initial
              polymerization steps will be studied under high vacuum conditions with IR
              absorption or SFG simultaneously with EMSI or SSHG. This research links
              electronic, molecular, mesoscopic and macroscopic parameters for
              reaction-diffusion phenomena that are important in various areas: catalysis,
              semiconductor manufacturing, biological and polymeric coating deposition. At
              the educa tional level, Prof. Lauterbach will renew the chemical engineering
              laboratory courses with experiments in surface chemistry, catalysis, nanoscale
              mechanics, polymer engineering, holography, and optical engineering, coupled
              with newer evaluation and teaching methods based on interactive electronic
              media.
