Title       : A CAREER Plan: New Mixed-Valent Layered Perovskites to Elucidate
               Structure-Property Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9733329

Award Number: 9733329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243312             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margret J. Geselbracht mgeselbr@reed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reed College
	      3203 S E Woodstock Blvd
	      Portland, OR  972028138    503/771-1112

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9178,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9733329  Geselbracht    Understanding structure-property relationships is the
              key to  unlocking the ability to tailor-design new superconductors and  other
              materials with interesting electronic and magnetic  properties.  This CAREER
              award will support research focused on  the synthesis and characterization of
              new mixed-valent materials  with layered perovskite-type structures. 
              Specifically, new mixed-  valent titanates and niobates will be targeted via
              direct  preparation in molten chloride fluxes.  Characterization of the 
              electronic and magnetic properties of these materials will  elucidate
              structure--property relationships in a series of  compounds with similar
              structures and varying compositions.  The  results of this research will expand
              the repertoire of synthetic  strategies to early transition metal oxides and
              provide valuable  insight into what structural and electronic features are 
              necessary for superconductivity in reduced titanates and  niobates.  The
              educational plan will emphasize mentoring  undergraduate students in research
              and integrating the theme of  structure-property relationships in layered
              perovskites into the  Introductory Inorganic Chemistry course through the
              development  of several new laboratory projects.  In addition, a student-based 
              outreach program to local high school chemistry classrooms will  be initiated,
              and illustrative examples of structure-property  relationships in extended
              solids will be disseminated to the  larger educational community through the
              development of a World  Wide Web site.  %%%  In an inherently interdisciplinary
              field like materials  research, the role of the solid state chemist is to lead
              the  drive to discover new materials with interesting properties.  New
              materials will, in turn, stimulate physicists, materials  scientists, and
              engineers to think about ways to harness these  properties for technological
              applications.  The discovery of  new materials lies at the heart of this
              research plan and  remains central to future progress in ma terials research. 
              On a  broader level, the primary impact of this work will be the rich 
              educational experience of undergraduates participating in  cutting-edge
              research.  Through this project, students at Reed  College will experience how
              modern science is done and the role  of chemists in shaping the solid state
              materials of the future.  ***
