Title       : CAREER: Integrated Environment for Interactive Rendering of Large-Scale Solid
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a9733827

Award Number: 9733827
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subodh Kumar subodh@cs.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Interactive rendering is crucial to virtual design and  prototyping of large
              engineering models. This research will  produce techniques to significantly
              speed up the rendering of  surface models on current graphics systems. The
              emphasis will be  on novel algorithmic improvements in processing and rendering
              of  large models.   The effectiveness of using analytic surfaces and  other
              higher order representations of large models will also be  investigated. Such
              representations contain more information than  polygonal representations, but
              take less space to store. Recent  improvements in efficient tessellation and
              rendering of  parametric surfaces have opened up new possibilities for speeding
               up the rendering of large surface models. This research will use  and improve
              these results. In particular, it will result in the  following:    - 
              Higher-order and hierarchical representations tessellated on-  line into a
              small number of triangles, based on the user's  position  -  Efficient
              visibility processing of surfaces    -  Interactive rendering of dynamically
              changing surfaces    -  Improved sampling of surfaces for the generation of
              textured  polygonal approximations    -  Configurable system that adjusts
              rendering speed and quality  without requiring user input    -  Algorithms that
              scale well with both available computing  resources and model size    -  A
              unified framework that allows various techniques to  inter-operate and results
              in combined improvement in the state of  the art    The project also includes
              design and installation of new computer  graphics courses and laboratories in
              the computer science  department at the Johns Hopkins University. Significant 
              interactions between the classrooms and laboratories are planned.  The usenet
              and the world wide web will be widely used to augment  the classroom teaching.
              In addition, seminars and informal  meetings will be organized to discuss
              research in computer  graphics.
