Title       : CAREER: Mesoscopic Scale Phase Separation in Alloys under Sustained External
               Forcing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9733582

Award Number: 9733582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pascal Bellon bellon@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9733582  Bellon    This CAREER grant addresses research and educational 
              programs which are centered on non-equilibrium processing of  materials.  The
              research component examines the new idea  that in alloys under sustained
              external forcing phase  separation may take place on a mesoscopic scale, i.e. a
               scale which is neither atomic, nor macroscopic, and these  meso-structures can
              be stable at steady-state. The  objectives of the proposed research are: (a) to
              perform a  detailed characterization of the composition field in alloys  with
              positive heat of mixing at steady-state during by ball  milling under
              controlled conditions; (b) to elucidate the  origin of the stabilization of
              mesoscopic phase separation  in alloys under sustained shearing; and (c) to
              test whether  the available experimental results on these mesostructures  can
              be rationalized by a kinetic model with competing  dynamics, where dislocation
              glide would be the dynamics  forcing the mixing of immiscible elements.  The
              approach  chosen involves the milling of Fe-Cu and Cu-Ag powders under 
              controlled conditions and the use of analytical techniques  that can resolve
              nanometric composition heterogeneity,  including for the first time for ball
              milled materials the  use of atom probe and three-dimensional atom probe 
              techniques.  Atomistic computer simulations and modeling  should assist in
              understanding of these forced systems.  The  educational component of the
              proposal consists in developing  a computer-assisted material for a graduate
              course on  materials under irradiation using CyberProf, a human-  computer
              interface developed at the Beckman Institute in  Urbana; and in reorganizing an
              undergraduate materials  science laboratory to stimulate initiatives from the 
              students.  %%%  Mesoscopic phase separations have been recently identified  in
              metal alloys with positive heats of mixing under  sustained shearing by
              atomistic computer simulations.  These  findings are consistent with the latest
              published  experiments showing complex dy namical phase equilibria and  strong
              chemical heterogeneity in alloys with positive heat  of mixing when submitted
              to ball milling.  This research is  motivated by the fact that the field of
              nonequilibrium  systems is in rapid development and has received much 
              attention in the last two decades.  Indeed in many  applications, materials are
              driven away from equilibrium by  some external forcing, either during their
              preparation  (e.g., by ball milling) or during their use (e.g., by 
              irradiation).  ***
