Title       : CAREER PROPOSAL IN PHYSICAL MATHEMATICS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1998   
File        : a9733030

Award Number: 9733030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Brenner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9733030  Brenner    This work is supported by a National Science Foundation
              Faculty Early Career   Development Award.  The research component will focus on
              an array of problems   applying techniques of nonlinear dynamics to fluid
              dynamics, acoustics, and   biophysics.  The uniting theme is the mathematics of
              nonlinear partial   differential equations.  Specific projects include the
              breaking of fluid drops   as an example of singularity formation in partial
              differential equations; the   dynamical mechanisms behind electrosprays; a
              theoretical investigation of single   bubble sonoluminescence, the conversion
              of acoustic energy into light; and a   study of experiments in bacterial
              chemotaxis, done in collaboration with   biologists.  The educational component
              of this activity aims both to improve the   learning environment in applied
              mathematics at MIT, as well as provide concrete   mechanisms for using teaching
              opportunities to extend the principal   investigator's research program to new
              areas.  These are several specific   points:  There will be an initiative to
              involve undergraduate students in the   research program by carrying out simple
              experiments to test theories and extend   research directions.  To identify and
              train undergraduate students for this   research, it is proposed to develop a
              short course during the Independent   Activities Period on the application of
              mathematics to physical experiments.    The undergraduate course in basic fluid
              dynamics will also be revamped.  For   graduate students, several new courses
              will be developed that describe important   mathematical techniques in the
              context of current research.  Finally, a special   student seminar series for
              informal discussion of topics of current research   interest has been
              established.    The National Science Foundation strongly encourages the early
              development of   academic faculty as both educators and researchers.  The
              Faculty Early Career   Development (CAREER) Program is a Foundation-wide 
              program that provides for    the support of junior faculty within the context
              of their overall career   development.  It combines in a single program the
              support of quality research   and education in the broadest sense and the full
              participation of those   traditionally underrepresented in science and
              engineering.  This program   enhances and emphasizes the importance the
              Foundation places on the development   of full, balanced academic careers which
              include both research and education.
