Title       : PECASE: Mechanisms of Surfactant Mediated Thin Film Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a9733416

Award Number: 9733416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric I. Altman Eric.Altman@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1076,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9733416  Eric I. Altman/Yale U.    Microelectronics,
              optoelectronics, and magnetic recording technologies all rely on the ability to
              grow low defect density, continuous, ultra-thin films. The objective of this
              project is to determine how the growth of ultra-thin continuous films can be
              promoted by addition of surfactants.  The effect of surfactants on nucleation
              and growth kinetics and mechanisms will be studied using in situ
              variable-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). The observed
              mechanisms and kinetics will be used to develop kinetic Monte Carlo simulations
              of surfactant mediated growth.  The simulations will  be used to investigate
              the sensitivity of the growth mode to the different kinetic parameters and thus
              will reveal the key features required to successfully use surfactants to form
              stable, ultra-thin continuous films.    For almost all applications Frank-van
              der Merwe (F-vdM) or layer-by-layer growth is the preferred growth mode because
              it results in the thinnest, most uniform, continuous films possible.  Frank-van
              der Merwe growth is favored when the surface tension of the substrate is
              greater than the sum of the interfacial tension and the surface tension of the
              film. Even when F-vdM growth is favored, kinetic limitations can lead to
              nucleation of new layers before the previous layers are completed.  Addition of
              a surfactant can  promote F-vdM growth by altering both surface and interfacial
              tensions and nucleation and growth kinetics.  Recent studies suggest the latter
              is more important, although nucleation and growth mechanisms and kinetics in
              the presence of a surfactant remain largely a matter of speculation. 
              Therefore, we will investigate the kinetics of the key elementary processes
              that govern surfactant mediated nucleation and growth: surface diffusion,
              diffusion across steps, attachment to steps, adatom-surfactant exchange
              barrier,  nucleation.  Comparison of two very different systems, Ag and Ge
              growth on Si(100) with group V surfactants, will reve al the key features
              required to successfully use surfactants to promote F-vdM growth, and how the
              kinetic parameters are affected by the nature of the interactions between the
              film, the substrate and the surfactant.    Continued advances in a wide range
              of applications including microelectronics, optoelectronics and magnetic
              recording depend on the ability to form ultra-thin, low-defect density films on
              industry standard Si(100) substrates. Specifically, the development of methods
              to grow smooth Ge films on Si(100) is seen as a key to developing high-speed
              integrated circuits based on Ge-Si alloy and superlattice structures, and the
              Ag-Si system is of interest as a base for thin film magnetic structures.
