Title       : CAREER: Semi-Active Control with Independently Variable Stiffness and Damping
               Systems: Analytical and Experimental Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9733962

Award Number: 9733962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Satish Nagarajaiah   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Career Research Project is to develop  innovative
              semi-active structural sysems for earthquake  protection, in which stiffness
              and damping can be varied  independently, using a newly developed novel
              semi-active  independently  varible stiffness and damping device  (SAIVSD). 
              The existing semo-active variable sstiffness and damping  devices for response
              control is limited because the  stiffness and damping are either closely
              coupled or  variation of only damping or only stiffness is possible.  Research
              will be carried out to (1) study SAIVSD device  experimentally and
              analytically; (2) develop control  algorithms; (3) implement the device with
              real time control  systems in scaled building models representing fixed base 
              and base isolated buildings and bridges; and (4) evaluate  the performance of
              the new system by shake tabletesting and  numerical simulations.  The
              comprehensive nature of this  study will permit the evaluation of the
              capabilities of  device and the advantages and disadvantages of using such 
              devices in structural systems.  Semi-active control systems have significant
              potential for  practical implementation for earthquake protection in the  near
              future.  The research would contribute to the  development of new and
              innovative semi-active control  systems .  The research will bee performed in
              clos  collaboration with the industry which will accelerate the  implementation
              of semi-active control system and hybrid  isolation systems.  The integral
              compnents educational compnents include (1)  furher development of innovative
              teaching software BEST an  usage in dynamics corse; (2) introduction of new
              advanced  software into undergraduate and graduate course to enhance  learning
              experience of students; (3) promote hands-on  experimets in dynamics for
              effective learning; (4)  development of a new earthquake engineering and
              structural  control course ; (5) introductio if interesting concepts in 
              dynamics to undergraduate and school students; and (6)  coordinated out re arch
              activities including presentations at  area schools and laboratory tours.  The
              educational program  is aimed at enhancing the learning experience of graduate,
               undergraduate, and school students.
