Title       : CAREER: A Comprehensive Study of Proto--Planetary Nebulae Dust Shells and the
               Development of Experimental Astronomy Programs at the University of Illinois
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9733697

Award Number: 9733697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Meixner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1207,1216,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9733697  Meixner    Dr. Margaret  Meixner, of the University of Illinois,  is
              investigating proto-planetary nebulae dust shells around dying stars and
              developing experimental astronomy programs for graduate and undergraduate
              students.  The research program, which focuses on the late stages of stellar
              evolution of intermediate mass stars (0.8 to 8 Solar masses), addresses two
              long standing problems in stellar astrophysics:  What physical mechanism drives
              the asymptotic giant branch star mass loss?  What is the nature of the
              circumstellar dust created by the asymptotic giant branch star during mass
              loss?  The history of asymptotic giant branch star mass loss is imprinted in
              the circumstellar dustshells of proto-planetary nebulae (objects in transition
              between the stellar asymptotic giant branch and planetary nebula phases).  To
              discern the final part of this history, Dr. Meixner is collecting infrared data
              on approximately 100 proto-planetary nebulae dustshells. Ground-based,
              mid-infrared (0.8-2.5 micrometers wavelength), images of these proto-planetary
              nebulae show the spatial distribution of the warm (about 300 degree K) dust in
              the inner regions.  The spatial distribution of the scattered starlight is
              imaged in these proto-planetary nebulae using the Near-InfraRed IMager (NIRIM)
              on a laser-guided adaptive optics system.  A computer program, which models the
               radiative transfer in the central star and dustshell system, will be used to
              quantitatively derive the 3D geometries of  these dustshells and their inner
              radii.  The information from the infrared data and Hubble Space Telescope
              images will be used in making the computer models.  The 3D models of the
              geometries will provide insight into the geometry of mass loss during the
              star's final death throes.   A preliminary investigation of several
              proto-planetary nebulae by Dr. Meixner et al showed that the geometries had an
              axial symmetry and this indicated that the star's loss mass at a higher rate in
              the equatorial plane than in the polar region.   The data from the observations
              of the dustshell inner radii are used to estimate the dynamical ages for the
              proto-planetary nebulae.  These ages will be used to test the theoretical
              timescales of stellar evolution predicted by other scientists.  These
              theoretical timescales are uncertain because the mass loss processes which
              dominate this stage of stellar evolution are poorly understood.  These data
              will be used to constrain the models of  the characteristics of circumstellar
              dust, including the grain sizes, the composition, and the optical properties of
              the dust.  The circumstellar dust created during the asymptotic giant branch
              mass loss process in stars is the single most important contribution to the
              dust observed  in our Galaxy.  The next generation of stars in our Galaxy are
              born from this dust enriched interstellar medium.  Hence, the new understanding
              about this dust composition will improve our understanding of galactic 
              evolution.  Concurrent with this research program, two educational experimental
              astronomy programs are being developed.   The infrared astronomy program will
              be expanded by involving graduate and undergraduate students in research on
              proto-planetary nebulae.  These students will learn the latest in infrared
              observing techniques.  A new introductory astronomy laboratory course, entitled
              Observing the Sky, will be created.  This will be used for the large
              introductory courses that are populated by non-science majors.  In this course,
              the students will learn about astronomical observations by doing observations 
              in a supervised, small-group environment.
