Title       : CAREER: Secure and Flexible Transmission Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1998   
File        : a9733447

Award Number: 9733447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelli K. Starrett starret@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9733447  Starrett    Objectives  The goal of this project is to begin a research
              and educational career that provides: high quality undergraduate, graduate, and
              continuing education; maintains working relationships with industry; and
              performs nationally competitive research.  The research proposal defines a plan
              for building a foundation for research in the analysis and control of stressed
              power systems.  The focus is to ensure system security and reliability in the
              rapidly changing utility environment by innovatively using new and existing
              controllers.  The plan is to develop coordinated system-wide schemes to improve
              system flexibility and to allow for more control of system security from the
              transmission system.  The goal is to encourage industry involvement to make
              research more applicable, and broaden the power education program.  Courses
              will be made more interesting and efficient using computer and video
              technology.  This plan strives to supply power system engineering students
              with: strong fundamental backgrounds, industry contacts, knowledge of practical
              power systems operation and control, and a knowledge of the big picture.   
              Methods to be Employed  Methods based on eigenvector analysis, controllability
              and observability, participation's, and sensitivities will be applied to the
              control design problem.  The uniqueness of this plan is the consideration of
              any system variables for control input, instead of limiting control variables
              to locally measured values.  FACTS controllers will also be included in this
              analysis.  The focus will be on system-wide analysis, and models will be
              developed and tested on the full nonlinear system.  Computer presentation
              software and hardware and active learning techniques will be utilized in the
              classroom and for course assignments.  The development of a seminar series and
              industry advisory board will help to integrate the research and teaching
              components of this project.  The communication, computer, and video technology
              will be utilized to enhance the  existing off-campus graduate program.   
              Significance of Plan  Open access, system mergers, and the growth in wheeling
              will magnify stress on the system.  As a result, each part of the system will
              become more vulnerable to problems in any other part of the system. 
              System-wide oscillations and energy transfers will become even more likely. 
              Control strategies and systems must be developed to keep the system secure as
              well as accommodate the host of new demands placed on it.  The results of this
              project will improve power system control strategies to allow the system to
              withstand increased stress.  The improvement of security using the
              transmission-based control will be necessary and valuable as generator-control
              is separated from the transmission system.  The plan will take advantage of new
              communication and control equipment and to coordinate its use for system
              security purposes.  Research, planning, and development now can mean more
              secure, flexible, and thus more profitable systems for the future.  More
              coordinated planning of new purchases can also reduce costs by avoiding
              redundant or ineffective controls.  Cooperative university-utility
              relationships and the training of high-quality engineers are critical to the
              success of a power program.  The activities in this plan are aimed at building
              and strengthening these relationships.  The creative use of teaching techniques
              and tools, collaborative efforts with other universities, involvement of
              industry in teaching plans, and the expansion of the curriculum will improve
              the quality of Kansas State University's power engineering graduates.  The
              industry will need well-trained engineers to succeed in the changing utility
              environment.
