Title       : CAREER: Magnetic-Nanocrystal Self-Assembled Superlattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a9733160

Award Number: 9733160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhong L. Wang zhong.wang@mse.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9733160  Wang    This grant explores synthesis and characterization of  magnetic
              nanocrystal superlattice materials.  To utilize the  technological advantages
              offered by the size specificity and  selectivity of nanoclusters, it is
              imperative to understand  the fundamental methodologies for preparation of
              cluster  assembled materials in macroscopic quantities and with high  standards
              of size, structural morphological and shape  uniformity.  These are vitally
              important steps toward a  systematic exploration of the nature of patterned 
              superstructures assembled from such building units, as well  as the formulation
              of methods for designing and controlling  such novel assembled materials.  The
              major research  objectives are:  to synthesize, characterize, and determine 
              the properties of self-assembly passivated magnetic  nanocrystal superlattices
              of Co, y-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4; to  determine the bulk and surface microstructures of
              the  nanoparticles and the superlattices for understanding the  magnetic
              coupling/decoupling among nanocrystals as a  function of the interparticle
              distance; to examine the in-  situ structure evolution and phase transformation
              of the  nanoparticles, the surfactant and the superlattices for  predicting the
              stability, reliability and durability of the  system for device applications,
              and to model the structure  and behavior of nanocrystals and their assemblies. 
              Education efforts are concentrated in the areas of  development of
              collaborative graduate student thesis  projects, expansion of outreach
              programs, development of  interactive microscopy displays for high school
              students and  the public, and development of interdisciplinary teaching 
              experiments related to materials science.  %%%  Nanocusters, and the physical
              and chemical functional  specificity and selectivity they possess, suggest that
              they  are ideal building blocks for two-and three-dimensional  cluster
              self-assembled superlattice structures.  Self-  assembled arrays can involve
              self-organization into  monolayers, thi n films, and superlattices of
              size-selected  nanoclusters  with encapsulated in protective compact  organic
              coatings.   Patterned magnetic nanocrystals are of  vital interest both
              scientifically and technologically  because of their potential applications in
              information  storage, color imaging, bioprocessing, magnetic  refrigeration,
              and ferrofluids.  ***
