Title       : CAREER: Mechanistic Investigation of Nucleoside Hypermodification in tRNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9733746

Award Number: 9733746
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dirk Iwata-Reuyl iwatareuyld@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9733746  Iwata-Reuyl   TECHNICAL     Modification of transfer RNA (tRNA) is
              fundamental to expression of the genetic code, its apparent importance is
              implied by both the phylogenetic conservation and the rich structural
              diversity. This study is designed to understand the biosynthesis of queuosine,
              a modified nucleoside ubiquitous throughout the Bacteria and Eukarya. Queuosine
              possesses an unusual 7-deazaguanosine core structure, occurs specifically at
              the wobble position of tRNA?s coding for asparagine, aspartic acid, histidine,
              and tyrosine, which suggests a role in modulating translational fidelity and/or
              efficiency. More specifically, the molecular mechanism involving the enzyme
              S-adenosylmethionine:tRNA ribosyltransferase-isomerase (QueA), which catalyzes
              the penultimate step of queuosine biosynthesis and the transfer of ribosyl from
              the co-factor S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) to a queuosine-tRNA precursor is
              studied. The experiments include studies of purified recombinant enzymes for
              their regio- and stereochemistry and reaction kinetics with the natural
              substrates and analogs, and do structural studies. The biosynthesis and
              function of the 7-deazaguanosine class of hypermodified tRNA nucleosides, such
              as glycosylated derivatives of queuosine and the hypermodified nucleoside
              archaeosine is also studied.  The educational focus is placed on encouraging
              the participation of undergraduates in biochemical research through an honors
              research thesis program, which is a pilot program with an attempt to replace
              and to revitalize the current departmental honors degree requirements.  2.
              NON-TECHNICAL.   Molecular interactions involving transfer RNA (tRNA) are
              fundamental to expression of the genetic code.  It is in the correct attachment
              of amino acids to tRNA, and subsequent protein synthesis through
              codon-anticodon pairing of the messenger RNA (mRNA) with the tRNA, that the
              physical manifestation of genetic information as protein is realized. A
              characteristic structural feature of tRNA is the presen ce of an astonishing
              diversity of modified nucleosides, many of which are highly conserved among
              disparate organisms.  Modification can range from relatively minor changes to
              complex hypermodification, which results in radical structural changes to the
              nucleoside and requires multiple steps to complete. This study constitutes a
              broad set of experimental approaches designed to develop a detailed
              understanding of a critical step in the biosynthesis of the hypermodified
              nucleoside queuosine, which occurs exclusively at the first position (wobble
              position) of the anticodon in tRNA?s coding for the amino acids asparagine,
              aspartic acid, histidine, and tyrosine. Its specific location in the anticodon
              suggests a role in modulating the fidelity and/or efficiency of protein
              synthesis, for which further experimental support is needed. The educational
              component focuses on increasing the participation of undergraduates in
              biochemical research through the design and implementation of an honors
              research thesis program, which serves to test the feasibility of instituting a
              general requirement, in lieu of the current departmental honors degree, for the
              Chemistry and Biochemistry degrees offered by the department.
