Title       : CAREER: New Methods for the Analysis and Deployment of Sustainable
               Infrastructure Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a9733017

Award Number: 9733017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Miller jbmiller@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award supports research leading to the development of a new
              methodology using project delivery and project finance methods as variables for
              optimizing the public infrastructure portfolio to replace the nation's current
              ideological confusion over `privatization` with reasoned engineering analysis. 
              Recent experiments with alternative delivery methods have produced hard
              evidence that, for many projects, more than one project delivery method is
              viable.  As project delivery and finance methods are considered variables, the
              optimization problem facing infrastructure decision makers is dramatically
              different.  The emerging task is to sensibly manage these variables to produce
              collections of viable individual projects (facilities or services) that are
              also viable at the portfolio level, i.e. they meet overall public
              infrastructure needs within multiple capital restraints.  The PI's research to
              date indicates that for public and private finance methods, and alternative
              project delivery methods to seamlessly co-exist, `linearity` must be
              re-established at the portfolio, not the project level.  Managing the
              infrastructure portfolio with these variables is the focus of the PI's
              research.  Based on detailed case study work, this research will develop the
              tools which will permit an integrated analysis and optimization of the public
              infrastructure portfolio.  These tools include new discounted cash flow (life
              cycle cost) models that can be commonly applied to all project delivery
              methods, and new linear optimization algorithms which extend capital rationing
              models to situations where there are multiple sources and limits on capital,
              along with a variety of viable project delivery strategies at the project
              level.  The goal of the research is to permit governmental infrastructure
              strategists, using sound engineering analyses, to investigate how different
              levels of private and public sector funding (together with changes in the
              amount and source of capital) affect the identity, number, and distribution of
              projects that can be completed using the various project delivery strategies.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
