Title       : CAREER: Atom Diffusion Studies During III-V Epitaxy: A Combined MBE-STM
               Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9733994

Award Number: 9733994
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Thibado thibado@uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9733994  Thibado    This CAREER project is focused on measurement and modeling
              of  diffusion, nucleation and growth properties of individual atoms  on
              III-V(OO1) surfaces. A multi-chamber facility with molecular  beam epitaxy
              (MBE) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) will  allow the study of
              sub-monolayer films on otherwise flat surfaces  as a function of substrate
              temperature and elemental V-flux,  quenching to room temperature and
              measurement of the island  number density, island size, and island separation
              distributions.  From the combination of these measurements and random walk 
              simulations diffusion rate versus substrate temperature,  activation energy for
              diffusion, critical island size for  nucleation, and the role of element V-flux
              on the elemental III-  atom diffusion will be assessed. These studies will act
              as a test  bed for a variety of computational models, ranging from first 
              principles theory to rate equation modeling. The proposed  research provides an
              excellent vehicle to accomplish a broad  educational objective of expanding
              career opportunities for  students. Both undergraduate and graduate students
              will be  involved in research acquiring skills in semiconductor 
              heterostructure design, processing, and characterization. The PI  will also
              establish collaborations with national laboratories and  industry. A hands-on
              lecture-lab course, in which students will  utilize semiconductor samples
              directly from the MBE system to  fabricate and measure properties of  devices,
              and to participate  in quantum well laser surface science aspects of 
              metal-semiconductor interfaces will be developed as part of  research and
              education integration to enhance studentsO general  experimental and analytical
              skills, and to improve learning  through discovery.  %%%  The project addresses
              forefront research issues in a topical area  of materials science having high
              technological relevance.  The  research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a  fundamental level to important aspect s of electronic materials
               and devices. An important feature of the program is the emphasis  on
              education, and on the integration of research and education  through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and  technologically significant
              research area.  ***
