Title       : CAREER: Determination of Glass Structure using Laser Induced Time of Flight Mass
               Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a9733724

Award Number: 9733724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473298             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario Affatigato maffatig@coe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coe College
	      1220 First Avenue NE
	      Cedar Rapids, IA  524025008    319/399-8000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9733724  Affatigato    The  Faculty  Early  Career Development project  will 
              use  laser  induced  time-of-flight mass spectroscopy (LITOF-MS) to determine 
              the  short-  and  intermediate-range order of  boron  oxide-based  glass 
              systems.  It is known that the network of pure boron oxide  glass   contains 
              hexagonal  rings  of  three-coordinated  boron.  Disagreement  exists, 
              however, regarding what  fraction  of  the  boron  present  in  the glass is
              tied up  in  these  rings.   The  straightforward deconvolution of
              time-of-flight mass spectra will  yield  valuable  information regarding  the 
              presence  of  larger  structural units in this glass, as well as quantitative 
              data  on  the  abundance of the ring groupings.  Alkali borate glasses  can  be
               made  up of a variety of larger groups, including chains  and  hexagonal rings
              linked by four-coordinated borons.  The  presence  and  relative  abundance of
              these larger units in  alkali  borate  glasses  of varying compositions will be
              measured using the  mass  spectrometer.   Crystals  of  the  same 
              stoichiometry  will   be  investigated  and  used as starting points  for 
              calibration  and  analysis.    During  this  stage of the project,  the  effect
               of  dopants (chromophores introduced into the glass at concentrations  below 
              1  molar  percent) on the yield of network groupings  upon  laser  irradiation
              will be examined.  In the last  stage  of  the  project,  the  LITOF-MS will be
              used to study alkali borosilicate  glasses.  It is generally agreed that these
              glasses are  made  up  mostly  of silicate and borate sub-networks, but
              questions remain  about  the effect of dopants and if there is interaction 
              between  the  two  networks.   NMR data yields contradictory  evidence  on 
              these  matters,  but the LITOF-MS should provide  data  that  can  answer  
              these  questions.   As  Coe  College  is   a   primarily  undergraduate 
              institution, the work will  be  carried  out  with  undergraduate students,
              providing them a rare long-term  researc h  exposure to cutting-edge work in
              materials science.  The students  will  carry  out the sample manufacture and
              characterization,  as  well  as  the time of flight measurements. In addition, 
              outreach  programs  will bridge the gap between the College and  the  local 
              high  schools.  The upper-level physics and chemistry classes  of  two  nearby 
              high  schools will be brought on campus  for  yearly  visits  and  seminars on
              careers in science and engineering,  and  will   have   several   opportunities
               to   interact   with   the  undergraduate researchers.  %%%  This  CAREER 
              project  will  seek to answer  several  fundamental  questions  about  boron
              oxide-based glasses using  laser  induced  time-of-flight mass spectroscopy
              (LITOF-MS) to examine the short-  and  intermediate-range atomic arrangements. 
               The  project  will  help   us  understand  the  structure  of  these 
              technologically  important  materials.  The involvement of undergraduate 
              students  in  the  performance  of  the research  will  provide  them  with 
              experience in materials research.  ***
