Title       : Crystal-Field Engineering of Transition Metal Doped Chalcogenide Laser Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0301951

Award Number: 0301951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Uwe H. Hommerich uwe.hommerich@hamptonu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampton University
	      
	      Hampton, VA  23668    804/727-5000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses new dopant-host combinations of transition metal (TM)
              doped II-VI semi-conductors to extend current solid-state laser wavelength
              coverage. Materials include TM (Cr, Fe, Co) doped Cd1-xRxTe, with R being
              either a IIa (Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba) or IIb (Zn, Hg) ele-ment. The composition of
              the host will be varied in order to modify crystal-field effects on opti-cal
              and laser properties of TM ions. The proposed materials will be grown by a
              Bridgman tech-nique at Hampton University, and collaboration with industrial
              partners at Brimrose Corporation of America will provide additional samples.
              All materials will be characterized through tempera-ture dependent transmission
              spectroscopy, steady-state and time-resolved emission studies, and laser
              performance studies. The spectroscopic results will be modeled within the
              framework of crystal field theory to derive crystal-field parameters,
              electron-phonon coupling strengths, and emission quenching activation energies.
              The results of the modeling will be used to derive struc-ture- property
              relations, which can guide the optimization of selected materials to achieve
              better laser performance. 

The project addresses fundamental research issues
              associated with electronic/photonic materials having technological relevance.
              The multi-disciplinary nature of the project enhances the quality of education
              in several science and engineering disciplines at Hampton University. The
              research will be incorporated in the training of students seeking degrees in
              physics, chemis-try, chemical engineering, and electrical engineering.
              Educational efforts include: (1) increase of students participating in research
              projects, (2) continuation and extension of an industrial intern-ship program,
              and (3) outreach activities. This program is expected to increase the skilled
              work-force in an important field of optoelectronics and lasers with a special
              emphasis on enhancing the participation of under-represented minorities.  

