Title       : Catalytic, Regioselective Functionalization of Alkanes and Arenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0301907

Award Number: 0301907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Hartwig john.hartwig@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research by Dr. John F. Hartwig of Yale University to understand the
              efficient cleavage and functionalization of alkane and arene C-H bonds by
              borane reagents and metal boryl intermediates and to exploit a new approach to
              alkane and arene functionalization. The project aims to understand how boryl
              groups create metal centers that are unusually reactive toward C-H bond
              cleavage and how the intermediates from C-H bond activation create
              functionalized products.  The synthetic potential for reactions with
              functionalized substrates and polyolefins will also be evaluated.
              

Specifically, rhodium catalysts modified with anionic ligands other than
              substituted cyclopentadienyl groups and ruthenium catalysts with
              pentamethylcyclopentadienyl ligands will be studied to identify the features of
              the catalyst structure that create activity for the functionalization of
              alkanes and arenes.  As the borylation of small alkanes can be extended to the
              borylation of protected, functionalized substrates and to the borylation of
              polyolefins, these reactions will be developed as an important step toward
              conducting selective functionalization of methyl groups in a complex molecule
              and toward generating prototype polyolefins that contain a variety of
              functional groups at the termini of sidechains. 

Directly transforming
              hydrocarbon bonds into useful chemicals and pharmaceuticals is a goal of both
              laboratory and economic significance.  In particular, the  conversion of
              alkanes to linear alcohols, amines and carboxylic acids is a prominent goal in
              synthetic organic chemistry.  This work capitalizes on Hartwig's discovery of a
              catalytic system that generates linear functionalized products from alkanes in
              only two steps.  This project also integrates research into a broader
              educational experience for both students and postdocs and provides them with
              training in advanced catalytic methods.

