Title       : Rheometrical techniques for the characterization of clay based suspensions
               relevant to geotechnical engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0301729

Award Number: 0301729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78352              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Caterina Santagata mks@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Investigation of the rheological behavior of clay-water suspensions is important
              in many civil engineering problems.  These materials are both present in
              nature, for example in mudflows, and are employed by man, appropriately
              engineered in some cases through the addition of additives (e.g. polymers,
              cement), in a variety of applications (as drilling and lubricating fluids in
              microtunneling and pipejacking, as grouts for soil improvement, as stabilizing
              fluids in tunnels and excavations, etc.).  To date, investigations of these
              materials have been quite isolated by application and have often relied on
              empirical tests and on behavioral assumptions. 
The proposed research intends
              to explore the use of advanced rheometrical techniques for the rheological
              characterization of "engineered" clay-based suspensions employed in
              geotechnical applications.  For this investigation use will be made of state of
              the art rheometers capable of performing viscosity, creep and oscillatory
              tests, which allow characterization of both the flow and the visco-elastic
              properties of these materials, and provide insight into their microstructure,
              in a manner so far never employed in geotechnical engineering. These properties
              will be investigated for different "systems": plain bentonite - water
              suspensions (base case), suspensions enhanced with three types of additives
              (one binder and two polymeric products), and suspensions prepared from
              commercially available products widely used in the drilling industry.  These 
              "systems", which pertain to different applications in geotechnical engineering,
              have different "performance" requirements and thus have the potential to
              illustrate the wide range in rheological behavior that can be observed.

More
              traditional measurements (e.g. rheological measurements with traditional
              viscometers and pressure filtration tests) will also be performed to provide a
              link between fundamental behavior and properties used in practice for design
              and evaluation of fluids employed in geotechnical construction and to lay the
              basis for a more performance based design of these materials.
 
In terms of
              broader impact the contributions of the study can be summarized in the
              following main points:
-	The proposed research will tackle the problem of
              engineered clay based suspensions with an interdisciplinary approach drawing on
              the methods and knowledge developed in other disciplines, such as fluid
              mechanics and soil science.  With this approach, methods of testing and
              analysis previously not employed in geotechnical engineering will be applied to
              geotechnical "materials".  Utilization in education of the experimental and
              analytical methods developed will contribute to innovate (graduate) teaching of
              experimental soil mechanics.
-	Collaboration with industry at the forefront in
              designing and manufacturing clay based materials for use in geotechnical
              applications will ensure that the research performed contributes to the
              solution of problems of practical significance, and will facilitate short term
              transfer of the fundamental lessons learned to the practical realm.
-	The
              agreement of collaboration with the Technical University of Torino in Italy
              will lay the basis for developing a continuous international partnership with
              one of the most renowned technical institution in Italy, and will promote
              broader dissemination of the work.  
-	As a result of the above the project
              will provide unique development opportunities for the students involved in the
              research.
	

