Title       : On a Reciprocal Tarry-Escott Problem, the Distribution of Roots of Polynomials
               Modulo a Composite, and Sieve Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0301282

Award Number: 0301282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98248              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bjorn M. Poonen poonen@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0301282
Poonen,  Bjorn M.
(Croot, Ernest S.)

Abstract


Title: On a
              Reciprocal Tarry-Escott Problem, the Distribution of Roots
         Of
              Polynomials Modulo a Composite, and Sieve Methods

The Proposer's research
              project has three goals:  
He wishes to finish working on his results and
              methods on the 
Prouhet-Tarry-Escott problem, which he will write up in one or
              more papers;
he plans to continue and to write up in a paper his work 
with
              an undergraduate on cryptology; and, he wishes to continue to develop 
a new
              sieve method for determining the number of primes in thin sets of 
integers. 
              The proposer's work on the Prouhet-Tarry-Escott problem gives a 
new method
              for constructing solutions to certain systems of diophantine 
equations with
              many variables, and the method may lead to a solution of one 
of more unsolved
              problems in this area.  The work on cryptology centers around 
showing that
              certain algorithms for attacking public-key cryptosystems, that 
find
              low-height roots of polynomials modulo an integer q 
(such as Coppersmith's
              method), cannot be easily improved.
Finally, the proposer plans to continue
              developing a sieve method
for counting the number of primes in a given set of
              integers, which allows 
one to use additional analytic information (besides
              the usual data used by the
combinatorial sieve) about the set, in the hopes
              that the method will
lead to the solution of one or another known, difficult,
              unsolved problems
in prime number theory.

Since the time of the ancient
              Greeks, mathematicians have been trying to
understand how the prime numbers
              are spaced; that is, how does the distance
between consecutive prime numbers
              vary as one considers larger and larger
primes?  Sieve methods were developed
              as a theoretical tool for answering
this type of question; however, there are
              many natural questions about such 
spacings that they currently cannot answer.
               One of the proposer's
research goals is to finish developing a new sieve
              method which he hopes 
to use to make progress on some of these unsolved
              problems.  The proposer's
work on cryptology was motivated by research with an
              undergraduate on
a certain method (Coppersmith's algorithm) for attacking the
              
RSA cryptosystem, which is a procedure for sending secure data via the
              internet.
The proposer (and student) plans to continue his work
on a related
              problem in number theory, the solution of which would show that
this method of
              attack cannot be much improved.  Lastly, the proposer plans
to continue his
              work on the Prouhet-Tarry-Escott problem.  This problem is  
a longstanding
              unsolved question in number theory, and proposer is
developing new methods to
              make progress on it and other, similar problems. 
