Title       : Toward Improved Understanding Of Warnings For Short-Fuse Weather Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0301392

Award Number: 0301392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis Wenger                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eve Gruntfest ecg@uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Benight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              INPUT-OUTPUT RISK MODEL OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEMS 

There is no
              higher priority for the nation today than assuring the security, continuity,
              and availability of our critical infrastructures. Modern critical
              infrastructures are marked by immense complexity, and characterized by strong
              intra- and interdependencies, as well as multiple hierarchies. The higher
              degree of interdependencies exhibited by our critical
              infrastructures-attributable in part to their increased reliance on modern
              technology-make them more vulnerable to human-caused disasters such as acts of
              terrorism. In assessing the vulnerability of a critical infrastructure, it is
              important to analyze not only an infrastructure per se but also its
              interconnectedness and influences on other infrastructures. Understanding this
              interconnectedness can be achieved by modeling the way inoperability propagates
              and proliferates throughout a critical system of infrastructures. Inoperability
              is defined as the inability of the system to perform its intended natural or
              engineered functions. Risk of inoperability is defined as a measure of the
              probability and the consequence expressed as a degree of the inoperability of
              the system. The research goal to develop a model capable of describing the
              risks inherent to our Nation's critical infrastructures will be realized
              primarily through extensions of an existing Leontief-based infrastructure
              inoperability model. Following are the components of the research effort: (1)
              Establish the theoretical bases underlying the concept of risk of
              inoperability, namely the mechanics by which inoperability can propagate
              through a system of interconnected infrastructures; (2) Develop a hierarchical
              implementation of the inoperability input-output risk model to address
              geographical and functional decomposition of the system of infrastructures; (3)
              Study the dynamics of inoperability due to an initial perturbation, addressing
              cascading effects of an attack in various temporal regimes (e.g., short-term,
              intermediate-term, or long-term); and (4) Provide a prototype application of
              the proposed inoperability I-O risk model to the electric power infrastructure.
              The inoperability I-O risk model developed here is an initial attempt to
              contribute to the incredible efforts needed to better our understanding of
              these dependencies, and subsequently to manage more cost-effectively the
              threats and risks that critical infrastructures encounter today. Thus, the
              proposed model is best viewed as a first step in an ambitious attempt to
              develop a more comprehensive risk assessment and management framework for
              ensuring the integrity and continued operability of the Nation's complex
              critical infrastructures.

