Title       : Optimal Design and Multiple-input Multiple-output Control Strategies for Media
               Handling in Copier and Printer Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0301719

Award Number: 0301719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto Horowitz horowitz@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Krucinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Media handling systems such as copier and printing machines are optimized for a
              narrow range of sheet properties. As a result, they often perform poorly when
              using media with non-standard characteristics, such as recycled paper.  This is
              due to the fact that copier machines are predominantly controlled in an open
              loop fashion.  Recent research activities by the PI and his collaborators have
              addressed the aforementioned robustness problems. However, the results obtained
              only pertain to media control in the longitudinal direction and most modern
              media and packaging handling systems also require precise lateral and skew
              control of the media.

The goals of this GOALI project are: 1) To formulate
              and implement a mechatronics solution for media handling systems that will
              allow accurate steering of the media along three in-plane degrees of freedom,
              while maintaining high throughput and robust performance to a wide variety of
              media characteristics. 2) To formulate and implement new extended hybrid
              control architecture, for media handling systems that can effectively control
              switching media dynamics with coupled degrees of freedom and nonholonomic
              dynamics. 3) To develop a new optimal mechatronic design methodology for media
              handling systems and other distributed mechatronic systems. 4) To develop a
              fully functional rapid-prototyping research and instructional platform, which
              will be re-configurable and capable of testing in real-time a variety of
              control methodologies.

The outcomes of this project will introduce and
              demonstrate new mechatronics approaches for solving fundamental problems in the
              control and design of media handling devices, which are currently of critical
              importance to the American copier and printing industries, and are common to a
              large class of assembly, manufacturing, robotics and transportation systems.
              The new developments in this project will be carried out in close collaboration
              with the Xerox Corporation, the industrial partner in this GOALI project.


