Title       : Image-Based Control of Movement-Induced Vibration During High-Speed Operation of
               Scanning Probe Microscopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0301787

Award Number: 0301787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Masayoshi Tomizuka                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201929             (Estimated)
Investigator: Santosh Devasia devasia@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
This research will address the critical problem of movement-induced
              
vibration that limits the operating speed of Scanning Probe Microscopes
              
(SPMs). It is noted that SPMs are key enabling tools in the experimental
              
investigation and manipulation of nano scale (and sub-nano scale) phenomena.
              
However, during high-speed operation of SPMs, movement-induced vibration
              
leads to damage of the sample and/or probe as well as modification of the
              
surface properties being investigated. Therefore, current SPM systems are
              
operated at low speeds; for example, high-resolution SPM systems operate at
              
around 1/100th of the lowest resonant frequency that excites significant
              
vibrations in the system. Thus, movement-induced vibration limits the
              
operating speed of current SPM systems. This work proposes to compensate-for
              
the movement-induced vibration and, thereby, to enable high-speed operation
              
of SPMs with sub-nanometer resolution, and without adverse affects such as
              
sample and probe damage. The novelty of the proposed approach is that it
              
will exploit the extant imaging capability of the SPM to increase the
              
operating speed. The proposed research consists of following three tasks:
              
(1) measure effects of dynamics using SPM images; (2) compensate-for the SPM
              
dynamics; and (3) evaluate increase in operating speed using Scanning
              
Tunneling Microscope (STM). The proposed approach will be used to evaluate
              
the maximum speed at which a STM can image standard samples such as carbon
              
atoms in highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). The proposed
              
improvements of SPM, a key-enabling tool, will have a broad impact on
              
research and development in nanosciences and nanotechnologies. The proposed
              
work will also build the research and human resource infrastructure needed
              
to remain competitive in emerging nanotechnology industries.

