Title       : Scaling of Metal Plasticity on Approach to Nanoscale: Asymptotic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0301445

Award Number: 0301445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283312             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zdenek P. Bazant z-bazant@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              On approach to nano-scale, the spacing of dislocations in crystal lattice of
              metal grains, the crystal grain sizes governing the thickness of boundary
              layers and texture gradation in thin films in micro-electronic devices, and the
              size of fracture triggering micro-voids, cease being negligible compared to the
              spacing of particles or fibers in nanocomposites, to thickness of thin films in
              miniature electronic components, and to size of MEMS components. This may or
              might not cause major beneficial size effects such as strength increase by an
              order of magnitude, which must be understood to ensure reliability and optimize
              performance. Several strain gradient theories were recently proposed for the
              micrometer range but their asymptotic properties on approach to nanoscale
              appear to be unrealistic. An improved strain-gradient theory is, therefore,
              developed. Since the small-size asymptotic solutions are much simpler than the
              solutions for the practical range, the technique of asymptotic matching is used
              to obtain simple analytical solutions for that range. The strain gradient
              theory,enhanced through incorporation of boundary layers of different
              properties and continuous crystal size or texture gradation, is then used to
              model the effect of particle size on the stiffness and strength of metal-matrix
              nanocomposites. The macro-scale methods for composites, such as Hashin's
              composite spheres model and Dvorak's transformation field analysis, are
              extended to micro-scale by replacing the strain gradient effect with
              eigenstrains. The size effects on strength and postpeak softening, recently
              observed in tensioned free thin films of micrometerthicknesses are also
              clarified. Finally, the role of strain gradients in micro-void formation that
              triggers fracture is also analyzed.
