Title       : Agent-Based Approach to Smart Sensing for Health Monitoring of Civil
               Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0301140

Award Number: 0301140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. F. Spencer bfs@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,9200,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This investigation seeks to develop a broad foundation for innovative smart
              sensing and health monitoring concepts utilizing advanced sensing,
              micro-processing, digital signal processing, wireless communication, and damage
              diagnostic methods. This work is aimed at providing near real-time structural
              condition assessment for extreme events (e.g., strong earthquakes), as well as
              long-term deterioration. The goal is to develop a computational framework that
              can take full advantage of the continuous and periodic wireless monitoring
              strategy and that can automatically and reliably detect possible damage
              locations or deteriorated regions in a structure. Autonomous agents and
              multi-agent systems represent an important new way of analyzing, designing, and
              implementing complex distributed computing systems represented by smart
              sensors. The Mote platform developed at the University of California at
              Berkeley with funding from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
              (DARPA) offers, for the first time, an open hardware/ software environment for
              broad smart sensing research and will be employed as a basis for this research.
              The comprehensive research plan has four primary tasks: (i) design and
              construct new high sensitivity acceleration and strain sensors for the
              Berkeley-Mote platform to facilitate global/local monitoring of civil
              infrastructure systems, (ii) conceptualize, develop, and implement an
              agent-based framework for monitoring and damage detection in civil
              infrastructure systems based on the Berkeley-Mote platform, (iii) develop new
              structural health monitoring algorithms that can be executed in the smart
              sensor's distributed computing environment, and (iv) prototype and test
              developed hardware and software in both the laboratory and field environment.
              This effort includes a significant US-China collaborative portion with three
              institutions.  Successful completion of this research is expected to accelerate
              economic and practical implementation of innovative strategies for protecting
              our respective nations' infrastructure.


