Title       : Extremal and Probabilistic Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0301228

Award Number: 0301228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14538              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lubos Thoma thoma@math.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator works in three areas of Combinatorics:  Probabilistic Methods,
              Extremal Combinatorics, and Ramsey Theory.  Using the methodology of the
              probabilistic method, as started  by Paul Erdos, the existence of a
              combinatorial object is shown  by exhibiting a suitable probabilistic space in
              which the desired  object has a positive probability. One of the goals is to
              find  efficient methods for studying probabilistic spaces arising from 
              combinatorial problems. The first part of this project concentrates  on two
              lines of research: on a detailed description  of the threshold phenomena mainly
              in the framework of the first order  logics and on research in the area of 0-1
              laws for logics with richer  signatures. Due to the methods used this area lies
              on the border between  probabilistic methods and finite model theory. The
              investigator's   focus in extremal combinatorics and ramsey theory is  on
              studying set systems with forbidden configurations. This is, very  often,
              closely connected with the research in probabilistic methods.  An example of
              problems in this area, which connect extremal combinatorics,  ramsey theory, as
              well as information theory, are problems on delta-systems  and on Shannon
              capacities of graphs. 

The investigator works in the area of Combinatorics.
              One part  of this project concentrates on studying random combinatorial 
              structures. This is motivated by problems coming from the area of random
              algorithms as well as from the area studying random  models in statistical
              mechanics. As an example, the investigator  studies emergence of certain
              properties in random structures,  so called threshold phenomena. The research
              involves developing  efficient methods for studying probabilistic spaces
              arising in  these problems as well as studying logics which describe the
              properties  of interest. The investigator's focus in extremal combinatorics and
               ramsey theory is on studying set systems with forbidden configurations. 
              Equivalently, the problems studied by the investigator deal with  appearance of
              certain patterns in set systems. An example of problems  in this area are
              problems on delta-systems and  on Shannon capacities  of graphs. These problems
              are connected to problems in information  theory and transmission of
              information. 

