Title       : The Nano-Precision HARPSS-CMOS Process for RF and Sensory Microsystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0301900

Award Number: 0301900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270348             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farrokh Ayazi farrokh.ayazi@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,7234,7238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0301900
Ayazi

This proposal is aimed at the integration of a high
              aspect-ratio, sub-100nm vertical airgap
MEMS/NEMS technology with a 1um
              gate-length CMOS process, and the application of the
resulting high aspect
              ratio CMOS-MEMS process to high-performance RF-sensory microsystems,
as well
              as mixed-signal circuits. The implementation of the following two testbeds is
              proposed as
technology demonstrators:

1. The high-performance sensor system
              testbed: Implementation of a novel CMOS-integrated
inertial-grade (sub-ug
              resolution) acceleration/vibration sensor system with direct digital
              output.
This single-chip sensor system will have 3-4 orders of magnitude
              higher sensitivity compared to
the current state of the art integrated
              microsystem. It consists of a nano-precision lateral
accelerometer and a
              high-performance mixed-signal interface circuit which utilizes 200um
              tall
vertical poly-poly capacitors, yielding 2 orders of magnitude reduction
              in the die area.

2. The wireless RF components testbed: Implementation of
              MEMS-based high-Q on-chip
frequency references "over a wide frequency range
              extending into GHz" integrated with CMOS
electronics (MEMS-based VCO).

Over
              the past few decades, CMOS and CMOS-like processes have substantially grown in
              the
number and thickness of the deposited layers on the surface of the Si
              substrate (the so-called
back-end processes). However, the front-end processes
              have not grown proportionally and
remained limited to the steps necessary to
              create the transistors. The out of silicon thickness of
CMOS has grown to be
              almost an order of magnitude larger than the inside silicon thickness of
              it.
The development of the integrated MEMS processes has followed the same
              model with
integration of surface micromachined structures. The question is:
              can the front-end of the CMOS
process be modified to bring new life to
              integrated MEMS by enhancing the performance and
providing higher levels of
              functionality?

The intellectual merit of the proposed activity is to modify
              the front-end of the CMOS
process using the deep reactive ion etching and
              refill technique to make use of the third
dimension into the silicon and embed
              functionality (both electrical and mechanical) inside the
CMOS-grade silicon
              substrate. The proposed process will allow the scaling of
              micromechanical
structures into the nanometer domain through its unique
              ability to create sub-100nm vertical gaps
and sub-micron silicon features.
              High aspect ratio poly and single crystal silicon structures (with
high
              quality factors) separated by nanometer in size gaps will be integrated with
              CMOS circuits.

The broader impact resulting from the proposed activity is
              the ability to bring about significantly higher levels of performance and
              integration to the integrated MEMS and mixed-signal circuits. Higher
              performance levels and the ability to communicate wireless on a single silicon
              chip can open up the door to new opportunities and applications. Imagine having
              a tiny MEMS-CMOS silicon chip that can not only monitor very small changes in
              the environment, but also can transmit the monitored data real time in digital
              form to a receiver base, or communicate with a network of wireless sensory
              nodes. Such wireless sensory nodes can find numerous applications in various
              forms of environmental monitoring and energy-efficient systems.

