Title       : Simulation and Function Approximation Based Iterative Approach To Process
               Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0301993

Award Number: 0301993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay H. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research:

The PI plans to investigate a simulation and function
              approximation-based strategy for bringing an evolutionary improvement to a
              control policy.  The investigation is motivated by some inherent limitations of
              the current model-based predictive control formulation with respect to handling
              systems of large-scale complex dynamics, and large amount of uncertainty.  The
              development will be rooted in an approach developed in the field of artificial
              intelligence - referred to by various names such as Neuro-Dynamic Programming
              and Reinforced Learning - which has shown great success in handling highly
              complex multi-stage discrete decision problems like backgammon playing,
              elevator dispatch problem, and job-shop scheduling.  The approach, when
              extrapolated to the problem of process control, begins by performing
              closed-loop simulations with a given suboptimal control policy for an extensive
              set of possible operating conditions.  The simulation results are then used to
              generate data for state versus "cost-to-go" or "reward" function, typically by
              fitting a neural network to the data.  The approximation is improved by
              additional off-line calculations, either by "value iteration" based on
              iterating the Bellman Equation or by "policy iteration" based on iterating
              between policy evaluation and policy improvement.  The improved approximation
              of the "cost-to-go" function can be used to implement optimal control in a
              computationally efficient way, either by reducing a large-horizon problem into
              an equivalent short-horizon problem or by allowing an off-line parameterization
              of the improved control law. 

To make the approach practicable for process
              control a number of issues need to be resolved.  The success of the approach
              will depend on the ability to obtain an accurate and robust approximation of
              the cost-to-go function.  An immediate question to ask is what types of
              function approximators are best suited for the approximation.  Also, the level
              of confidence in the neural network's cost predictions through interpolation
              and extrapolation need to be taken into account in the control calculations. 
              The PI plans to investigate these and other fundamental issues to arrive at
              systematic and practically useful answers.  The PI will collaborate with
              industrial partners Weyerhauser, Owens Corning, LG Chemicals, and Aspen
              Technology, to test the developed tools on real industrial process and to
              incorporate them into commercial process control software packages.  The
              application portion of the project will be carried out by students and visitors
              supported by these companies.

Broader Impact:

The Chemical Process
              Industries (CPI) are replete with nonlinear control problems involving
              significant uncertainties, which can benefit from this work.  In addition to
              process control, the strategy fits naturally to planning and scheduling
              problems under uncertainty as well as supply chain operation problems.

