Title       : Dispersive Phenomena in Linear and Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0301122

Award Number: 0301122
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $478511             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel I. Tataru tataru@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary aim of the proposed work is to investigate the role of dispersive
              phenomena in partial differential equations. While there certainly is some
              interest in studying dispersive phenomena for linear partial differential
              equations, the main motivation comes from nonlinear partial differential
              equations. Indeed, nonlinear effects (which can possibly lead to blowup) are
              stronger in regions of spatial concentration of the solutions. Hence the
              dispersion reduces the potential for blow-up.  If nevertheless blow-up occurs,
              its pattern should largely be determined by the worst type of concentration
              allowed by the dispersion.  On the other hand, nonlinear interactions can
              affect the dispersion.  Thus one is led from the study of linear dispersion to
              bilinear estimates and further to the analysis of fully nonlinear interactions.
              In recent years this line of attack has proved to be highly successful in the
              study of nonlinear dispersive equations. Yet much more remains to be
done, and
              one has the feeling that we have only seen the tip of the iceberg.

 A simple
              way to describe dispersion is to say that waves  (e.g. sound waves, elastic
              waves, water waves, electromagnetic waves, etc) cannot stay spatially
              concentrated for a long period of time; instead they must spread out and decay.
              In linear problems different waves cross each other without interaction.
              However, in nonlinear phenomena waves will always interact. The strength of
              this interaction depends on the strength of each wave but also on their
              intersection pattern. These nonlinear interactions play an essential role in
              both the study of the short time behavior and of the long time behavior of
              various physical systems. Examples include elastic waves in solids,
              gravitational waves in general relativity, and many others. The goal of the
              proposed work is to contribute to the understanding of the dynamics of
              nonlinear wave interactions in the context of physically motivated dispersive
              systems.
