Title       : Interacting Particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0301795

Award Number: 0301795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $578461             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Liggett tml@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0301795
Liggett
	The project addresses several problems in interacting
              particle systems and related areas of probability theory. One collection of
              problems involves the stationary distributions for exclusion processes with
              drift in both one and higher dimensions. Recent work of the investigator showed
              the existence of stationary blocking measures in one dimension under weak
              assumptions. The next set of problems concerns the existence of nonblocking
              stationary profile measures in one dimension and of nonreversible stationary
              blocking measures in higher dimensions -- in neither case are there any known
              examples. Other problems involve (a) connections between the symmetric
              exclusion process and negative dependence, (b) the extent to which the known
              theory of the symmetric exclusion process extends to processes with a few
              asymmetries, (c) the analysis of some infinite systems motivated by the
              investigator's recent work on a class of models in sociology, and (d) the
              computation of the critical values for a family of reversible growth models on
              homogeneous trees. 
	Many problems in the natural and social sciences involve
              the behavior of large numbers of individuals (people, molecules, cars, viruses,
              etc.) that interact in unpredictable ways. This lack of predictability is
              modeled by randomness. One of the fundamental contributions of probability
              theory in the past century is the realization that large populations display a
              significant amount of predictability and order in spite of the lack of
              predictability of the actions of the individuals in the population. This
              project is aimed at gaining a better understanding of several models of this
              general type. Among them are: (a) the exclusion process, which models particle
              motion, traffic flow, and the behavior of ribosomes in biology, (b) certain
              growth models that are partly motivated by tumor growth and conflicts between
              competing populations, and (c) models from sociology, in which relationships
              among individuals are altered by the exchange of gifts or rewards. In each
              case, the objective is to determine the long time behavior of the system. 

