Title       : Development, Characterization, and Application of Advanced Coatings for
               Improving the Reliability of MEMS/NEMS Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0301056

Award Number: 0301056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bharat Bhushan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,7237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Advanced coatings will be developed by molecular and atomic design and tailoring
              of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs), diamond like carbon films (DLC), and
              organic/inorganic bilayers (perfluoropolyethers or SAMs on DLC), which are
              expected to have enhanced functionalities and to greatly improve the
              reliability of MEMS/NEMS. Understanding of the relationship between
              micro/nanotribological and mechanical performance of DLC and SAMs and their
              atomic and molecular structures will be clarified. The microstructure of these
              coatings will be characterized by various techniques. Their micro/nanoscale
              tribological properties will be mainly characterized by atomic force microscopy
              (AFM) and a novel microtriboapparatus developed by our laboratory.
The effect
              of length scale, velocity, relative humidity, and temperature on the
              performance will be investigated. The micro/nanoscale mechanical properties of
              advanced DLC coatings will be mainly studied using a nanoindenter and AFM based
              bending and fatigue tests. The relationship between the process, structure, and
              performance will be addressed in order to obtain superior performance coatings.
              Computer modeling of adhesion relevant for MEMS/NEMS will be performed, in
              which the contribution of meniscus formation, electrostatic, van der Waals
              forces, and solid bridging will be considered. Knowledge of optimum surface
              characteristics and advanced coatings will be applied to an industrial
              application to improve their reliability. The pixel failure mechanisms of
              digital micromirror devices (DMD) will be studied. Methods to minimize
              adhesion, stiction/friction and wear will be incorporated in DMD devices. (Two
              support letters from industry are attached.) This study is expected to be
              beneficial to both the MEMS/NEMS research and industry.

An award would
              support two graduate students and partially support one postdoctoral
              researcher. This would provide an opportunity to recruit and fund a minority or
              woman. The PI and his department have made efforts to attract such students in
              recent years. The department regularly invites, and provides travel grants for,
              students, particularly women and minorities, from other schools to attract them
              for graduate studies. Undergraduate students would work on the project as well.
              Projects like these provide hands-on opportunities for undergraduate students
              in a high-tech lab. Past undergraduates in the PI's lab have actually
              coauthored articles for technical journals. This project will provide
              additional material for the PI's course on tribology and in
              soon-to-be-developed nanotribology courses.

