Title       : Geometric Analysis of Deformations of Finite Distortiion via Nonlinear PDEs and
               Null Lagrangians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0301582

Award Number: 0301582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Drasin                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359268             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tadeusz Iwaniec tiwaniec@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract: DMA 0301582

T Iwaniec, Syracuse University

 Intellectual
              Merit.

 Prominent advances in analysis will continue to
enhance both theory
              and applications. In this challenge, there is enormous
opportunity for
              contributions from geometric function theory and
nonlinear partial
              differential equations. Broadly speaking, this theory is
about weakly
              differentiable mappings which distort small circles in a controlled manner
              (finite distortion). It elevates all
the analytic and geometric spirit of
              holomorphic functions in the complex
plane to higher dimensions; domains of
              the Euclidean  n-space or
Riemannian manifolds,  Mappings of finite distortion
              owe much of their
importance to recent developments in
several fields of
              applied mathematics: continuum mechanics, nonlinear
elasticity, material
              science, composites with  microstructure, crystals,
and so forth. However, in
              this proposal we focus on practical questions
only through  mathematical
              formulations, sometimes without proclaiming
definite answers. We emphasize the
              fundamental role of the Jacobian
determinant and other nonlinear differential
              expressions, called  null
Lagrangians, which have driven (over the past twelve
              years) a very
productive study of mappings with unbounded distortion. The
              present
knowledge of null Lagrangians will tell us something about the
              regularity
and topological behavior of those mappings. This also brings  us
              closer to
the methods of harmonic analysis and nonlinear partial differential
              equations. However, we depart
from the earlier theories, which are governed
              by
uniformly elliptic systems, and move into the realm of degenerate
              elliptic
equations, where important new applications lie. 

 Broader
              Impact.

Hopefully this proposal gives some appreciation of the
diversity of
              applications and directions in which current research of the
PI is moving, as
              well as a glimpse of the substantial body of joint work
with young scholars.
              It is at this point where the proposed research meets
the broader impact
              criteria, such as: effective training and educational
materials, enhancing
              partnerships, participation of under-represented
groups from non-PhD granting
              institutions in the USA and abroad, women and
men. 
The Principal
              Investigator plans to organize a conference at Syracuse to bring
              together
researchers in geometric function theory and in applied areas.
              The
proposed program reflects continued efforts of the PI to reach
              out
graduate students. In the final analysis, education is the path
              to
opportunities for countless individuals, and the mathematical community
              as
a whole is the beneficiary.


