Title       : A Workshop Exploring the Role of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences in
               Support of Basic Research Needs of the U.S. Intelligence Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2002   
File        : a0301254

Award Number: 0301254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry N. Blount, III                    
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62289              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne E. Pemberton pembertn@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1253      OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports, in part, a workshop jointly sponsored by the Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences Directorate of the National Science Foundation and the
              U.S. Intelligence Community that is designed to identify basic scientific
              opportunities that will significantly impact key technologies required for the
              U.S. to deal effectively with future terrorist threats.  This workshop will
              involve mathematical and physical scientists from academia, industry, and
              government laboratories, and will be held over a two and one-half day period. 
              Participants are being identified according to expertise in the five research
              focus areas of (1) energy sources, (2) sensors and detectors, (3) image
              reconstruction and analysis, (4) optical spectroscopies, and (5) mathematical
              techniques.  The outcome of this workshop is expected to be a report detailing
              the opportunities for scientific research that can positively impact on
              intelligence technology capabilities necessary for the detection and deterrence
              of future threats to national security both at home and abroad, along with a
              suggested timeline for their development.  

The broader impacts of the
              proposed activity are twofold.  Firstly, a list of key opportunities for
              scientific research and technology development to enhance the capabilities of
              the U.S. Intelligence Community will result, and secondly, a cadre of
              mathematical and physical scientists well informed in the current challenges
              and needs of the U.S Intelligence Community will be developed.  Both impacts
              are critical for the U.S. Intelligence Community to maintain the technological
              capability required for ensuring the nation's security. 

