Title       : A Novel Type of Vibration Isolator Utilizing Buckled Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0301084

Award Number: 0301084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Masayoshi Tomizuka                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269788             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence N. Virgin l.virgin@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The importance of avoiding or suppressing vibration is a universal concern that
              can hardly be overstated.  Vibration may be damaging, annoying, or dangerous,
              and is a problem occurring in a vast array of situations ranging from
              suspension systems for vehicles to protective packaging to infrastructure
              hazard mitigation during earthquakes.  The objective of the research described
              in this proposal is to develop a new class of vibration isolator based on
              elastically-buckled structures.  Analytical, numerical, and experimental
              methods will be used together with a variety of test strategies and components
              to identify optimal approaches to vibration isolation.  The results of this
              research will allow a generally undesirable effect (buckling) to be utilized in
              a beneficial context (vibration isolation).
The proposed isolators are
              post-buckled rigid-link mechanisms, struts, and plates.  They will be designed
              to have a high axial stiffness under static loading, so that they support the
              weight of the system without excessive displacement, and to have a
              relatively-low stiffness during excitation.  Harmonic, multi-frequency, shock,
              impact, and random inputs will be considered, along with combinations of these.
               The isolator may protect the system from base excitation (e.g., in an
              earthquake), or may reduce the transmissibility of forces from the system
              (e,g., rotating machinery) to the base.  These passive isolators may be used in
              conjunction with dampers and with semi-active or active control systems.  The
              optimum properties, locations, and number of isolators will be determined. 
              
	The intellectual merit of this approach includes a bridge between
              instability and structural dynamics.  This type of cross-fertilization of ideas
              is exactly the type of activity that has enabled interdisciplinary research to
              be so successful.  Both the analytical/numerical work and the experimental work
              contain significant challenges. 
	The potential broader impacts of this
              approach are profound.  Noise reduction, stealth technology, and flutter
              suppression in aircraft are just some of the directions in which this work
              could evolve.  Distributed mounting options for shock absorption, and
              high-cycle fatigue mitigation, are clearly achievable goals.  This is a
              collaborative proposal between Duke University and Virginia Tech. Each
              institution will benefit from enhanced interaction.  The proximity of the two
              universities and previous collaborative work of the Principle Investigators
              provides a team whose sum is greater than the individual components. 
              Underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students will be sought, and the
              results of this research will be disseminated broadly.

