Title       : Dynamics of Noisy Nonlinear Mechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0301412

Award Number: 0301412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Masayoshi Tomizuka                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213609             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Sri Namachchivaya sri@nsgsun.aae.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of this investigation is to formulate and develop 
methods to
              analyze the complex interactions between noise, symmetries, 
and
              nonlinearities inherent in rotating and gyroscopic systems, 
particularly the
              dynamics of spinning flexible discs and rotating shafts.

The approach
              consists of a rational construction of low-dimensional 
stochastic models that
              systematically capture essential features of 
noisy mechanical systems. The
              basis of the proposed work is a 
collection of limit theories for stochastic
              processes which model a 
class of engineering problems with dominant
              Hamiltonian dynamics. 
For the reduced model, one seeks standard statistical
              measures of 
response and stability; e.g., mean exit times, Lyapunov exponents
              and 
stationary measures, so that it may be possible to design reliable
              
engineering systems. The proposed work will be a cross-disciplinary 
one,
              spanning the spectrum from modeling and novel analytical 
techniques to
              experimental verification.

We plan to transfer to industry innovative theory
              and simulations 
developed in the proposed program which will allow improved
              design 
and greater performance of various rotating systems.
An integral part
              of the final outcome of the proposed work will be  
web-based simulators to be
              used in senior undergraduate and graduate 
courses and to provide industrial
              designers with a predictive tool 
to avoid unwanted behavior. This will
              enhance visual understanding of 
the effect of noise on real engineering
              problems.

