Title       : Summer School and Conferenceon the Arithmetic, Geometry and Topology of
               Algebraic Cycles; June 15-July 7, 2003; Morelia, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0301220

Award Number: 0301220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Weibel weibel@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              From June 15 to July 7, 2003, there will be a Summer School and Conference in
              Morelia, Mexico on ``The Arithmetic, Geometry and Topology of Algebraic
              Cycles.'' The first two weeks will consist of a series of introductory
              lectures, covering recent developments in the study of algebraic cycles and
              motives from the algebraic, geometric, and topological points of view. The
              status of the main problems in the field (Hodge conjecture, Tate conjecture,
              motivic problems) will also be covered. The final week will be a research level
              conference centered around the latest developments in the subject. The primary
              purpose of this grant is to provide travel and subsistence support for graduate
              students and young postdoctoral people, especially women and underrepresented
              minorities. A second priority is to support U.S. participants without other
              grant support.

From June 15 to July 7, 2003, there will be a Summer School
              and Conference in Morelia, Mexico on ``The Arithmetic, Geometry and Topology of
              Algebraic Cycles.'' This is an interdisciplinary branch of mathematics which
              has seen substantial development in the last few years. The first two weeks
              will consist of a series of introductory lectures, primarily aimed at training
              young researchers. To reinforce the ideas and methods presented in these
              lectures, the third week will be a research level conference centered around
              the latest developments in the subject. The primary purpose of this grant is to
              provide travel and subsistence support for graduate students and young
              postdoctoral
people, especially women and underrepresented minorities. A
              second priority is to support U.S. participants without other grant support. 
              This grant is supported jointly by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and
              the Office of International Science  and Engineering.

