Title       : Development of ``Global" Feedback Control Strategies for Silencing Noise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0301740

Award Number: 0301740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Masayoshi Tomizuka                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270029             (Estimated)
Investigator: Atul G. Kelkar akelkar@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is motivated by the need for inventing new technologies
              and devices that can drastically reduce noise in noisy environments. In
              particular, the acoustic systems of interest are acoustic enclosures such as
              passenger cabins in aerospace vehicles, industrial machinery, and household
              appliances.  The goal of the research is to advance the state-of-the-art in
              active noise control (ANC) technology to a stage where it can lead to the
              development of silencing devices; for example, a portable ``intelligent" cover
              that can be snapped on a vacuum cleaner or a lawn mower for reducing the noise
              by 80\%; small silencing hardware that can be placed in the family room for
              reducing the effect of outside noise (e.g., jet aircraft flying overhead) by
              two-thirds; and smart devices installed in the walls and the interior of an
              aircraft cabin for making it quieter and more vibration-free than a luxury car.
              Based on the analytical and experimental results obtained to date, such a
              technology appears to be within the realm of possibility. Development of such
              technology, if successful, will also have the added bonus of reducing the
              outside (environmental) noise - an important problem identified by FAA with
              regard to noise in the neighborhood of the airports. There are many possible
              non-aerospace spinoffs such as those mentioned above.  The technology may also
              provide an effective solution to noise problems in spacecraft (such as those
              recently reported by the Space Station crew).

The proposed research, with
              strong analytical and experimental foundation built over last few years through
              NSF and NASA support, is aimed at enhancing the state-of-the-art in ANC by
              addressing following key research issues:
(a) for a given reverberant acoustic
              enclosure what is the theoretical limit of performance for ANC and what are the
              key design parameters that this limit depends on and how one can optimize the
              choice of these parameters (such as, number and configuration of actuators and
              sensors, shape of enclosure, etc.) to extend this limit; 
(b) what are the
              inherent limitations of various robust control design methodologies for
              acoustic systems; 
(c) what are the conditions (analytical) under which a
              given feedback strategy can OR can not achieve uniform reduction in acoustic
              pressure levels in space and frequency and how to design controllers that can
              satisfy these conditions to achieve effective noise reduction. These key
              research issues will be addressed through  the following list of research
              tasks:
 (1) Devise automated synthesis techniques for passivity-based
              controllers, which have been proven to extract energy from the system in the
              closed-loop configuration. These controllers have ability to reduce noise not
              only at the sensor location and at isolated frequencies but uniformly over the
              space and frequency.
(2) Devise integrated (structure + acoustic) control
              strategies that can effectively minimize the cost which reflects the total
              acoustic energy of the system and not the acoustic energy at a particular
              location in space or energy in the particular mode of the system. 
(3) Develop
              control strategies that are aimed at modifying boundary impedances of the
              enclosures to optimize noise containment or noise transmission. The idea is to
              modify the structural geometry (morphing) to change the impedance
              characteristics of the boundary so as to minimize transmission of acoustic
              noise or achieve maximum acoustic dissipation. 
(4) Develop and validate the
              concept of ``active silencing hood" that can be used for commercial
              applications to curb noise pollution. 
(5) Experimentally validate the new
              technology first on a specially built laboratory apparatus followed by
              household appliances such as washer and vacuum cleaner and full-scale aircraft
              fuselage model  available at Acoustic Research Facility at NASA
              LaRC.

Intellectual Merit:

The proposed project will develop our
              understanding of the inherent limitations as well as the benefits of potential
              ANC methodologies compared to the existing technology. The proposed research
              has potential for development of number of patents particularly in the design
              of silencing hoods for machineries and appliances, and design of active control
              software and hardware for large enclosed spaces. It will also develop
              scientific base for addressing several unsolved problems in vibration isolation
              and active control of noise in open field. To the best of P.I.'s knowledge,
              there doesn't exist an active control technique that can guarantee broadband
              reduction of noise that is uniform in space. The outcome of the proposed
              research will also provide the knowledge base for innovative design of  casings
              of machinery and appliances for quiet operation. If successful, this research
              will also benefit the development of technology that can alter the acoustic
              signature of submerged vehicles such as submarines. 

Broader Impact:

 The
              impact of the proposed research will involve: (a) advancement of discovery and
              understanding while promoting teaching, training and learning, (b) broadening
              of participation of under-represented groups with special recruitment
              initiative for minority students, (c) enhancement of infrastructure for
              research and education, (d) economic boost to US industry, (e) broad
              dissemination of information to enhance scientific and technological
              understanding, and (f) benefit to society from reduced noise pollution and
              boost to US industry.

