Title       : Lp Estimates in Non-commutative Probability and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0301116

Award Number: 0301116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marius Junge junge@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Junge

The starting  point of this project on 'Lp estimates in
              noncommutative probability and analysis' are recent results  and techniques 
              from noncommutative  martingales inequalities obtained by Pisier/Xu,
              Randrianantoanina, Junge  and Junge/Xu.  This new insight enables us to show a 
              noncommutative analog the maximal ergodic theorem for completely positive maps
              and study square function inequalities in this setting (joint work with
              LeMerdy/Xu).  The formulation and properties are motivated by the theory of
              Operator Spaces.  On the other hand martingale inequalities are crucial in
              understanding independent, indiscernable and exchangeable sequences in
              noncommutative Lp spaces and properties of almost uniform convergence.
              Martingale inequalities and noncommutative probability are also fundamental 
              tools in  analyzing the operator space OH and its realization in the predual 
              of type III von Neumann algebras.  These  techniques are similar to those used
              by Pisier/Shlyaktenko in proving  the noncommutative version of Grothendieck's
              inequality.  Surprising the analog of the 'little Grothendieck inequality' in
              the context of  operator spaces only holds up to a logarithmic
              factor.


Quantum mechanics and Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and
              mathematical models realizing these phenomena changed not only our perception
              of the world but also the mathematical discipline. Many noncommutative
              (=quantum) generalizations of classical mathematical theories for example the
              theory of quantum groups and noncommutative  (=quantum) probability theory.
              Very interesting new phenomena  and difficulties arise when adopting classical
              concepts to this noncommutative framework. Noncommutative  measure theory and
              the theory of von Neumann algebras provide plenty of examples of genuinely new
              phenoma. Indeed, von Neumann's  motivation for his work on operator algebras
              (now called von Neumann algebras) was to provide a good mathematical foundation
              for quantum mechanics.  In this tradition the theory of Operator  Spaces
              provides the right language for quantizing Banach spaces, a notion developed 
              to describe the spaces of solutions of differential equations. For example,
              using this language  it is now possible to talk about the expected exit time
              for a noncommutative domain although we can never see the 'points' of this
              domain. As a long term perspective these mathematical  theories  provide new
              features which may  be used to understand phenomena in physics and other
              natural sciences.

