Title       : Scalable Strained Silicon MOSFET Technology with Advanced Gatestack Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0301238

Award Number: 0301238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Veena Misra vmisra@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mehmet C. Ozturk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of this proposal is to demonstrate a scalable strained
              silicon technology that is integrated with advanced front-end processes. The
              scalability of the proposed approach is due to its applicability not only in
              planar bulk devices but also in a) strained silicon directly on oxide (SSOI)
              and in b) a novel double gate strained MOSFET (SSDG) that will be described in
              the proposal. The research will focus on strained Si layers since mobility
              enhancement can be obtained in both p-channel and n-channel devices. The
              program will consist of three research thrusts: a) Epitaxy of Strained Silicon
              layers, b) Advanced Gate stacks on Strained Silicon Layers and c) Device
              Demonstration. Since ITRS predicts the need for enhanced channel mobility by
              2010, we believe initiation of this research effort in a timely manner is
              especially critical. The program is expected to stimulate innovation in
              development of alternative gate stack and junction processes suitable for
              strained layers. The program will take advantage of the diverse backgrounds of
              its investigators who have been working on advanced materials and processes for
              gate stacks, ultra-shallow junctions and low temperature epitaxy of Si and
              Si1-xGex alloys.


In the education and outreach activities, we plan to
              provide an enriching research experience for graduate students with emphasis on
              nanoscale materials and devices and establish a collaborative and
              interdisciplinary group research environment. We will also create a course on
              beyond planar devices for the graduate curriculum. Opportunities will also be
              provided for undergraduate students to get involved in the research through
              existing REU programs.

