Title       : Applicability of "Full-Flow" Penetration Probes for Characterizing Soft Soil
               Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0301448

Award Number: 0301448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147454             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason T. DeJong dejong@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Soft soil sediments, primarily due to their high sensitivity, underconsolidation
              and very low strength, present a unique challenge to the geotechnical community
              in both their characterization and use as an engineering material. 
              Conventional drilling and in situ testing methods do not quantify soft
              sediments at a level of accuracy and reliability now required for many
              geotechnical projects.  While performance modifications can be made, these in
              situ devices are restricted by inherent characteristics of their test procedure
              and/or geometric design that cannot be overcome through minor improvements. 
              The insufficiency of these methods is compounded by steady increases in the
              quantity and complexity of on-shore, near-shore, and off-shore soft sediment
              applications such as tunnels, bridges, wind turbines, submarine slope
              stability, buried pipelines, and oil and gas platforms.  
This project is
              focused on a unique and important opportunity to validate the ability of
              "full-flow" penetrometers to characterize soft soil deposits through leveraging
              the resources of five existing highly characterized international test sites. 
              "Full-flow" penetrometers provide a measure of the pressure differential
              necessary to induce soil flow around a symmetric geometric probe.  In
              principal, the penetrometers are akin to a viscosity measurement as they induce
              plastic flow of the soil around a geometric probe during penetration.  This
              unique flow measurement is free from the correction factors that limit the
              accuracy of state-of-practice devices and therefore have strong potential in
              the applications mentioned above.  
To date, three types of "full-flow"
              penetrometers have been evaluated (T-bar, ball, and plate) though analytical,
              numerical, laboratory, and centrifuge investigations.  From these analyses,
              "full-flow" penetrometers demonstrate potential to obtain profiles of the
              undrained shear strength (su) and the remolded shear strength (su-remolded)
              respectively, which in turn provide an in situ estimate of sensitivity (St). 
              Through performing "twitch" tests, a series of consecutive short penetrations
              where the penetration rate is sequentially halved, an in situ estimate of the
              coefficient of consolidation (cv) may be obtained.  
"Full-flow" penetrometers
              will be validated at full-scale through an extensive field investigation at
              five highly characterized test sites, three in North America, one in Norway,
              and one in Australia, in a cost-effective manner.  The field testing program at
              each site will consist of performing a minimum of 13 soundings, selected
              excavation of the penetrometers to verify flow patterns, and limited sampling
              for validation of the applicability of existing data.  This will culminate in
              the validation/development of interpretation methods and procedural guidelines
              for "full-flow" penetration probes. 
The broader impacts of this proposal
              include the potential to affect worldwide soil engineering practice with
              respect to site investigations and the design of geosystems on-shore,
              near-shore, and off-shore including the applications listed above.  The use of
              international test sites and collaboration with international experts on in
              situ testing ensures broad applicability and dissemination of the research
              findings.  The results of this research will be posted on the PIs website,
              presented at conferences, and published in journals in a timely manner.  

