Title       : Input-Output Risk Model of Critical Infrastructure Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0301553

Award Number: 0301553
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis Wenger                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $467750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yacov Y. Haimes yyh4f@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wei Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Lambert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry M. Horowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Toward Improved Understanding of Warnings for Short-Fuse Weather
              Events

The meteorological and hydrological sciences have shown dramatic
              improvements in offering increased lead-times, better long-term models and
              integrated real-time monitoring for short fuse weather events. At the same time
              the social science research necessary to translate the new knowledge into
              improved responses to short-fuse weather events is missing.

This project
              challenges the current state of public perceptions of warnings for flash floods
              and tornadoes. A team of geographers and psychologists will work closely with
              forecasters and emergency managers in the two case study cities of Austin, TX
              and Denver, CO: cities with high growth rates, great diversity, and significant
              disaster potential. We have five objectives: 1) to develop an enhanced
              understanding of warnings by studying public and private sources of warning
              information; 2) to see how changing demography of the US influences public
              responses to warnings; 3) to evaluate the use and potential of new technologies
              for warning perceptions and responses; 4) to assess the construct of "false
              alarms" for short-fuse weather events; and, 5) to evaluate the applicability of
              social cognitive theory as a framework to understand the differences between
              how people respond to warnings. 

Results from this research will have broad
              implications for future warning procedures providing new directions for local
              and state emergency managers and for the federal agencies involved in warnings
              including the National Weather Service, the Bureau of Reclamation, FEMA, and
              the US Army Corps of Engineers. 


