Title       : CAREER: Synthesis and Investigation of Novel Condensed Matter Compounds and
               Development of a High-Resolution Capacitive Dilatometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0301166

Award Number: 0301166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114220             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Neumeier neumeier@physics.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project is focused on transition metal oxides and related materials.
              Specimen synthesis, magnetic and electrical measurements, and experiments under
              high pressure (pressures to 1.5 GPa) will bridge aspects of the chemistry and
              physics of these materials. Investigations of layered nickel oxides, such as
              the single-NiO2-layer La2NiO4 compound, are expected to clarify relations
              between the nickel oxides and the superconducting cuprates. This work will
              yield the first studies of these systems under high pressure. Syntheses and
              related experiments are designed to simulate the magnetism of the cuprates.
              Other targeted chemical systems include molybdenum oxides and the copper
              pnictides. An innovative high-resolution quartz dilatometer, the only device of
              its kind in the USA, will be constructed to measure the thermal expansion of
              sub-millimeter sized single crystals, thus enabling the investigation of phase
              transitions. The education component of the project will involving graduate and
              undergraduate students in the research, and will also involve new classroom
              teaching methods for introductory physics. The teaching method for introductory
              physics will integrate active processes into lectures through demonstrations
              and single-concept problems aimed at improving conceptual understanding and
              creating a more enthusiastic learning experience.
%%%
This CAREER award will
              enable the development of a research project involving transition metal oxides,
              and an educational component leading to new classroom teaching methods for
              introductory physics. The research focuses on the study of transition metal
              oxides which are known to exhibit unusual electrical and magnetic properties.
              These materials may ultimately find important technological applications.
              Specimen synthesis, magnetic and electrical measurements, and experiments at
              high pressure play major roles in the research, which spans areas of chemistry
              and physics. A number collaborations with researchers at other institutions
              extend the range of experiments that can be performed on the materials. An
              innovative high-resolution quartz dilatometer, the only device of its kind in
              the USA, will be constructed to measure the length change of tiny specimens as
              the temperature is varied. This will allow the detection of important phase
              transitions occurring in the materials. Graduate and undergraduate students
              will receive valuable training for future careers in the high-technology
              marketplace. The teaching method for introductory physics will integrate active
              processes into lectures through demonstrations and single-concept problems
              aimed at improving conceptual understanding and creating a more enthusiastic
              learning experience.




