Title       : Collaborative Research: Characterization of the Wetlands Source of Tropospheric
               Methyl Bromide (CH3Br) and Methyl Chloride (CH3Cl)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0301036

Award Number: 0301036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70326              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Hines   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Lowell Res Fdn
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  01854    978/934-4750

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1309,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is a collaboration between the University of New Hampshire and the
              University of Alaska.  It was submitted to the Environmental Geochemistry and
              Biogeochemistry Program (EGB) and is supported by the Atmospheric Chemistry
              Program of the Division of Atmospheric Sciences; the Petrology and Geochemistry
              Program, and the Hydrologic Sciences Program of the Division of Earth Sciences;
              and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the Division of Chemistry of
              the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.  	

Methyl bromide
              and methyl chloride are anthropogenically influenced trace gases that play an
              important role in the stratospheric ozone balance.  Although their
              biogeochemisty is not well understood, it is known that these gases have
              significant natural sources.  The atmospheric budgets of these gases are out of
              balance because the identified sinks for both gases outweigh known sources. 
              Recently, it has been discovered that flooded peatlands are a terrestrial
              source for these gases which could impact their global budget.  Information is
              still lacking about the regional distribution and magnitude of this new source
              and how the flooded soils might affect their ambient mixing ratios.  In this
              project direct flux measurements of methyl bromide and methyl chloride will be
              made in a variety of peatlands and experiments will be carried out to determine
              the chemical, physical, and biological parameters controlling these fluxes.
