Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Seismic Hazard Assessment and Seismological
               Study in the Korean Peninsula using Modern and Historical Earthquake Catalog
               Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0301894

Award Number: 0301894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jer-Ming Chiu chiu@ceri.memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose Pujol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 0000,5942,9196,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0301894
Chiu


A reliable seismic hazard assessment has become an essential
              scientific and economic issue for the Korean Peninsula as well as for the
              central and eastern U.S.A. that are considered in a stable intraplate
              continental environment.  Via this joint research effort between the Center for
              Earthquake Research and Information, the University of Memphis, USA, and the
              School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Seoul National University, Korea, a
              few most fundamental but not well understood questions concerning earthquake
              activities in a stable continental region will be studied.  These questions
              include but are not limited to (1) Why significant earthquakes occur in
              intraplate regions far away from plate boundaries? (2) Can surface geology be
              correlated to historical and modern earthquake activities? Can active faults be
              identified from reliably determined seismicity? (3) Are there any recurrence
              patterns for large intraplate earthquakes in historical records? Will the next
              large earthquake occur near any previous location? (4) Can historical
              earthquake information be used to predict the most probable mode of faulting
              for the next large earthquake and how large the future faulting area will be?
              (5) What role does the upper mantle structure play in a regional tectonic
              evolution and in the occurrence of damaging earthquakes?  Some of these
              questions are very difficult to answer in the central and eastern U.S. mainly
              because of a relatively short period of modern and historical data that is,
              however, not the case for the Korean Peninsula.  A historical earthquake
              catalog covering over ~2000 years is available for Korea and the modern Korean
              seismic network is surrounded by one of the world's most seismic active regions
              including Japan, Ryukyu, Taiwan, and northeastern China.  Furthermore, the
              selection and construction criteria, and safety management of the existing and
              future critical facilities, e.g. nuclear power plants and high technology
              centers, in the Korean Peninsula also depend on a reliable seismic hazard
              assessment which is not only a local problem but has evolved into an
              international concern. The ultimate goals of this joint NSF-KOSEF project will
              emphasize on (1) the compilation of a consistent Korean historical earthquake
              catalog and the conversion of its intensity information to the moment magnitude
              scale, (2) the evaluation of seismicity and crustal and upper mantle structure
              beneath the Korean Peninsula using modern seismic network data and their
              implications for regional tectonic evolution, and (3) an assessment of
              earthquake hazard in the Korean Peninsula from the revised modern and
              historical earthquake catalog data. Therefore broader impacts of the proposed
              research will include (1) a safer site selection and management of numerous
              critical facilities on the Korean Peninsula that is significant for regional
              and global environment and economics, and (2) a better understanding of how
              earthquakes work in a stable continent and its applications to other intraplate
              regions around the world where long historical earthquake catalog may not be
              available.


