Title       : Cellular, Molecular, and Genetic Analysis of Meristem Initiation and
               Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9205970

Award Number: 9205970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian M. Sussex   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Apical meristems are responsible for the production of the entire              
              postembryonic plant, aerial and subterranean. The sites at which               
              meristems are initiated, and their patterns of development,                    
              growth, and arrest are responsible for the establishment of the                
              architectural patterns of the shoot and root systems. These                    
              architectural patterns contribute to the overall light harvesting              
              efficiency, water and nutrient absorption, and productivity of                 
              the plant. For these reasons, and for gaining increased                        
              understanding of basic plant developmental processes, it is                    
              important to analyze the ways in which meristems are initiated,                
              organized, and function. The experiments that Dr. Sussex will                  
              carry out are based on the assumption that the initiation and                  
              organization of lateral root meristems represents a developmental              
              pathway consisting of a sequence of genetically controlled                     
              molecular and cellular events. The experiments are designed to                 
              dissect this pathway in the following ways. First, he will define              
              cellular events that occur early in lateral root meristem                      
              formation, including the contribution of cell cycle events and                 
              the role of cortical microtubule arrays; second, he will analyze               
              the regulation of genes that are expressed during initiation and               
              early development of lateral root meristems; third, he will                    
              isolate, map, and analyze mutants in lateral root meristem                     
              initiation and organization, and order the pathway into a                      
              temporal sequence. He will relate the cellular and molecular                   
              aspects of lateral root development genetically by comparing them              
              in wild type and in mutants for lateral root development, and                  
              experimentally by uncoupling lateral root development from cell                
              division and DNA replication.
