Title       : Small GTP-Binding Proteins and Cell Division Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1994       
File        : a9205697

Award Number: 9205697
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarissa M. Cheney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 In this proposal, the overall aim is to determine the role of               
              small GTP-binding proteins in the regulation of mitosis. A small               
              regulator for GTP-binding proteins, called a GDP Dissociation                  
              Inhibitor (GDI), has been identified from Drosophila melanogaster,             
              through the developmental mutant known as quartet. In quartet, GDI             
              fails to undergo a post-translational modification, and processes              
              regulated by GTP-binding proteins are altered. Prominent among the             
              anomalies in quartet are changes in mitotic behavior; mitotic                  
              chromosomal separation is blocked. Thus, chromosomal separation in             
              mitosis may involve small GTP-binding proteins.                                
              %%%                                                                            
                 Mitosis is the process by which already-replicated chromosomes              
              align, split apart, and then separate into two groups in an orderly            
              fashion. Mitosis is similar in widely divergent cells throughout               
              the eukaryotic realm, but our understanding of this process is not             
              well-developed. The increased availablity of conditional mutants               
              that exhibit anomalous entry into or progression through mitosis               
              have proven to be powerful tools with which to dissect the                     
              mechanisms by which chromosomes move. In this project, a mutant of             
              Drosophila exhibits anomalous progression through mitosis. The                 
              underlying mechanism for this block to chromosomal separation                  
              appears to be linked to a family of regulatory proteins that have              
              heretofore not been linked to the process. This work has the                   
              potential to provide important clues about the regulatory                      
              components that control chromosomal separation in all higher                   
              organisms.
