Title       : A Coupled Model of the Effects of Planetary Waves on the Zonally Averaged State
               of the Middle Atmosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1995     
File        : a9205027

Award Number: 9205027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137779             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Boyd jpboyd@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne K. Smith  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The circulation of the middle atmosphere is driven by complex             
              interactions of chemical, physical, and dynamical processes.                   
              Ideally this circulation should be simulated with a fully three                
              dimensional model, but to do so can be computationally prohibitive.            
              For this reason, and also in order to isolate certain processes for            
              in-depth studies, researchers rely on simpler models for much of               
              their work.  In designing simpler models, researchers endeavor to              
              make them as realistic as possible.  Under her last award, the                 
              principal investigator coupled a quasi-geostrophic time-dependent              
              wave model to a zonally averaged (two-dimensional) chemical-                   
              radiative-dynamical model of the middle atmosphere (principally the            
              stratosphere).  The wave model is used to determine the driving of             
              the mean flow by Rossby waves and subsequently the eddy transport              
              of chemical species.  Her goal was to obtain more realistic                    
              simulations of stratospheric circulation and associated trace                  
              species transport than would be possible with the two dimensional              
              model alone.                                                                   
                   With this renewal award, Dr. Smith will continue her research             
              on the middle atmosphere.  The coupled model will be made more                 
              realistic with the addition of an interactive lower boundary at the            
              tropopause.  The principal objective then will be to assess the                
              quality of the coupled model's dynamical interactions and the                  
              ability to simulate transport of chemical species (the distribution            
              of which also affects the circulation).  The coupled model will be             
              compared in detail with a fully nonlinear three dimensional model              
              of the stratosphere to determine the ability of the wave model to              
              represent transport processes.
