Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Polynomial Invariants in the Theory of Knots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9205277

Award Number: 9205277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis H. Kauffman kauffman@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project concerns polynomial invariants in knot theory,               
              particularly the Jones polynomial and its generalizations.  Along              
              with knot theory, the project is integrally involved with related              
              problems in combinatorics, generalized spin networks, quantum                  
              groups, statistical mechanics, and invariants of 3-manifolds.  In              
              particular, it addresses a tangle-theoretic recoupling theory for              
              the Temperley-Lieb algebra and its relationship with invariants of             
              graph embeddings, the SL(2) quantum group, and the Turaev-Viro                 
              invariant of 3-manifolds.  This recoupling theory gives a                      
              completely tangle-theoretic version of quantum 6j coefficients at              
              roots of unity, and it permits the construction of the Turaev-Viro             
              invariant on a purely knot-theoretic basis.  These topics will be              
              explored in the context of the Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants            
              of 3-manifolds.  Other problems about link polynomials will be                 
              considered, such as the properties of statistical mechanical models            
              for the Alexander-Conway polynomial and relations with four-                   
              dimensional topology.                                                          
                   Knots are rather elementary geometric objects whose really                
              interesting properties are topological.  By this we mean that two              
              geometric knots do not differ in an interesting way if one of them             
              can be transformed to look just like the other without cutting or              
              untying it, just by pushing its string about to rearrange the                  
              crossings.  Topologists say that they are two different geometric              
              realizations of the same topological knot.  Nevertheless, it is not            
              a trivial matter to recognize when one complicated geometric knot              
              is topologically different from another, rather than just a                    
              different geometric realization.  This problem can be addressed by             
              computing certain numbers or polynomials which are called                      
              "topological invariants," meaning that they always have the same               
              value for different geometric realizations of the same topological             
              knot.  The problem would be reduced to pure algebra if there were              
              one invariant which also always had different values for geometric             
              realizations of different topological knots, but life is not so                
              simple -- no single invariant achieves this ideal, nor even all the            
              known invariants taken together.  It is therefore valuable to                  
              investigate new invariants, some of the most useful being those                
              inspired in recent years by ideas from quantum physics. In                     
              particular, applications of knot theory to the biology of long                 
              strands of DNA have drawn upon knowledge of these newer invariants.
