Title       : Molecular Dissection of the Plant Golgi: A Heterologous Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1992      
File        : a9205451

Award Number: 9205451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Galbraith galbraith@arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project is on the Golgi apparatus, which is the              
              subcellular site of the biosynthesis, modification, and sorting of             
              glycoproteins and complex polysaccharides of the plant cell                    
              surface.  Very little is known about the molecular composition of              
              the Golgi in plants.  Few of the enzymes involved in the synthesis             
              of cell wall matrix polysaccharides have been identified and                   
              characterized.  Nothing is known about the organization of these               
              enzymes within the Golgi, or how such organization is maintained,              
              or how polysaccharide synthesis is initiated, or how complex                   
              polysaccharides are assembled and targeted to specific locations in            
              the cell wall.  Part of the difficulty has been an inability to                
              subfractionate plant Golgi into cis-, medial, and trans-cisternal              
              elements.  A novel approach is proposed to achieve such separation,            
              in which a chimaeric protein (translational fusion between the E1              
              glycoprotein of avian Infectious Bronchitis Virus, IBV-E1, and GUS)            
              will be used to target the manipulable GUS marker to the Golgi.                
              This idea is based on observations in animal systems that IBV-E1 is            
              targeted to and accumulates in the membranes of the cis-Golgi                  
              cisternae.  In this project, the ultrastructural location of                   
              chimaeric markers containing all or part of the IBV-E1 coding                  
              sequence will be determined by EM colloidal gold immunolocalization            
              (to be done in collaboration with experts in this technique).                  
              These studies will establish the feasibility of more extensive                 
              biochemical work exploiting the IBV-E1 fusion expressed in plant               
              cells.                                                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              A large fraction of the dry weight of plants is in the cell walls.             
              Plant cell walls are critical to the survival of the plants, since             
              they provide the rigidity needed to maintain morphology and turgor             
              pressure. There are indications that cell walls are also critical              
              components of defense mechanisms against plant pathogens.  They are            
              the biological sources of significant commercial products, such as             
              cellulose and cellulose-based products, wood products, and dietary             
              fiber.  This novel approach to understanding the cell biology of               
              plant wall biosynthesis may open up the possibility of genetic                 
              engineering of plant walls for specific purposes.  In addition, the            
              research should provide important information about the parameters             
              that affect expression of animal glycoproteins within genetically              
              engineered plants.  This should be relevant for applications                   
              involving the recovery of commercially useful animal glycoproteins             
              from transgenic plants.
