Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9205339

Award Number: 9205339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5686               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Soja   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Concomitant with the decline of established manufacturing                 
              regions in the U.S. has been a rise in both output and employment              
              in service industries.  Of these producer services, the financial              
              service industries have undergone substantial change as a result               
              of intensified competition, domestic deregulation, and technical               
              change.  Financial services are important employers, and they                  
              influence the competitiveness of most other industries by virtue               
              of their control over the money supply and the credit system.  As              
              world financial markets have become more international, the                    
              coordination and control of financial flows is concentrating in a              
              few select centers of banking and commercial capital.  After                   
              London, Tokyo, and New York, Los Angeles has risen to a position               
              as the financial center of the west coast in terms of employment,              
              assets, deposits, and loan activity.  This research investigates               
              how the restructuring of financial services since 1970 has                     
              affected the demand for, and the composition of, labor in Los                  
              Angeles.  The research will link changes in forms of competition               
              and regulation, technical change, and industrial organization                  
              with changing employment strategies in commercial banking.                     
              Analysis of secondary data will be complemented by semi-                       
              structured interviews with senior bank management in order to                  
              establish how commercial banks reorganize their internal and                   
              external operations to remain competitive, to uncover the                      
              strategies they use to restructure labor and lower costs, and to               
              determine whether restructuring affects different labor pools in               
              terms of wages, hours worked, turnover, and job security.                      
                   An examination of changing employment practices in                        
              commercial banking will extent an understanding of how industrial              
              restructuring affects different groups of labor.  It will also                 
              inform broader theoretical and policy debates about the growth of              
              tertiary employment in the face of a decline in manufacturing                  
              employment in U.S. cities.
