Title       : Characterization of Resistance Mechanisms to the Photosensitizing Compound
               Cercosporin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1994     
File        : a9205578

Award Number: 9205578
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret E. Daub margaret_daub@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1136,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 This project focuses on the mechanisms by which a group of                  
              fungal plant pathogens from the genus Cercospora, exhibit                      
              resistance to the photosensitizing toxin cercosporin that they                 
              produce. Cercosporin produces singlet oxygen when activated by                 
              light and is toxic to a wide variety of organisms, including mice,             
              plants, bacteria and many fungi. However, Cercospora species                   
              produce high concentrations of this compound in the light and are              
              unaffected by its presence. Published evidence suggests that the               
              production of carotenoids and the ability of Cercospora fungi to               
              reduce and detoxify the cercosporin molecule are the primary                   
              mechanisms of resistance to the toxin. This project tests the                  
              hypothesis for the involvement of carotenoids in cercosporin                   
              detoxification through the generation of a series of carotenoid-               
              deficient mutants produced by gene disruption experiments. Mutants             
              that are either sensitive to cercosporin or deficient in                       
              cercosporin-reducing ability will provide alternative means to test            
              for possible mechanisms of detoxification.                                     
              %%%                                                                            
                 Naturally-occurring toxins are usually without effect in the                
              cells in which they are produced, yet they can be potent poisons in            
              the cells of closely-related organisms. The cellular mechanisms of             
              detoxification in toxin-producing organisms are thought to involve             
              either the chemical modification that results in the inactivation              
              of the toxin or the compartmentalization of the active toxin                   
              molecules away from targets elsewhere in the cell. The chemical                
              basis for cercosporin toxicity is understood and the inactivation              
              of cercosporin through its chemical reduction is thoroughly                    
              reasonable. This project provides a straightforward test of the                
              involvement of carotenoids in the reduction of this toxin and will             
              contribute to our understanding of detoxification in a variety of              
              other organisms.
