Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Theory and Applications of Homo- clinic and Heteroclinic
               Bifurcation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1994     
File        : a9205535

Award Number: 9205535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: JANICE L ALEXANDER                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Schecter schecter@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiao-Biao Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigators continue research on homoclinic and                     
              heteroclinic bifurcation and on several important applied                      
              problems in which homoclinic and heteroclinic bifurcation theory               
              are crucial.  They continue work begun by Lin on spatially                     
              patterned solutions of reaction-diffusion wquations near                       
              spatially homogeneous solutions, represented by homoclinic orbits              
              on heteroclinic cycles of the reaction equation.  They                         
              investigate a new approach, based on earlier work, to the                      
              stability of stationary solutions of reaction-diffusion equations              
              with small diffusion that consist of regular and transition                    
              layers, in which the stability would be checked layer by layer.                
              They continue work begun by Schecter using heteroclinic                        
              bifurcation theory to study the solutions of systems of                        
              conservation laws.  They also continue work on the stability and               
              convergence of numerical methods for finding homoclinic and                    
              heteroclinic orbits to nonhyperbolic equilibria.                               
                   It can happen that if one starts a dynamic process near one               
              of its steady states, the resulting orbit of the process goes far              
              from that state, then returns to the same or a different steady                
              state.  Such an orbit is called homoclinic or heteroclinic                     
              respectively.  These orbits turn out to be key to understanding                
              numerous phenomena in the sciences.  The investigators continue                
              their studies of homoclinic and heteroclinic orbits, and of                    
              mathematical aspects of them that are important in applications.               
              One subject they investigate is how two interacting dispersed                  
              populations can spontaneously become organized into spatial                    
              patterns of varying population densities that fluctuate over                   
              time, because of homoclinic or heteroclinic orbits in the                      
              underlying dynamics.  The second subject is an idea of Lin for                 
              understanding the stability of propagating fronts, in chemical                 
              reactions, for example, by viewing the fronts as heteroclinic                  
              orbits.  The third subject is complicated waves that arise in                  
              solutions of equations such as those that model the recovery of                
              oil from an underground reservoir when water is pumped in to                   
              force it out.  These waves can be viewed as heteroclinic orbits.               
              The fourth subject is the robustness and accuracy of numerical                 
              methods used to compute homoclinic and heteroclinic orbits.
