Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9205094

Award Number: 9205094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7680               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald I. Dorn ronald.dorn@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Geomorphic processes, climate, soils, and biota work on a                 
              large scale to create the observed physical landscape.  At a                   
              microscale, weathering contributes as part of the geomorphic                   
              system, and an important objective of weathering research is the               
              development of models that explain and predict rates of chemical               
              reactions at the earth's surface.  Quartz is among the most                    
              common of terrestrial minerals, and it is regarded as one of the               
              most resistant to chemical weathering.  The processes of quartz                
              weathering is not as well understood as those associated with                  
              other, more weatherable materials.  This project seeks to                      
              understand how quartz decrystallization, a micro-weathering                    
              phenomenon, is influenced by climate, biota, geochemistry, and                 
              time.  It will also determine a chemical signature for quartz                  
              decrystallization that may be useful for paleo-environmental                   
              research.  The project will sample quartz from a constant                      
              geomorphic environment and time, but with varying climate and                  
              vegetation.  Field analysis combined with laboratory                           
              microanalytical techniques will be used to quantify the physical               
              and chemical characteristics of quartz decrystallization.  These               
              characteristics will be compared with time, temperature,                       
              moisture, geochemical environment, biochemical environment,                    
              geomorphology, and scale by means of statistical tests.                        
                   This research will define the elements of quartz                          
              decrystallization, and it will contribute to a greater                         
              understanding of weathering processes as a whole.  This is                     
              important because weathering processes are closely connected to                
              geomorphic processes, soil development, and sedimentology.  The                
              findings should also amplify the importance of quartz in                       
              geochronology, paleo-environmental research, and archaeology.
