Title       : Mineralogical Trends in Upper Paleocene-Lower Eocene Sediments of the Gulf Basin
               and Southern Rocky Mountains: Test for Synchroneity between Source Area Uplift
               and.....
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1993     
File        : a9205946

Award Number: 9205946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141234             (Estimated)
Investigator: Earle F. McBride   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Preliminary analysis of mineralogical trends through time in              
              two large clastic wedges in the northwestern Gulf of New Mexico                
              Basin (Wilcox and lower Claiborne Groups), and time-equivalent                 
              upper Paleocene-lower Eocene strata in Laramide basins of the                  
              Southern Rocky Mountains, suggests that the two-phase uplift                   
              history of Laramide orogeny described by Chapin and Cather (1983)              
              may be recorded by detrital mineralogy.  Temporal changes in                   
              composition also indicate that changing climate played a role in               
              the evolution detrital mineralogy.                                             
                   The proposal is to study the temporal changes of detrital and             
              diagenetic mineralogy in the Wilcox and lower Claiborne Groups of              
              the northwestern Gulf of Mexico Basin, and coeval sediments in                 
              Laramide basins of the Southern Rocky Mountains.  This information             
              will provide a test of the theory that pulses of intracontinental              
              Laramide tectonism are recorded by episodes of deltaic-wedge                   
              progradation in the Gulf of Mexico Basin.  In particular, we will              
              address the question:  Is the response of delta growth geologically            
              instantaneous, or does a geologically significant lag-time exist               
              between filling of basins adjacent to interior uplifts and the                 
              deposition of associated sediment at the continental margin?                   
              Palynological analysis of sample intervals will place the trend of             
              mineralogical changes within a time framework.  This temporally                
              constrained analysis of mineralogical changes will allow an                    
              assessment of synchroneity between interior-continental orogeny and            
              continental-margin sedimentation.
