Title       : Symposium on Development in Vertebrate Embryos: Environmental, Parental and
               Embryonic Interactions; Cambridge, United Kingdom; August 9-13, 1992.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1992      
File        : a9205280

Award Number: 9205280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol M. Vleck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Physiological Soc
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1148,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal seeks funding to support the overseas travel costs               
              of American participants to a two-day symposium which is part of               
              a larger four-day  meeting at Cambridge University in August,                  
              1992.  This meeting is jointly sponsored by four scientific                    
              societies located in Europe,  Canada and the United States and will            
              be attended by approximately 300 biologists from throughout the                
              world.  The symposium is entitled "Development in Vertebrate                   
              Embryos:  Comparative physiology, environmental influences and                 
              parental role."  It was organized by Dr. Carol Vleck (University               
              of Arizona) and Dr. Amos Ar (Tel Aviv University, Israel) and will             
              be attended by 19 persons from nine countries,  including 11                   
              American.  The symposium will focus on the special physiological               
              problems that vertebrate embryos face as they progress from just               
              a single cell to an independent individual.  These developing forms            
              do not have the same arsenal of physiological and behavioral                   
              responses that adults do to maintain function in the face of                   
              stress,  yet still must be able to cope with conditions to which               
              they are exposed.  Relatively little attention has been given to               
              understanding the diversity of physiological strategies available              
              to embryos and how parents ameliorate the physical environment in              
              which the embryo develops.  The symposium will bring together for              
              the first time persons from diverse backgrounds in vertebrate                  
              physiology. but all with a special interest in embryonic form and              
              function.
