Title       : Elongation & Termination by Yeast RNA Polymerase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1994       
File        : a9205583

Award Number: 9205583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Todd M. Martensen                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline Kane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Transcriptional regulation is one of the major control points for              
              gene expression in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and controls               
              during elongation and termination operate by a variety of                      
              strategies.  For several years, the elongation and termination                 
              properties of mammalian RNA polymerase II have been studies in this            
              laboratory.  This research includes studies on these reactions with            
              yeast RNA polymerase II using in vivo and in vitro techniques.  The            
              advantage to studying these processes in yeast (Saccharomyces                  
              cerevisiae) is the availability of powerful genetic tools to                   
              complement biochemical analyses. There are five specific                       
              objectives:  1) Identify the signals which cause yeast RNA                     
              polymerase II to terminate;  2) Define the physical structure of               
              specific elongation complexes;  3) Evaluate the contribution of the            
              conserved C-terminal domain of the largest subunit of the                      
              polymerase to the elongation reaction;  4) Examine the mechanism by            
              which yeast transcript elongation factor SII promotes terminator               
              read through by RNA polymerase II;  and 5) Identify other cellular             
              proteins involved in regulating transcript elongation in the cell.             
              The results from these experiments should provide fundamental                  
              information about the regulation of transcript elongation in                   
              eukaryotes.  The similarities in components of the transcriptional             
              machinery between yeast and larger eukaryotes suggest that much of             
              the information obtained here will be directly related to                      
              mechanisms in other eukaryotes.  Any differences which we observe              
              obviously will also be important.  The advantage to this approach              
              is that genetic tools are available to complement the biochemical              
              and cell biology approaches available in mammalian cells.                      
              %%%                                                                            
              Transcriptional regulation is a major control point for gene                   
              expression.  This control can occur during initiation elongation or            
              termination. Controls during elongation and termination by                     
              mammalian RNA polymerase II have been studied in this laboratory               
              for several years.  While studies of the mechanisms controlling                
              transcript elongation and termination mammalian cells have provided            
              much preliminary information, there are limits to the types of                 
              experiments that can be done in such systems.  Thus, we propose to             
              expand our previous work with mammalian cells by studies of                    
              transcription regulation in yeast.  The advangatage to studying                
              these processes in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) is the                     
              availability of powerful genetic tools to complement biochemical               
              analyses.  There are five specific objectives: (1) Identify the DNA            
              sequences are which yeast RNA polymerase II stops elongating an RNA            
              chain,  These experiments will use both the intact cell in vivo as             
              well components isolated from those cell in vitro. (2) Define the              
              physical structure of specific elongation complexes containing the             
              polymerase, the DNA template, and the RNA transcript.  Enzymatic               
              and chemical probes will be used to identify the molecular contacts            
              between the protein and nucleic acid components in these complexes.            
              (3) Evaluate the contribution of the C-terminal domain of the                  
              largest subunit of the polymerase to the elongation reaction.  This            
              subunit contains a unique structure consisting of multiple.                    
              Repeated heptapeptide sequences.  Quantitative analysis of the                 
              elongation properties of polymerase molecules containing and                   
              lacking this domain will be carried our (4) Examine the mechanism              
              by which a yeast transcript elongation factor (SI) stimulates                  
              elongation by RNA polymerase II.  The clone for the yeast SII                  
              protein will be mutagenized, and activity of the mutant proteins               
              will be compared.  (5) Identify other cellular proteins involved in            
              regulating transcript elongation in the cell.  genetic analyses                
              will be used to identify candidate proteins which will be further              
              characterized in vivo.  Complementing in vivo and in vitro results             
              will provide strong evidence for the participation of particular               
              proteins in elongation control.
