Title       : Tropical Intraseasonal Variability in an "Aqua Planet" GCM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1994      
File        : a9205905

Award Number: 9205905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112236             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anandu D. Vernekar adv@atmos.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              There is strong theoretical evidence that the Madden-Julian (30-60             
              day) oscillation in the atmospheric is due to interactions between             
              convection and circulation.  The PI will study the characteristics             
              of these interactions in a fully nonlinear general circulation                 
              model with an ocean covered earth ("aqua-planet").  Preliminary                
              experiments with the model show strong eastward propagation at                 
              periods between 10-15-days.  The oscillation is equatorially                   
              trapped with maximum amplitude in the upper troposphere.  The                  
              disturbances appear to exhibit both Kelvin and Rossby wave                     
              characteristics, possibility suggesting that the disturbances are              
              coupled Kelvin-Rossby waves.  The hypothesis has been put forth                
              that the vertical profile of convective heating defines the phase              
              speed of propagation observed in the model and the real atmosphere.            
              It is suggested that interacting vertical modes excited by the                 
              diabetic heating lead to propagating wave-CISK modes.  The PI will             
              critically examine this hypothesis in the "aqua-planet" general                
              circulation model.  The preferential excitement of the slowest                 
              modes over the warmest waters in the observations is inadequately              
              explained by the hypothesis.  The PIs will also study the                      
              sensitivity of oscillations to zonal asymmetries in the sea surface            
              temperatures.  The spatial scale of the convection is very small               
              whereas the oscillations in the circulation occur on the planetary             
              scale.  Finally, the PIs will study the zonal scale selection and              
              the coupling between the rotational and divergent kinetic energy by            
              an analysis of the model energetics in the wave number domain as a             
              function of time.  It is expected that the proposed research will              
              provide a better understanding of the characteristics of the                   
              interactions between convection and large scale atmospheric                    
              circulation.
