Title       : Distribution and Survival of Cod Larvae in Relation to Hydrography on Georges
               Bank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9205936

Award Number: 9205936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122973             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Radtke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will investigate the "distributional histories" of                
              larval cod on Georges Bank during the spring and early summer                  
              period of developing thermal stratification. The period of thermal             
              stratification is a time during which the intricacies of larval cod            
              vertical and areal distributions may hold important implications               
              for survival and ultimately recruitment. This project will utilize             
              a new technique of otolith analyses (Sr/Ca ratios), which has                  
              recently been developed, to hindcast the temperature histories,                
              and hence distributional histories (that is from the time of                   
              hatching to capture), of individual cod larvae collected in various            
              hydrographic regimes in the Georges Bank area.  The technique will             
              be advanced by employing a new technology, electron energy loss                
              spectroscopy, which will increase the resolution of the Sr/Ca                  
              technique to a level capable of resolving sub-daily temperature                
              histories.  These analyses could reveal diel vertical migrations               
              into or through a thermocline.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Larval cod are believed to be more closely associated with the                 
              stratified waters on the sides of Georges Bank than the tidally                
              mixed waters on top of the Bank, and are transported around Georges            
              Bank and to the southwest with the residual circulation.  The                  
              abundances of their zooplankton prey are also more abundant on the             
              stratified side of the thermal front in early spring, and the                  
              larvae are often associated with the depth of maximum prey                     
              abundance in the thermocline.  Later in the year the late larvae               
              and early juveniles are on the top of the Bank, where zooplankton              
              densities become greater than on the flanks.  The exact nature of              
              the vertical and areal distributions of the larvae in relation to              
              mixed and stratified waters may be very important with regard to               
              horizontal transport processes, temperature effects on growth, and             
              the availability of zooplankton prey items.  This project will                 
              employ new technology to examine the distributions of cod larvae               
              and will form a collaborative link with an already-funded study                
              (NOAA) that  focuses on the physics of the vernal stratification               
              process as it relates to the complete suite of zooplankton, and the            
              distribution, growth and condition of cod and haddock larvae, thus             
              making for a strong interdisciplinary program
