Title       : Characterization and Role of SAR Elements Flanking the HSC80Locus of Tomato
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1994       
File        : a9205573

Award Number: 9205573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luca Comai comai@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The relationship between chromatin organization, nuclear                  
              architecture and gene expression in all eukaryotes and,                        
              specifically, in terrestrial plants is a complex and unresolved                
              question.  Chromosomal domains, consisting of chromatin loops                  
              attached to the chromosomal scaffold, may provide a specialized                
              environment for gene expression.  Supporting this hypothesis,                  
              transgenes inserted at different loci in a plant genome very in                
              expression levels.  Scaffold Attachment Regions (SAR) are DNA                  
              elements that bind to the nuclear scaffolds and could anchor loop              
              domains.  We have discovered that the HSC80 gene of tomato is                  
              flanked by SAR regions, suggesting that, in vivo, the association              
              of these SAR elements with the scaffold.  The putative loop domain             
              will be compared to a DNAase I-hypersensitivity map of the same                
              region.  Using transgenic plants, we will determine whether                    
              flanking SARs are necessary for position-independent, copy-number-             
              dependent expression of a HSC80-Gus chimeric gene and of a                     
              mannopine synthase (Mas)-Gus chimeric gene.  To avoid a selection              
              bias, we will characterize the expression pattern of Mas-Gus                   
              transgenes that were not directly selected.  We will obtain                    
              unselected insertion of the chimeric Gus gene by co-transformation             
              with a separate T-DNA carrying the kanamycin resistance gene.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              It has been clear for some time that the programmed regulation of              
              gene expression during development and in different tissues is too             
              complex to be totally explained by cis and trans acting factors.               
              One idea which has become more and more acceptable is that                     
              chromosome structure somehow plays a part in such precise control              
              of gene expression and the information which should result from the            
              successful completion of this work will give greater insight into              
              possible mechanisms of regulation.
