Title       : Expression and Biochemical Characterization of Arabidopsis Calmodulin Isoforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9205702

Award Number: 9205702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond E. Zielinski zielinsk@life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1136,9145,
Abstract    :
                 This project is aimed toward the elucidation of intracellular               
              signalling pathways that involve calcium in the transduction of                
              hormonal and environmental stimuli in higher plants.  The current              
              project focuses on the part of the signal transduction pathway that            
              involves the interaction between calcium and calmodulin, and the               
              consequent activation of specific target enzymes.  The preliminary             
              work for this project established the existence of four different              
              calmodulin isoforms encoded by at least six different genomic DNA              
              sequences from Arabidopsis thaliana.  This diversity of calmodulin             
              isoforms is unprecedented in either the plant or animal kingdoms,              
              and preliminary phylogenetic analyses suggest that this arrangement            
              may be unique to Arabidopsis or to the crucifer family.  These                 
              findings have led to the hypothesis that the different Arabidopsis             
              calmodulin isoforms have evolved to optimize the interaction of                
              calmodulin with specific target enzymes, particularly target                   
              enzymes associated with membranes.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                 This project is directed toward intracellular signal                        
              transduction pathways in higher plants.  At present, there is only             
              a general understanding of these processes in the plant kingdom.               
              The preliminary data demonstrate the existence of multiple isoforms            
              of the calcium-binding elicitor protein, calmodulin, in Arabidopsis            
              thaliana.  This unexpected result may underlie significant                     
              differences between plants and other organisms in the mechanisms of            
              signal reception and transduction.
