Title       : Resolution and Reconstitution of Photosystem I in Cyanobacteria and Higher
               Plants; Molecular Biological and Physiochemical Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9205756

Award Number: 9205756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $441000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Golbeck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9197,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program aims at studying the structure, function                 
              and organization of the Photosystem I reaction center complex in               
              cyanobacteria and green plants.  Our ability to resolve P700-                  
              FA/FB complex into the P700-FX core, the P700-A1 core, and P700-A0             
              core, and our ability to reconstitute each preparation with                    
              altered cofactors and genetically-modified polypeptides, has                   
              provided new research opportunities in Photosystem I.  The                     
              proposed program is based on the ability to resolve and                        
              reconstitute the Photosystem I reaction center in terms of                     
              polypeptides and cofactors, and has five major objectives:                     
              1)  To determine the involvement of FA and/or FB in the                        
                  photoreduction of NADP+.                                                   
              2)  To confirm the ligands to the FX iron-sulfur cluster on PsaA               
                  and PsaB.                                                                  
              3)  To determine the roles of PsaD, PsaE and PsaF in Photosystem               
                  I function.                                                                
              4)  To solve the 3-dimensional structure of the PsaC, PsaD and                 
                  PsaE proteins.                                                             
              5)  To measure the spectroscopic properties of A1 with                         
                  reconstituted quinones.                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Green plants are able to utilize sunlight as an energy source                  
              with the use of photosynthetic reaction centers to power the                   
              organism's growth, metabolism, and reproduction.  Two different                
              kinds of reaction centers are located in the chloroplasts of                   
              green plants, and each contains chlorophyll, proteins, and metals              
              ions necessary for transforming solar energy into chemical                     
              energy.  In the last several years, we have learned how to remove              
              the proteins and metals from one of these reaction centers, and                
              we have learned how to rebuild the reaction centers from the                   
              constituent parts.  In this proposal, we will rebuild the                      
              reaction centers using proteins that have been altered using                   
              techniques of modern genetic engineering.  We will obtain these                
              proteins through a close collaboration with several molecular                  
              geneticists.  We will then use sophisticated measuring techniques              
              to determine the function of the individual proteins in the                    
              process of photochemical energy conversion.  By altering one                   
              protein while retaining the function of the others, we will be                 
              able to determine which protein provides a certain function in                 
              the process of the photosynthesis.  The proposal, therefore,                   
              relies on the marriage of two very powerful, but disparate                     
              techniques, genetics and biophysics, to solve the complicated                  
              problem of green plant photosynthesis.
