Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Smoothing Parameter Selection and Related Topic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1994       
File        : a9205687

Award Number: 9205687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shean-Tsong Chiu chiu@stat.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Tweedie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The statistical part of this project will be to study a                   
              number of estimation methods using nonparametric approaches.  In               
              particular kernel estimation and related areas of nonparametric                
              and density estimation applications will be studied, and the                   
              smoothing parameter selection problem addressed.  Problems to be               
              considered include those of discontinuities or rough density                   
              functions, selection for ridge regression, and the effect of                   
              discretization.  The modelling part of this project involves new               
              developments of the theory and applications of Markov models in                
              both discrete and continuous time.  The investigator will                      
              concentrate on rates of convergence results and on state and                   
              history dependent criteria for such stability.  These results                  
              will be incorporated into a new approach to Markov decisions                   
              processes where the state space is extended to include the                     
              decision set into the overall Markovian structure. Stability                   
              properties of such general processes will then be established in               
              quite complex environments.                                                    
                   Probabilistic modelling and statistical estimation                        
              techniques encompass two separate parts of the same activity.                  
              The first part endeavors to describe, in manageable terms, models              
              of real and often complex systems in such a way that the inherent              
              randomness in the system is properly represented.  The second                  
              endeavors to use these models, and data gathered to describe real              
              systems, in such a way that one can estimate the parameters that               
              actually describe what is happening in practice.  In the                       
              modelling part of this project the investigators will study                    
              important models in operations research, time series, and finance              
              and economics, with a focus on developing methods for stability                
              of such systems.  In the statistics part of the proposal, the                  
              investigators will look at a number of computer intensive ways of              
              estimating parameters with a goal of finding methods which give                
              good estimates quickly.
