Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9205409

Award Number: 9205409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richa Nagar  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Migration theory emphasizes the various ways in which social              
              networks based on family, kin, and ethnic ties are established by              
              expatriate communities in response to new political, economic,                 
              and social circumstances.  Missing from this genre of research is              
              insight into how gender interacts with ethnicity and class in the              
              process of migration and settlement.  Much research has                        
              overlooked the importance of international migrations within the               
              Third World, focusing instead on labor migration from                          
              economically less well developed to more developed countries.                  
              This research project will examine the abrupt and large                        
              population movement of Indians in Tanzania in the period 1960-                 
              1990 as a means of understanding the complex processes of large                
              scale migration within the Third World.  The study will highlight              
              how groups of migrants were affected by and responded to                       
              geographical differences in social, economic, and political                    
              conditions associated with migration.  Data from archives in both              
              India and Tanzania will be combined with personal interviews and               
              participant observation of migrants to test hypotheses relating                
              gender, class, caste, age, and family structure to particular                  
              migration streams to and within Tanzania.                                      
                   Within the past century, and particularly since the breakup               
              of colonial empires, there have been substantial migrations of                 
              people into Africa.  One of the most dynamic situations has                    
              involved the migration of Asian Indians into and with the country              
              of Tanzania.  This project will not only provide documentation of              
              this phenomenon, but it will also explain how such disruptions                 
              help to redefine ethnic boundaries, gender relations, and class                
              hierarchies under changing political and economic conditions.
