Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Structures and Discrete Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1994       
File        : a9205139

Award Number: 9205139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121700             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Goldman wmg@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9178,9251,MANU,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This continuing investigation of geometric structures on                  
              manifolds and discrete groups will concentrate on complex                      
              hyperbolic geometry, spherical CR geometry, flat Lorentzian                    
              geometry, conformal 3-dimensional geometry, and real projective                
              geometry.  These geometries are intimately interrelated, yet each              
              displays its own characteristic personality.  Direct constructions             
              of discrete groups by fundamental polyhedra (in the spirit of                  
              Poincare) in geometries in which totally geodesic hypersurfaces                
              either do not exist or are not sufficiently flexible to build                  
              fundamental polyhedra, have led to alternate notions of half-spaces            
              and hypersurfaces.  The investigator has analyzed how such                     
              hypersurfaces intersect and the possible combinatorial types for               
              polyhedra built from these objects.  He applies this theory to the             
              geometry and topology of moduli spaces of geometric structures on              
              a manifold, these spaces being closely related to the better known             
              moduli space of representations of a manifold's fundamental group,             
              a structure profitably studied using gauge-theoretic techniques.               
              The prototype of such moduli spaces is Teichmueller space, and one             
              objective of this project is to see how the geometry of                        
              Teichmueller space extends to these more general moduli spaces.                
                   Despite the fact that we live in a 3-dimensional manifold, our            
              intuition quickly fails us as a guide to the truth or falsity of               
              fairly simple questions about their general geometric and                      
              topological properties.  Nor is it terribly helpful in telling us              
              where to look for answers.  An elaborate theory has been developed             
              which is growing by leaps and bounds and has been far more                     
              successful than raw intuition, one of the most surprising features             
              of the theory being the prominent role that a non-Euclidean                    
              geometry, so-called hyperbolic geometry, occupies in this theory.              
              Other special geometric structures also have been exploited in                 
              similar ways, somewhat as a scaffolding is used in constructing a              
              building:  One asks a topological question about a manifold,                   
              something intrinsically independent of geometry.  One then imposes             
              a geometric structure, deduces properties that seem to depend upon             
              this geometric structure (and some of which, as intermediate steps,            
              actually do depend upon it), and finally in a sense kicks away the             
              scaffolding to reveal the desired answer to the original question.             
              By this I mean that one observes that one has deduced a result that            
              does not mention the geometric structure explicitly, and that one              
              then succeeds in showing that any other choice for the geometric               
              structure would have led to the same final result.  This is only               
              one intriguing aspect of such research, for it is true that the                
              geometric structures involved have now attracted a considerable                
              amount of interest in their own right.
