Title       : Mechanism and Macromolecular Organization in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9205004

Award Number: 9205004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Boxer sboxer@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9197,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              In order to understand the mechanism of the initial charge                     
              separation steps in bacterial photosynthetic reaction centers,                 
              several lines of investigation are proposed.  (i) Measurements of              
              the resonance Raman intensities and excitation profile for the                 
              lowest Qy electronic state of the special pair, combined with                  
              photochemical holeburning, absorption and electroabsorption (Stark             
              effect) spectroscopy, to obtain information on excited state                   
              dynamics; (ii) preparation and characterization of site-specific               
              mutants in the vicinity of the special pair which perturb its redox            
              properties to obtain information on the local dielectric properties            
              which may affect unidirectional electron transfer; and (iii)                   
              studies of the quantum yields and kinetics of RC mutants whose                 
              donor, acceptor and mediating state redox properties are different             
              from wild-type in applied electric fields to determine the                     
              mechanism of the fast charge separation and slower charge                      
              recombination reactions.                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Photosynthetic reaction centers are the smallest chlorophyll-                  
              protein complex capable of sustaining the light-induced charge                 
              separation reactions which initiate photosynthesis.  The first                 
              reactions are among the fastest reactions known in any system.  In             
              addition to the obvious importance of these reactions as the                   
              primary source of stored chemical energy on earth, these reactions             
              have much broader biophysical and chemical significance.  This is              
              because electron transfer reactions are ubiquitous in nature, and              
              because of the relative simplicity of this type of reaction, there             
              is some prospect of being able to understand the reaction mechanism            
              at a  fundamental level.  Bacterial reaction centers were the first            
              membrane protein to be characterized by x-ray crystallography, and             
              consequently all of our work falls under the general heading of                
              structure-function relationships.  The proposed research focuses on            
              systematically altering the rates and mechanisms of charge-transfer            
              reactions in the reaction center by modifying either internal or               
              external electric fields.  Internal fields can be altered by                   
              changing specific amino acids or stretches of amino acids using                
              recombinant DNA methods.  External fields can be applied either                
              with electrodes to a bulk sample or as transmembrane potentials.               
              The latter are of very great importance in nearly all biological               
              assemblies and we seek to understand the mechanisms which couple               
              such potentials to biological function.
