Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1992       
File        : a9205760

Award Number: 9205760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7350               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Storper storper@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The ability to translate advanced technology efficiently                  
              into manufacturing capacity is crucial under the new paradigm of               
              industrialization and competition in the world economy.  The                   
              competitive advantage of countries and regions depends on                      
              strategies of innovation and organization of production that                   
              allow for rapid adaptation to changes in the competitive                       
              environment.  A key question in this process is whether                        
              regionally focused production systems can be used by developing                
              countries in acquiring advanced technologies.  This project will               
              test the hypothesis that the creation of new industries and                    
              industrial sectors is influenced not only by technological change              
              and organizational innovation, but principally by place based                  
              politics and institutional strategies.  The research will focus                
              on three emerging high-technology agglomerations in Sao Paulo                  
              State in Brazil.  It will attempt to establish the relationship                
              between high-technology specialization and government sponsored                
              scientific efforts to generate efficient technology search                     
              procedures for industrial application.  Data will come from                    
              censuses, industrial surveys, and interviews with individual                   
              firms.  Data will be analyzed with statistical and cartographic                
              techniques to determine whether the hypothesized relationship                  
              between regional specialization and institutional factors is                   
              valid.                                                                         
                   This research should provide a framework for addressing the               
              specific conditions of semi-industrialized countries regarding                 
              their innovativeness and competitiveness, the role of                          
              geographically specific factors in this process, and whether                   
              regionally focused production systems promote advanced                         
              technological capacity for developing countries.  These questions              
              are important in determining whether the advent of a global                    
              economy based on technological competition poses obstacles or                  
              opportunities for industrial development in less developed                     
              countries.
