Title       : Role of a Hydrophobic Cell-Surface Protein in the Biology of a Plant Pathogenic
               Fungus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1994      
File        : a9205818

Award Number: 9205818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal K. Van Alfen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Cell surface hydrophobicity is a property of many                         
              microorganisms.  A group of small hydrophobic proteins has                     
              recently been described in filamentous fungi.  These proteins,                 
              termed hydrophobins, have a number of properties in common,                    
              including:  1) accumulation on surfaces of sporulation                         
              structures, 2) accumulation on aerial hyphae, 3) presence of                   
              eight cysteines in the molecule, 4) putative hydrophobic leader                
              sequences, and 5) hydrophobic domains in the secreted protein.                 
              Proteins, or genes encoding such proteins, have been described                 
              from a number of different unrelated filamentous fungi, including              
              one from the chestnut blight fungus Cryphonectria parasitica.                  
              This small hydrophobic protein, cryparin, was discovered because               
              it is down-regulated in strains which are hypovirulent and                     
              sporulate poorly.  Cryparin accumulates on asexual fruiting                    
              bodies and in aerial hyphae.  Unlike other hydrophobins, cryparin              
              is also a lectin.  The evolutionary conservation in different                  
              fungi of similar small cell surface hydrophobic proteins                       
              associated with fruiting bodies suggests that they play important              
              roles in the biology of these fungi.  This proposal is to                      
              investigate the role of cryparin in the biology of the chestnut                
              blight fungus.  The physical properties of cryparin at air                     
              interfaces may be important for some aspect of fruiting body                   
              formation, positioning of the fruiting body, or spore dispersal.               
              Cryparin could also play a role in virulence as proposed for                   
              another hydrophobin.  To begin addressing the role of cryparin in              
              the biology of the chestnut blight fungus.                                     
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
                   The chestnut blight fungus, Cryphonectria parasitics, has                 
              nearly eliminated the American chestnut from its original natural              
              range.  Before this disease killed them chestnut trees were one                
              of the most important and common trees in the forests that range               
              from New England to the Southern Appalachians.  A biological                   
              control for this disease has been discovered.  A virus infects                 
              the chestnut blight fungus causing it to no longer be able to                  
              attack the chestnut tree or to form normal fungal reproductive                 
              structures.  We have found in previous work that the virus                     
              interferes with production of a few specific fungal proteins, one              
              of which is the protein cryparin.  We have preliminary evidence                
              that this protein may play a role in the ability of the fungus to              
              reproduce.  There is also a possibility that the protein enhances              
              the ability of fungus to damage infected trees.  It is the                     
              purpose of the study to investigate what role this abundantly                  
              produced protein plays in the biology of the fungus.  Knowledge                
              gained by this study may lead to the development of new                        
              approaches for the control of plant diseases.
