Title       : The Southwest Archaeological Obsidian Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1992       
File        : a9205506

Award Number: 9205506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17653              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Steven Shackley shackley@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Steven Shackley will              
              continue his work to locate and characterize obsidian deposits in              
              the U.S. Southwest. The research will proceed in several stages.               
              First he will use energy-dispersive X-ray fluorescence analysis                
              to convert semiquantitative data from materials already collected              
              into quantitative form. This will aid future analysis and                      
              facilitate interlaboratory comparison. Secondly he will work to                
              discover the location of other obsidian sources which, through                 
              analysis of their byproducts, are known to have been used by                   
              prehistoric peoples. The work will be focussed in Arizona and                  
              western New Mexico and will proceed through the use of regional                
              geological maps and interview with local rock collectors. Because              
              obsidian is often found in alluvial deposits, he will search for               
              such sources as well. Finally Dr. Shackley will collect samples                
              from known sites to determine the degree of intrasource                        
              variability. This will help him to determine the degree of                     
              confidence with which archaeological artifacts can be tied to                  
              individual sources.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Obsidian, or "volcanic glass" is intensively studied by                        
              archaeologists for two reasons. First, when fractured it forms                 
              and maintains extremely sharp cutting edges and therefore was                  
              prized by prehistoric peoples for making tools. It is often found              
              in archaeological sites in many parts of the world. Secondly                   
              different sources usually have descrete chemical signatures and                
              elemental analysis often permits one to tie a sample to a                      
              specific source area. Through analysis of archaeological obsidian              
              it is often possible to reconstruct prehistoric patterns of trade              
              and movement. This in turn provides insight into subsistence,                  
              social and political organization. For this process to work                    
              however it is essential to locate and characterize all source                  
              areas and this goal lies at the core of Dr. Shackley's work.                   
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons. It will improve                 
              and expand a data base which will be widely be used by                         
              archaeologists. It will also shed light into the lifeways of                   
              prehistoric inhabitants of the United States Southwest.
