Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Neogene Sediments of the San Timoteo Badlands, Southern
               California: Tectonic Implications Along the San Andreas and San Jacinto Faults
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1992      
File        : a9205023

Award Number: 9205023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael O. Woodburne mows@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This proposal is to study the stratigraphy, biostratigraphy,              
              and geochronology of the San Timoteo Badlands.  It contains a                  
              sequence of nonmarine deposits about 12,000 feet thick that ranges             
              in age from about 5 to 0.7 Ma, yields remains of fossil mammals                
              throughout the sequence, and contains lithologies amenable to                  
              magnetostratigraphic and isotopic age analysis.  The deposits, the             
              Mt. Eden and San Timoteo formations, occur in well exposed outcrops            
              of an anticline that plunges gently northwestward and is truncated             
              on its southwestern edge by the currently active San Jacinto fault.            
              The San Jacinto, the most active strand of the San Andreas fault               
              system in southern California, underwent about 24 km of right slip             
              during the past two million years.  Paleocurrent data indicate that            
              the sediments were transported to the San Timoteo basin from the               
              north and northeast.  Distinctive clast suites in the rocks are                
              consistent with derivation from sources in those directions now                
              northeast of the Badlands; some east of the present San Andreas                
              fault (s.s).  The San Timoteo beds thus are ideally situated in                
              space and time to promote investigations of the slip history of                
              elements of the San Andreas fault system during the past 5 million             
              years.  These beds are the only sequence that accumulated                      
              relatively continuously during this span of time in this part of               
              southern California.                                                           
                   A detailed analysis of age of these beds has never been                   
              attempted.  The program of age analysis will include vertebrate                
              paleontology and biostratigraphy, magnetostratigraphy and isotope              
              chronology.  If successful, the results will dramatically improve              
              our ability to attempt a reconstruction of the sedimentary history             
              of the San Timoteo beds, and palinspastic reconstructions of the               
              tectonic block that contains them relative to the then adjacent                
              terranes in this region.  The data also will be valuable in                    
              addressing the timing of transfer of regional slip from the San                
              Andreas fault strands (s.s) to the San Jacinto fault, will improve             
              our ability to evaluate when and how the entire San Andreas system             
              became effectively "locked" in this region; will sharpen the focus             
              of local investigations of slip rates on the San Andreas, and on               
              how regional shear between the Pacific and American plates is                  
              propagated through the Transverse Ranges province.
