Title       : Molecular Bases of Antioxidant Responses in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1992    
File        : a9205515

Award Number: 9205515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38259              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth G. Alscher ralscher@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Ruth Alscher, of the Department of Plant Pathology, Physiology and             
              Weed Science at Virginia Polytechnic and State University is                   
              applying to spend a year at the DOE/MSU Plant Research Laboratory              
              on the Michigan State University campus in the laboratory of Dr.               
              Chris Somerville.  The title of her research project will be                   
              Molecular bases of antioxidant responses in Arabidopsis.  The                  
              mechanisms in green leaf cells which protect against oxidative                 
              stress will be studied in Arabidopsis, in particular the production            
              of three plastid proteins specifically associated with resistance              
              whose inheritance may be coordinately controlled. These antioxidant            
              defense proteins have been implicated in resistance to a number of             
              different stresses, including drought, extremes of temperature,                
              herbicides and air pollutants.  The PI will avail herself of the               
              expertise and resources of Dr. Sommerville's laboratory to study               
              effects of exposure to stress on gene expression, to identify                  
              mutants with a altered sensitivity to oxidative stress and to study            
              the signalling process by which altered gene expressioning is                  
              brought about.  One principal focus will be the development of a               
              molecular cloning strategy to identify the genes which encode the              
              antioxidant plastid proteins.  A year of concentration in the                  
              molecular aspects of stress responses in green plant cells will                
              enable the PI to progress towards her goal of understanding the                
              basis in molecular genetics of differential resistance to oxidative            
              stress in photosynthetic tissue.
