Title       : RUI: Seasonal Turnover of Organic Matrix Collagen in Octocoral Spicules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9205674

Award Number: 9205674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136336             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roni J. Kingsley kingsley@urvax.urich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Calcification is an extremely widespread phenomenon occurring in               
              organisms as diverse as bacteria, plants, sponges, clams and                   
              humans. Among the invertebrates, there are calcified structures                
              that cover or encase their bodies such as coral reefs, snail                   
              shells, crab exoskeletons and sea urchin tests and spines. Other               
              invertebrates form numerous usually microscopic calcified                      
              structures that impregnate the body called spicules or ossicles.               
              The octocoral or sea whip Leptogorgia virgulata is an excellent                
              example of an animal possessing elaborate spicules throughout its              
              body. Like most invertebrate calcified structures, these spicules              
              contain an internal organic matrix that provides a framework for               
              the deposition of calcium carbonate. What is unusual, however, is              
              our discovery that this octocoral spicule matrix contains collagen,            
              a protein that is critical in the formation of bones and teeth, but            
              is rarely associated with invertebrate calcium carbonate structure.            
              Furthermore, this octocoral collagen varies seasonally, being                  
              predominant in the summer. This three-year project will explore in             
              depth the relationships between octocoral spicule calcification                
              over time will be studied using a variety of specific markers. For             
              example, tetracycline is a fluorescent marker and 45Ca is a                    
              radioactive calcification. Radiolabelled proline and specific                  
              antibody markers that we have recently developed, mark collagen                
              synthesis. These components can be visualized through fluorescence             
              and transmission electron microscopy, and measured by quantifying              
              the amount of label present. Bone remodelling involves changes in              
              acidity and enzyme spicules using enzymatic reactions and other                
              specific antibody markers. An important dimension of this project              
              is the involvement of student investigators.
