Title       : Molecular Analysis of the rbcS Multigene Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1993       
File        : a9205713

Award Number: 9205713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197221             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilhelm Gruissem   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Transcriptional regulation is an important control step in the                 
              developmental and  organ-specific expression of the rbcS gene                  
              family in plants. Among plant genes, the rbcS promoter is one of               
              the best characterized for cis-acting DNA sequence elements and                
              transacting factors.  In contrast, much less is known about the                
              integration of the regulatory components into the developmental                
              program.  Using tomato as a model system, we have shown that the               
              temporal and organ-specific activity of each rbcS promoter is                  
              correlated with changes in the complex interaction of DNA-binding              
              proteins with specific DNA sequences that are shared or unique                 
              among the promoter regions.  In tomato fruit, all but one of the               
              rbcS promoter DNA-protein complexes disappear during the transition            
              from young to ripening fruit.  This proposal will investigate the              
              mechanisms that control the developmental and organ-specific                   
              differences in DNA-protein interactions.  The project will focus on            
              five different DNA-binding proteins with unique binding                        
              characteristics.  Experiments are presented to establish the                   
              function of the proteins in rbcS transcriptional control and to                
              determine how the expression of the proteins is regulated in                   
              different organs and during fruit development.                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              This approach will provide novel and important insights into the               
              mechanisms that control regulatory DNA-binding proteins during                 
              plant development.
