Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1992       
File        : a9205490

Award Number: 9205490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Prince sp43@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The timing and development of leaf canopies represent an                  
              essential part of the adaptive strategy of deciduous trees and                 
              herbs.  This canopy phenology is an extremely sensitive indicator              
              of the many factors such as climate, soil moisture, and land use               
              that affect natural vegetation.  At coarse spatial scales, the                 
              phenology of natural vegetation is strongly correlated with                    
              climate.  In order to understand how phenology may be used as an               
              indicator of climate change it is necessary to establish first                 
              the baseline variation in phytophenological rhythms under current              
              types of environmental variation.  Multitemporal observations of               
              phenology made from satellite platforms provide a unique way of                
              assessing ecosystem dynamics at a variety of spatial and temporal              
              scales and thus provide a crucial link between local-scale                     
              studies and global data sets.  This study will use multitemporal               
              satellite, climate, and ground reference data to document and                  
              model regional canopy phenology in several different extensive,                
              but contrasting, plant communities in south-central Africa.  The               
              project will use field data and satellite imagery to reveal                    
              contrasts in regional-scale phenology and to validate the                      
              satellite measurements.                                                        
                   Increased climatic variation under enhanced greenhouse                    
              conditions is expected to produce severe disruptions in the                    
              annual life cycles of many organisms.  The relationship of                     
              current phenological rhythms to the climate at the present time                
              may provide clues as to the probable effects of future climate                 
              change on regional vegetation types.  In order to understand how               
              phenology may be used as an indicator of global change, this                   
              study will establish baseline variation in phytophenological                   
              rhythms under current levels of climate variation.
