Title       : Control of RNA Processing Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1994     
File        : a9205425

Award Number: 9205425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lillie L. Searles lsearles@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to determine the role of the nuclear              
              protein encoded by the Drosophila suppressor of sable ?su(s)! gene             
              in RNA processing control.  Mutations of the su(s) gene elevate the            
              expression levels of three vermilion (v) mutants.  These v mutants             
              have insertions of a retrotransposon in the first exon of the v                
              gene.  The transposon insertion in this position behaves as a large            
              intron and is spliced from the precursor RNA at cryptic sites near             
              the ends of transposon sequences.  Experimental observations                   
              indicate that su(s) mutations increase the stability of these                  
              transcripts.  Two models are being proposed to explain the                     
              observations.  First, RNA stability could be increased if su(s)                
              mutations enhance spliceosome formation at cryptic sites, thereby              
              unspliced RNAs would be stabilized and allowed more time for                   
              splicing to occur.  Thus, su(s) might encode a component of the                
              splicing machinery.  Alternatively, su(s) could encode a protein               
              involved in targeting nuclear RNAs for degradation, suggesting that            
              su(s) might play a direct role in controlling the stability of                 
              specific transcripts.  The objectives of this proposal are the                 
              following.  (1) To establish whether the response of v mutants to              
              su(s) mutations depends on splicing at the cryptic sites, these                
              splice sites will be altered (e.g., eliminated and improved) by                
              site specific mutagenesis.  After transformation of these                      
              derivatives into the Drosophila germ line, expression will be                  
              examined in su(s) wild type and mutant backgrounds.  (2) To develop            
              an in vitro assay for su(s) activity, nuclear extracts will be                 
              prepared from su(s) wild type and mutant embryos and tested by in              
              vitro splicing, spliceosome assembly, and RNA degradation assays.              
              (3) To examine the biochemical properties of the su(s) protein,                
              anti-su(s) antibodies will be used to determine whether the protein            
              fractionates with spliceosomes or if it binds to RNA.                          
              Furthermore, attempts will be made to partially purify the protein             
              from either embryos or cultured cells that have been engineered to             
              over express the protein.                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              These studies will provide new information about RNA processing                
              control mechanisms in eukaryotes.
