Title       : Surface Mediated Organic Chemistry on Alumina and Modified Alumina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1994     
File        : a9205378

Award Number: 9205378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Pagni rpagni@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Kabalka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The "solvent like" characteristics of alumina under a variety                  
              of conditions will be determined. Diagnostic Diels-Alder                       
              reactions will be evaluated with emphasis on the stereochemical                
              and rate consequences of carrying out reactions on activated                   
              alumina. In addition to the investigation of cycloaddition                     
              processes, the ability of alumina surfaces to enhance the                      
              acidity of hydrogen halides will be evaluated by the                           
              spectroscopic analysis of protonated polycyclic aromatics. By                  
              comparison of the behaviour of the cycloaddition and                           
              protonation reactions on alumina with similar reactions in                     
              solution, solvent parameters will be assigned to the surface of                
              alumina as a function of the activation temperature.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work                 
              of Professors R. A. Pagni and G. W. Kabalka at the University                  
              of Tennessee. Alumina, a form of aluminum oxide, is a porous                   
              solid which is widely used in the chemical industry, both as a                 
              medium for chromatographic separations as well as a catalyst to                
              accelerate chemical processes. The studies will be directed to                 
              providing a framework for defining the parameters which will                   
              enhance the utilization of alumina as an effective catalyst for                
              organic reactions, many of which have important industrial                     
              applications. By determination of the solvent-like nature of                   
              alumina, it is possible to learn how the properties of the                     
              surface can be altered to maximize the yield of well defined                   
              chemical structures. This work will provide the understanding                  
              required to efficiently make chemical structures with specific                 
              architecture or "stereochemistry."
