Title       : Investigation of Brine Migration in the Louisiana Gulf Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1992   
File        : a9205661

Award Number: 9205661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99684              (Estimated)
Investigator: Udo Fehn fehn@earth.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pankaj Sharma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              We will apply the 11129 I system to the study of the origin and                
              migration history of brines in the Louisiana Gulf Coast Basin. This            
              basin consists of a sequence of sedimentary layers ranging in age              
              from Jurassic to recent.  Generally, there exist three different               
              flow regimes in this basin, a shallow fresh-water system, and two              
              deeper systems, one hydropressured, one geopressured, which are                
              characterized by fluids with higher concentrations of solutes.                 
              Although the depositional sequence of the sedimentary formations               
              in this basin is well undeerstood, the relation of the brines to               
              their host formations is often not clear.  The geochemical                     
              characteristics  of iodine combined with the half-life of 129 I                
              (15.7 Ma) make this isotope system potentially useful for the                  
              determination of source ages for fluids and orgainic material in               
              this basin and, in conjunction with determination of 36 Cl, for the            
              estimate of residence times of waters in their respective host                 
              formaiton.  The results of this study will give information on the             
              age relation between the fluids and their host rocks, on the                   
              relation between fluids in the different parts of the basin and on             
              communication between different reservoirs.  Because the presence              
              of iodine is related to that of organic material the result will               
              given information on the origin and the age relation of                        
              hydrocarbons in this basin.  Since this project represents the                 
              first time that this isotope system is to be used on a regional                
              scale in a sedimentary basin, the study will also indicate to what             
              extent the 129 I system is useful for the investigation of fluid               
              movement in basins containing organic material.  This has very                 
              strong implication for understanding basin evolution, oil                      
              accomulation and formation of sedimentary ores.//
