Title       : Primary Electron Transfer Processes in Photosynthetic Bacterial Reaction Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1994      
File        : a9205019

Award Number: 9205019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dewey Holten holten@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine R. Kirmaier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The bacterial reaction center (RC) is the membrane bound pigment-              
              protein complex within which light energy is converted into                    
              chemical energy.  This photoconversion process occurs via a                    
              series of fast and highly specific electron transfer reactions                 
              that separate charge across the RC (and thus across the                        
              membrane) with unity quantum yield.  The ultimate goal of this                 
              work is to arrive at a comprehensive understanding of this                     
              process at a molecular level.  To this end, transient absorption               
              spectroscopic measurements spanning the femtosecond to                         
              millisecond timescales as well as other spectroscopic studies                  
              will be carried out to directly identify and study the                         
              intermediate states of charge separation and the rates and yields              
              of their formation and decay.  These studies will be carried out               
              on both wild-type RCs and a wide variety of mutant RCs in which                
              one or more amino acids are changed.  Numerous unresolved issues               
              regarding the involvement of specific chromophores in the pathway              
              of electron transfer, and the selectivity (or directionality) of               
              these reactions will be addressed.  Factors underlying the                     
              balancing of the competition between the forward electron                      
              transfer reactions and the deactivating (or back) reactions will               
              be investigated.  These studies will also address the role of the              
              protein in the charge separation process, both at the level of                 
              specific amino acids and at a more global level.  The results of               
              this work will be compared with predictions from various                       
              theoretical models for electron transfer and, indeed, will likely              
              form the basis for further theoretical developments.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              The conversion of light energy into chemical energy is essential               
              for life on earth.  Detailed studies of the mechanism of this                  
              energy conversion process are essential not only for increasing                
              the understanding of one of the most important biological                      
              processes, but also as a foundation for devising biomimetic systems            
              for solar energy conversion.  The proposed studies will provide                
              diverse information that is critical for elucidating the                       
              molecular mechanisms by which the reaction center functions.  The              
              studies also will advance knowledge of the factors that control                
              electron transfer, which is one of the most fundamental processes              
              in biology and chemistry.  Additionally, the research will                     
              provide detailed new information on the effects of pigment-                    
              protein interactions and protein dynamics on the energetics,                   
              rates and mechanisms of biological processes.  Hence, the                      
              proposed research should have a very positive impact on our                    
              fundamental understanding of photosynthesis and on the applied                 
              aspects of photosynthetic energy conversion.
