Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9205322

Award Number: 9205322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8310               (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Jenson  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Laurentide Ice Sheet was the largest of the Northern                  
              Hemisphere ice sheets that developed during the last glacial                   
              maximum.  An accurate reconstruction of this ice sheet has                     
              significant implications for late Quaternary paleoclimatic                     
              reconstructions, including interpreting global sea-level history.              
              A significant point of debate concerning the dynamics and form of              
              the Laurentide Ice Sheet involves specifying whether the dominant              
              mechanism of ice movement was internal deformation, sliding,                   
              subglacial sediment deformation, or some combination of these.                 
              The fundamental question is whether rigid-bed processes, such as               
              sliding, or soft-bed processes, particularly pervasive                         
              deformation, were dominant.  This project will attempt to answers              
              this question by developing aa numerical model of the ice-till                 
              dynamics of the Lake Michigan Lobe during the last glacial                     
              maximum.  Parameters for sediment rheology derived from                        
              geotechnical analyses of glacial sediment will form the basis of               
              the model, and they will be integrated with an examination of the              
              sediment record and sediment transport fluxes of the lobe with                 
              respect to its dynamics.  The model will test the deforming bed                
              versus sliding hypotheses through a quantitative assessment of                 
              the physical conditions under which sediment deformation could or              
              could not have occurred beneath the Lake Michigan Lobe.                        
                   The results of this research will have significant                        
              implications for understanding and modeling the dynamics of ice                
              sheets as well as for interpreting the origin of massive,                      
              homogeneous till units in mid-latitude regions.  Understanding                 
              the dynamics and behavior of an ice sheet during its decay is                  
              important for constraining potential behavior of modern ice                    
              sheets.
