Title       : Dendroclimatic Characterization of Southwestern Paleoclimate During the Past
               2000 Years
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9205968

Award Number: 9205968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52163              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Dean jdean@ltrr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Graybill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Drs. Dean and Graybill will continue their dendroclimatological                
              work to reconstruct past climates in the United States Southwest.              
              Because the size and configuration of annual growth rings in                   
              trees are affected by changes in rainfall and other environmental              
              variables, it is possible to use them to reconstruct past                      
              climatic change.  Also, since tree rings are deposited on an                   
              annual basis, they permit an accurate dating of this change.                   
              Drs. Dean and Graybill will add to an already substantial data                 
              base through the analysis of additional cores from living trees                
              in Arizona, New Mexico, Utah, and Colorado.  Their preliminary                 
              work show a major climatic peturbation at approximately 1300 AD;               
              this corresponds to a time of major cultural change in the                     
              Southwest.  The Arizona team will focus their attention on this                
              issue.  They will reconstruct changing annual and seasonal                     
              variations in precipitation, temperature, growing season length,               
              the Palmer Drought Severity Index, and changes in stream flow.                 
                                                                                             
              The Southwestern United States saw the rise, in pre Hispanic                   
              times, of complex cultures which  covered large portions of                    
              several states.  These archaeological complexes expanded and                   
              contracted over time and the largest disintegrated before the                  
              arrival of the Spanish.  Archaeologists have hypothesized that                 
              these cultural changes were in fact responses to variation in the              
              environment and that the Southwest offers an excellent change and              
              human response.  The tree ring data will significantly aid in                  
              analyses of this kind.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This research will be important not only for archaeologists, but               
              also paleoecologists and scientists interested in climate                      
              dynamics and changes.  Changes in temperature and precipitation                
              which are of such concern today occurred many times in the past.               
              It is important both to understand them and to learn how human                 
              societies responded.
