Title       : Self-Catalyzed Reversible Modification of Serine Hydrolase Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1994     
File        : a9205927

Award Number: 9205927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ildiko M. Kovach   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Existing data show that the initial phases of inactivation of                  
              serine hydrolase enzymes by organophosphorus compounds resemble                
              those of acylation.  The thesis of this proposal is that the                   
              characteristic differences between carbon and phosphorus in                    
              valence and electronic structure dominate the ensuing                          
              processes.  An investigation of these later phases, the                        
              stabilizing forces in the adducts and the dynamics of their                    
              decomposition can reveal much about the scope of the catalytic                 
              potential of serine hydrolases and how enzyme regeneration might               
              be promoted over aging.  Reversible phosphonate ester                          
              inhibitors of serine hydrolases might be used as blocking                      
              agents in pretreatment against soman and sarin.                                
              The specific goal of this project is the modeling of                           
              interactions between fully hydrated trypsin, chymotrypsin or                   
              acetylcholinesterase and organophosphorus inhibitors: 2-propyl                 
              and pinacolyl methyphosphonofluoridates, 4-nitrophenyl 4-                      
              substituted-phenacyl methylphosphonates.  Charge distribution                  
              will be calculated with program MNDO and nonbonded interactions                
              will be evaluated in the course of adduct formation and in the                 
              diastereomeric adducts by molecular graphics and molecular                     
              mechanics calculations using program YETI.  The effect of                      
              positive charge on His-57, when each N is protonated, will also                
              be studies as a potential stabilizing factor in the serine                     
              hydrolase-organophosphate adducts.  Isotopic probes and NMR                    
              measurements will also be employed for the study of the                        
              mechanism of the general acid and base catalyzed aging                         
              reactions.  These and results of previous investigations of the                
              kinetics of phosphonylation dephosphonylation and enzymic                      
              dealkylation in the phosphonate ester adducts will then be                     
              correlated with calculated energies and geometries in the                      
              adducts.  The factors promoting dephosphonylation and disfavor                 
              aging will then be assessed.                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              The results of this experiment will contribute to an                           
              understanding of the stereochemical outcome of serine protease                 
              phosphonylation, thereby furthering knowledge regarding the                    
              modes of interaction at the catalytic site.  From the practical                
              point of view, if one could learn the key elements involved in                 
              the stability and dynamic of adducts, one could promote                        
              dephosphonylation at will and thereby design inhibitors with                   
              controlled reversibility.  Ideas of this kind can find use in                  
              medical application and in protein synthesis by molecular                      
              engineering.
