Title       : Signatures of Changing Eruptive Style, and Bias in the Sedimentary Record of
               Volcanism, Challis Volcanic Field, Idaho
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1992      
File        : a9205190

Award Number: 9205190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth A. Palmer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This project is a three-year study of reworked volcaniclastic             
              deposits in the Eocene Challis volcanic field in central Idaho.                
              The project focuses on two major goals.  The first is                          
              identification of changes in sedimentation style and pattern that              
              result from different types of volcanic eruptions.  The second goal            
              is analysis of bias in the sedimentary record of volcanism.                    
                   Deposits of the Challis volcanic field represent a long period            
              of volcanic activity (51 to 40 million years ago) characterized by             
              an initial period of predominantly non-explosive intermediate                  
              volcanism followed by caldera-forming volcanism.  The sedimentary              
              system associated with this volcanism comprises high - and low -               
               sinuosity streams, lakes (claystone - tuff and turbidite                      
              components), and debris - flow aprons deposited by lahars.  The                
              study will identify the signal of different eruption types in a                
              diverse assemblage of depositional environments.  The study will               
              also identify which environments are most sensitive to perturbation            
              by eruption and therefore, contain the best record of volcanic                 
              activity.                                                                      
                   The study is field - oriented, combining lithostratigraphy,               
              tephra fingerprinting, and petrofacies stratigraphy to produce the             
              detailed correlation framework needed to achieve the projects                  
              goals.  These methods require measurement of detailed stratigraphic            
              sections, sandstone, diamictite, and conglomerate petrology, and               
              chemical analyses of fallout tuffs in the sections.
