Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Set Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1994      
File        : a9205530

Award Number: 9205530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sy D. Friedman sdf@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Friedman intends to investigate four areas within set theory              
              in addition to beginning work on a book on the method of L-coding.             
              (The latter should help make the many significant applications of              
              this method accessible to a wider audience of set-theorists.)  (1)             
              With his former student, Dorshka Wylie (now an NSF fellow and an               
              instructor at M.I.T.), he is engaged in a radically new approach to            
              the core model K for a strong cardinal, which should provide a                 
              powerful new tool for establishing combinatorial principles in K.              
              (2) A second goal is to enable coding methods to lift smoothly to              
              K, permitting extension of results such as his proof of the Pi-1-2-            
              Singleton Conjecture to the core model context.  (3) A long-                   
              standing open question in the theory of iterated forcing concerns              
              the problem of extending the method of countable support iteration             
              beyond omega-2 without collapsing cardinals.  A number of important            
              consistency problems could be solved by such a technique.  With his            
              student, Dimitiros Tzimas, Friedman will attempt to develop such a             
              method through the use of morasses.  (4) Friedman will also explore            
              questions in descriptive set theory as to whether the full                     
              structure theory for projective sets can be developed directly from            
              the existence of large cardinals, without the use of infinite game             
              theory.                                                                        
                   Set theory provides the popular way to lay the foundations for            
              all of mathematics, the best known systematic attempt to do this               
              being Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica, dating from               
              the early part of the 20th Century.  Important foundational                    
              questions concern the independence and the consistency of the                  
              axioms used to establish set theory.  Zermelo and Fraenkel's axioms            
              (ZF for short) are one of the most convenient sets of basic axioms.            
              However, it has been known since the work of Kurt Goedel in the                
              1930's that no axioms for set theory can be complete as well as                
              consistent.  This means that no set of axioms can be powerful                  
              enough to prove every possible proposition or else its negation,               
              but not both.  Upon this startling theorem has been erected a rich             
              theory, treating possible propositions P such that either P or Not             
              P can be added to ZF without resulting in a contradiction.  Any                
              such proposition P is said to be independent of ZF and can be taken            
              as an additional axiom of set theory.  The principal technique for             
              finding such independent propositions is Paul J. Cohen's so-called             
              method of forcing and its offspring.  This is the circle of ideas              
              involved in and motivating the investigator's research.
