Title       : Sequence Stratigraphy, Third-Order Accommodation Events and Related Diagenetic
               History of the Middle Cambrian Bonanza King Formation, Southern Great Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1994  
File        : a9205839

Award Number: 9205839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105301             (Estimated)
Investigator: Isabel P. Montanez   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay L. Banner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Osleger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research involves a combined sequence                        
              stratigraphic and diagenetic analysis of cyclic passive margin                 
              carbonates of the Middle to Late Cambrian Bonanza King Formation of            
              the southern Great Basin (California and Nevada).  The formation               
              ranges from 300 to 1350 meters and forms a westward-thickening                 
              wedge from craton margin to shelf-edge and base-of-slope facies.               
              The Bonanza King is composed of >200 meter-scale carbonate cycles              
              that provide a remarkable strip record of Middle to Late Cambrian              
              third-order relative sea-level oscillations.                                   
                   Preliminary results suggest that four and a half third-order              
              sequences can be recognized and mapped out across the Bonanza King             
              platform.  Intervals of thick subtidal cycles appear to                        
              characterize the transgressive systems tracts, intervals of thin               
              peritidal cycles characterize the highstand systems tracts and thin            
              zone of peritidal cycles exhibiting evidence of sporadic exposure              
              probably manifest sequence boundary zones.  Intracyclic abundance              
              of early dolomite decreases systematically from craton margin to               
              outer platform.  Cycles in sequence boundary zones and upper                   
              highstand systems tracts are dominantly dolomite whereas cycles in             
              transgressive systems tracts and lower highstand systems tracts                
              retain abundant limestone.                                                     
                   The objectives of the research are fourfold: 1) Dissect the               
              internal anatomy of carbonate stratigraphic sequences using the                
              excellent exposures, broad outcrop area and extraordinary cyclicity            
              of the Bonanza King Formation as the data base.  Predictable                   
              variations in cycle stacking patterns and cross-platform trends                
              will be used to identify the component systems tracts and bounding             
              unconformities.  2) Develop a reliable Middle to Late Cambrian                 
              accommodation curve of comparison to other published curves to                 
              determine the degree of eustatic control on sequence development.              
              3) Document the effects of sea-level fluctuations of all                       
              frequencies on early diagenesis of Bonanza King carbonates. 4)                 
              Evaluate the textural, petrophysical and geochemical changes that              
              occur in early diagenetic facies during fluid-rock interaction                 
              throughout burial.                                                             
                   This study integrates the sequence stratigraphy with the sea-             
              level and diagenetic history recorded in the Bonanza King Formation            
              and is the first major attempt to decipher the diagenetic history              
              of early Paleozoic carbonates of the Cordilleran passive margin.
