Title       : Degradation and Transport of Recent Crinoid Ossicles at San Salvador, Bahamas:
               Part 2, the Winter Season
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9205606

Award Number: 9205606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne Bourgeois                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22747              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald D. Lewis lewisrd@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Crinoid skeletal elements are a rare component in modern                  
              seafloor sediment, but ancient crinoid ossicles are commonly                   
              abundant enough to be major constituents of marine rocks.  Thus,               
              the study of fossilization processes of separate ossicles is                   
              important for sedimentologists as well as for paleontologists.                 
                   In order to determine the effects of in-place degradation of              
              crinoid ossicles, the elements will be glued to plexiglass plates              
              and fastened to concrete hemispheres on the seafloor.  Ossicles                
              will also be glued to plexiglass rods buried vertically in the                 
              seafloor sediment to study the effects of burial.  These techniques            
              have already proven effective in a study of biologic degradation               
              over the summer months (March-September, 1991).  Infesting and                 
              encrusting organisms and their effects on the crinoid's calcite                
              stereom are currently being studied using ossicles left on the                 
              seafloor for periods from 5 days to 6 months.  The proposed                    
              research will focus on the winter months, using the same approach.             
                   Transport of ossicles has not been observed directly in the               
              summer, but is expected to be a major part of the proposed                     
              research.  Dye will be released into the water, grains will be                 
              stained and monitored, and sediment traps designed to sample both              
              traction and suspended load will be used to measure ossicle                    
              transport directly and indirectly.  In addition, sediment samples              
              will be taken along transect from shore to shelf edge, and examined            
              for ossicles transported from their living sites.
