Title       : Design of Sensor Referenced Action Planning and Control for Robotic Systems in
               Workstations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1992       
File        : a9106317

Award Number: 9106317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198871             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tzyh-Jong Tarn tarn@wurobot.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award supports investigation of the problem of sensor-                    
              referenced action planning and control for robotic systems in a                
              workstation setting, superimposed on model-based planning and                  
              control which has been the norm for robotic system control.  The               
              paradigm is to model the known and sense the unknown in the task               
              space and implement the planning and control accordingly.  Tasks               
              will be formulated in terms of events sensed in the task space,                
              which in many cases are represented by a pattern of fused                      
              information from different sensors.  Ultimately, this machine                  
              intelligence approach will provide high-level decision making                  
              capability for automation, promote system integration, and lead                
              to more user-friendly planning and decision/control systems for                
              robotic workstations.  To accomplish this, a number of problems                
              must be addressed.  Initially, the research will address a new                 
              type of motion description and efficient algorithmic formulation               
              of kinematic and dynamic action capabilities of robot arms.  The               
              motion description uses a phase-space approach (velocity vs.                   
              position) instead of the usual state-space (position vs. time)                 
              approach.  Preliminary results indicate that motion description                
              and planning in phase-space is more compatible with sensor                     
              referenced control that is time-based planning and control.  The               
              algorithmic formulation of action capabilities used the known                  
              parameters, both of the arms and the task environment in order to              
              provide a model-based foundation for sensor-referenced                         
              intelligent action planning and control.
