Title       : Spectroscopic Determinations of Excited State Properties of Organometallic and
               Inorganic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9106471

Award Number: 9106471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey I. Zink ZINK@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Four approaches will be used to investigate the electronic                     
              excited states of metal-containing molecules under conditions                  
              ranging from single crystals at low temperatures to the gas                    
              phase.  The first group of experiments is the detailed                         
              assignment of excited states by using single crystal polarized                 
              spectroscopy.  The second component of the program is the                      
              determination of excited state distortions from vibronic                       
              structure in electronic spectra.  The experiments will focus on                
              emission and excitation spectra of molecules in the cold                       
              collision-free conditions of a supersonic free expansion jet as                
              well as in condensed media.  The third group of experiments                    
              will determine excited state distortions from analysis of                      
              resonance Raman excitation profiles.  Thus, the excited states                 
              can be examined mode by mode even when the electronic spectrum                 
              is broad and featureless.  Finally, the geometries of molecules                
              in excited states will be measured by using excited state                      
              pump-probe Raman spectroscopy.  The goal of all of the                         
              experiments is the unified understanding of excited state                      
              orbital characteristics, potential surface displacements and                   
              geometries of metal compounds.                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and                            
              Organometallic Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Jeffrey                  
              I. Zink of the University of California at Los Angeles will                    
              continue studies of the determinations of excited state                        
              properties of metal-containing molecules by spectroscopic                      
              methods.  These studies provide crucial, fundamental                           
              information necessary for the understanding of many                            
              photochemical processes in which sunlight is used as an energy                 
              source.
