Title       : Studies in Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9106380

Award Number: 9106380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1120000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Evans evans@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal mission of this research program is the continued                
              focus on the discovery and development of new stereoselective                  
              organic reactions. Specific areas include the development of                   
              new methods for the generation of metal enolates (especially                   
              under mild conditions), the exploration of new stereoselective                 
              reactions of chiral enolates, and the development of new aldol                 
              reaction concepts. In complementary studies, the focus is on                   
              the develpoment of a new family of chiral bidentate ligands and                
              the evaluation of their utility in a selection of important                    
              catalyzed asymmetric processes. Such processes include metal                   
              carbene transfer to olefins and dialkylsulfides and                            
              enantioselective aldol addition and acylation reactions                        
              proceeding through metal enolates and metalloenamines. In all                  
              such reactions where stereochemical information is relayed,                    
              either from catalyst or one of the reaction constituents in the                
              creation of new stereogenic centers, a serious effort is                       
              expended to understand the fundamental stereochemical control                  
              features of the process under study.                                           
                                                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              With this award the Synthetic Organic Program of the Chemistry                 
              Division will support the research of Dr. David A. Evans of the                
              Department of Chemistry at Harvard University. The research is                 
              in the general area of synthetic methodolgy and is focussed on                 
              the discovery and development of new stereoselective organic                   
              reactions. Chemical synthesis provides the capacity to produce                 
              new organic architecture, and chemical reactions are the                       
              irreplaceable tools of those engaged in this discovery process.                
              Consequently, the synthesis activity is a critical discipline                  
              which continues to have important impact upon the fields of                    
              medicine, biology, and materials science. The research in this                 
              award is at the forefront of that activity by developing                       
              controlled procedures for the preparation of chiral molecules                  
              by both stoichiometric and catalytic processes.
