Title       : Iterative Evolution of Depth Stratification in Neogene Planktonic Foraminifera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1991      
File        : a9106108

Award Number: 9106108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53800              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Berggren   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Norris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   It has been widely assumed, despite few tests, that pelagic               
              organisms speciate and diversify by invading unoccupied parts of               
              the water column.  Radiation is thought to occur when populations              
              become isolated across oceanic fronts or across boundaries between             
              vertically stratified water masses.  Extensive convergent evolution            
              in planktonic foraminifera and other planktonic groups suggests                
              that the same habitats are repeatedly invaded by different lineages            
              over geologic time.  For example, globular, spiny-walled planktonic            
              foraminifera repeatedly give rise to compressed, smooth-walled                 
              species ornamented with a peripheral carina or keel.  We propose               
              to test the popular model that explains the iterative evolution of             
              keeled planktonic foraminifera in terms of invasion of                         
              progressively deeper parts of the water column.                                
                   Our study will produce del 18 O isotopic rankings for species             
              in two groups of globorotaliids that independently evolved the                 
              keel:  Fohsella and early members of the Menardella/Globoconella               
              clade.  Isotopic differences between surface-dwelling planktonic               
              foraminifera, benthic foraminifera, and members of these two                   
              lineages will be used to estimate changes in depth habitats.  Since            
              these lineages independently evolved from globular ancestors, we               
              can observe whether similar changes in depth habitat occurred in               
              concert with similar morphological changes in both lineages.                   
                   These results will permit us to test the hypothesis that                  
              surface-dwelling species radiated by invading deeper parts of the              
              water column.  Our findings will show if the repeated convergent               
              evolution of foraminifera can be explained in terms of changes of              
              depth habitat within lineages.  We can also determine whether or               
              not morphological evolution is correlated with ecological evolution            
              in these marine plankton.  In addition, this study will document               
              the ecological context in which a major radiation unfolded.
