Title       : Japan Long Term Visit: A Historical Study of Japan's Famous Slogan "Rich Nation,
               Strong Army" and its Impact on JapaneseTechnology.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1991    
File        : a9106045

Award Number: 9106045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice Cassidy                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73696              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Samuels samuels@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 1371,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a long-term visit by Professor                         
              Richard Samuels, Department of Political Science, Massachusetts                
              Institute of Technology to Japan to carry out joint research                   
              with the Techno-Economics Group of the Mitsubishi Research                     
              Institute (MRI) which is one of Japan's leading think tanks.                   
              While at Mitsubishi he will have complete access and                           
              cooperation with researchers from Government and industry                      
              (including the Japan Defense Agency, the Ministry of                           
              International Trade and Industry), as well as defense                          
              contractors from within and from outside the Mitsubishi Group.                 
              Professor Samuels study will explore the intellectual and                      
              practical underpinnings of a Japanese technology strategy                      
              that, without regard for artificial differences between                        
              military and civilian applications has positioned Japan on                     
              the threshold of global power.  It will explain how                            
              Japanese planners made strategic choices that enhance the                      
              national capacity for innovation.  The research will provide                   
              valuable information on  (1) Japanese politics  (2) the                        
              Japanese techno-military sphere, and (3) the relationship                      
              between military technology/industry and economic development,                 
              processes and institutions in advanced industrial societies                    
              in general.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The relationship between civilian and military technology is                   
              extremely relevant to the future of U.S. and world economic                    
              growth.  Professor Samuels is one of a very few American                       
              scholars in the area of contemporary Japanese politics and                     
              society.  Mitsubishi Research Institute is a first rate                        
              institution in the area of techno-economics studies and thus                   
              is the   ideal organization for Professional Samuels to                        
              undertake his research.  The research should result in a                       
              significantly enriched understanding of the nature and extent                  
              of defense techno development in Japan.  It may also provide                   
              the groundwork for U.S. reevaluations about the social and                     
              political organization and priorities of both our civilian                     
              and military technologies.
