Title       : Voters as Goal-Directed Information Processors: Candidate Traits As Prospective,
               Performance-Oriented Judgments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1992   
File        : a9106311

Award Number: 9106311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Milton Lodge mlodge@datalab2.sbs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick K. Stroh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              American voters increasing are portrayed as individuals more                   
              concerned with the personalities and images of candidates than with            
              candidate ideologies or issue positions.  This proposal draws on               
              recent research in cognitive psychology to develop and test an                 
              explanation of this trend.  Specifically, this research develops               
              a model of candidate evaluation which view voters as "cognitive                
              misers" in the sense that they attempt to strike a balance between             
              the amount of thought they invest in their voting decision and the             
              likely ability of thought to predict candidate's future behavior.              
              Since candidates intentionally obscure their policy positions and              
              given the decreasing distinction between the parties in most                   
              voters' minds, this model predicts that voters will rely                       
              increasingly on personalities in evaluating candidates.                        
                                                                                             
              A series of laboratory experiments will be undertaken to test this             
              interpretation. Subjects will be exposed to various types of                   
              information including issue positions, group affiliations,                     
              appearance and personality regarding competing hypothetical                    
              candidates.  The effects on candidate evaluation will then be                  
              tested.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              When completed this innovative research will help determine not                
              only the influence of personality on candidate evaluation but also             
              the source of those personality inferences in political                        
              communication.
