Title       : FTIR Study of Bacteriorhodopsin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1994   
File        : a9106017

Award Number: 9106017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Rothschild kjr@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              Bacteriorhodopsin (bR) is a light driven proton pump whose                     
              function includes two key membrane based processes, active                     
              transport and energy transduction.  Despite extensive research on              
              bR and other membrane proteins, the molecular basis of these                   
              processes is unknown.  Dr. Rothschild's laboratory has developed               
              an approach based on Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) difference              
              spectroscopy which allows these processes to be investigated at                
              the level of single protein residues.  This work is providing                  
              information about changes in the protonation state and                         
              environment of specific residues during the bR photocycle.  The                
              goal of this research will be to utilize this approach to develop              
              an increasingly detailed picture of the bR pump mechanism.  These              
              studies will be facilitated by recent improved methods developed               
              for time-resolved FTIR difference spectroscopy, polarized FTIR                 
              and attenuated total reflection.  In collaboration with Dr. H.G.               
              Khorana's group new methods have been developed, based on site-                
              directed mutagenesis, for assigning bands in FTIR difference                   
              spectrum to the vibrations of individual protein residues.  These              
              techniques allow the investigation of the sequence of protonation              
              changes of Asp groups and other residues in the bR proton                      
              transport pathway; changes in the orientation of the bR alpha-                 
              helices and changes in pK  of individual COOH groups in the                    
              membrane.  Parallel studies will be conducted using time-resolved              
              UV/visible spectroscopy and resonance Raman spectroscopy.  FTIR                
              studies will also be continued on two related membrane proteins                
              from Halobacterium halobium:  halorhodopsin (hR), a light driven               
              chloride pump and sensory rhodopsin (sR-I), a phototaxis light                 
              receptor.
