Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Analysis, Probability, and Finite Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1992     
File        : a9106223

Award Number: 9106223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Krantz sk@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                   Six undergraduates will receive support from this Research                
              Experiences for Undergraduates award.  They will work under the                
              direction of several faculty advisors all of whom have strong                  
              research programs under way.  This program continues a successful              
              program of undergraduate research at Washington University.  It                
              will be augmented during the next two years by a series of visits              
              by leading mathematical researchers.  The environment for this                 
              activity is particularly fecund at Washington University which                 
              has produced many of the top finalists and leading teams in the                
              Putnam examinations over the past ten years.                                   
                   Included among the many topics which will be available for                
              student projects is the study of the phi-transform.  This concept              
              is a very recent variation of the wavelet transform allowing one               
              to decompose general functions into sums of simple terms.  It                  
              has interesting computational characteristics which allow for                  
              simple but important questions to be undertaken early without                  
              need for extensive theoretical training.  Work will also be done               
              on the boundary behavior of conformal mappings and harmonic                    
              measure.  This work will fit well into the development of                      
              students who have recently completed an undergraduate complex                  
              variables course.                                                              
                   Another area of interest includes problems arising in the                 
              theory of several complex variables.  Here, researchers can                    
              construct numerical models for automorphism groups and perform                 
              calculations of invariants associated with boundary differential               
              invariants.  The work only requires basic algebra and an                       
              understanding of symbol manipulation programs.  In the process,                
              students will develop concrete understanding of geometric                      
              structures and the analysis related to them.                                   
                   A more applied program developing mathematical models of                  
              molecular evolution will also be available.  Students will                     
              consider questions concerning the distribution of nucleotides in               
              the coding regions of individuals chosen from a random-mating                  
              population. Connections with algorithms for estimating                         
              phylogenies of creatures whose traits are known in the present                 
              will be investigated.
