Title       : Mechanism of Rho-Dependent Transcription Termination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9106112

Award Number: 9106112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Bear   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Mexico Sch of Med
	      Bandelier West, Room 223
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Transcription termination factor Rho is an ATPase that binds to the            
              nascent RNA transcript and catalyzes its site-specific release                 
              within E.coli and coliphage transcription units.  This proposal                
              outlines a kinetic and thermodynamic approach with the goal of                 
              gaining a greater physical understanding of the molecular                      
              interactions and dynamic processes that occur during the                       
              termination reaction.  A synthetic paused ternary complex will be              
              constructed from the E. coli rho attenuator (att) region, an                   
              important Rho-dependent terminator that is located in front to the             
              rho gene, and which autogenously regulates the level of Rho in the             
              bacterial cell.  The use of a recent technique to generate a                   
              homogeneous population of paused transcription complexes will be               
              used.  A transcription blockade is created through the binding of              
              a cleavage-defective EcoR1 mutant endonuclease bound to an                     
              engineered EcoR1 site placed at strategic locations within the att             
              region.  The energetics of Rho assembly and the kinetics of                    
              transcript release will be measured to test key questions about                
              the termination reaction.  The RHo binding site on the attenuator              
              transcript will be determined by RNA footprinting studies using                
              primer extension/chemical modification techniques.  The                        
              relationship between the site of the blockade and the energetics               
              and kinetics of Rho attachment and transcript release will be                  
              evaluated.
