Title       : Molecular Basis of Growth in Plants: Probing the Role of Wall Polysaccharides
               and Their Metabolism by Wall Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9106136

Award Number: 9106136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121729             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Nevins djnevins@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Plant cell elongation is an expression of metabolic changes that               
              alter load bearing bonds within the wall to allow molecular                    
              displacement under the influence of internal pressures.                        
              Specifically, the proposal addresses the hypothesis that specific              
              wall polysaccharide structures are modified in such a manner that              
              such load bearing bonds are affected.  The assay system utilized               
              will be the Zea mays coleoptile.  The major directions the proposal            
              explores include: 1) The development of an in vitro system to                  
              quantitatively evaluate polysaccharide binding to cellulose.  This             
              model will allow a determination of the extent to which binding is             
              affected by pH and the effect of pH after modification of                      
              structures by enzymes.  2) The experiments will extend the                     
              observation that antibodies are powerful probes to explore cell                
              wall metabolism.  The results derived from application of a family             
              of glucan and glucanase antibodies will be extended to determine               
              the consequences of exposure of tissue to glucuronoarabinoxylan                
              antibodies.  The behavior of ferulic acid and the role of diferulic            
              acid linked to these molecules will be assessed.  3) An important              
              component of (2) will be the application of a new enzyme mechanism,            
              using glucuronoxylanase (previously called feraxanase), to modify              
              glucuronoarabinoxylans to determine structure (especially                      
              glucuronic acid and ferulic acid components).  A second emphasis               
              is based on the observation that spatial (directional) application             
              of antibodies is important in their capacity to suppress growth.               
              This effort will help to determine the role of the epidermis in                
              controlling elongation.  Structural and metabolic aspects will also            
              be examined in isolated epidermal cell walls.  The experiments                 
              described in this proposal will help to elucidate the molecular                
              mechanism of plant growth.//
