Title       : Biochemical Characterization of Retroviral Transactivator Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1993       
File        : a9106041

Award Number: 9106041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Dynan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The retroviruses HTLV-1 and HTLV-II are distinguished from                     
              many other RNA tumor viruses because they encode regulatory                    
              proteins that interact with the host cell RNA synthesis                        
              machinery.  One of these proteins, the tax gene product                        
              activates transcription via a target sequence located                          
              upstream of the RNA synthesis iniation site in the proviral                    
              LTR.  The principal objectives of the present work are to                      
              elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying tax                               
              transactivation and to identify the specific cellular                          
              proteins that interact with the tax gene product.                              
              Functional Tax protein will be purified from eukaryotic cells                  
              infected with a recombinant  baculovirus vector.  It will be                   
              determined whether purified Tax protein binds to or modified                   
              any of the previously purified cellular transcription factors                  
              that interact with the HTLV-1 LTR, including NF-1, HEF-1T,                     
              and various other proteins that bind in or near three 21 bp                    
              sequence repeats present in the target region.  Binding will                   
              be measured directly in coprecipitation and electrophoretic                    
              mobility shift assays.  In addition, Tax will be incubated                     
              with preparations of purified cellular transcription factors                   
              to determine whether any of the polypeptides present in these                  
              preparations are released from multisubunit complexes or                       
              otherwise modified.                                                            
              In separate experiments, purified Tax protein will be added                    
              to nuclear extracts from uninfected cells in an attempt to                     
              develop a Tax-responsive system for in vitro transcription of                  
              the HTLV proviral promoter.  As a complementary approach,                      
              anti-Tax antibody will be prepared and added to Tax-                           
              containing reactions in an attempt to block transcription by                   
              steric interference.  In addition, a Tax protein affinity                      
              column will be prepared and tested for its ability to deplete                  
              nuclear extracts of general and promoter-selective                             
              transcription factors.                                                         
              Finally, structure-function studies of Tax protein will be                     
              initiated.  These will include characterization of the                         
              differences between Tax protein from HTLV-1 and HTLV-II,                       
              using the transcription and protein binding assays described                   
              above.  Also, these studies will include characterization of                   
              a mutant that alters the transactivation specificity of HTLV-                  
              I tax to that of HTLV-II tax, two deletion mutants that are                    
              transactivation negative, and a mutant that is a                               
              transdominant inhibitor of HTLV-II tax.  Methods of scaling-                   
              up tax expression will also be developed, with the ultimate                    
              objective of producing Tax protein in quantities and purity                    
              necessary for physical and structural studies.
