Title       : Regulation of PEP-carboxykinase mRNA Breakdown by cAMP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9106256

Award Number: 9106256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Todd M. Martensen                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yaacov Hod yhod@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The steady-state level of specific mRNA is determined by the rates             
              by which this molecule is synthesized and degraded.  Despite the               
              importance of mRNA turn-over in the control of gene expression,                
              the mechanisms that underlie this process are still obscure.  It               
              is thus the long-term goal of the proposed research to explore the             
              mechanism of intracellular mRNA breakdown.  In recent studies the              
              PI has shown that the breakdown rate of the mRNA for PEP-                      
              carboxykinase (PEPCK) is hormonally regulated and that cAMP (as an             
              intracellular mediator of glucagon) stabilizes the mRNA against                
              degradation.  It has also been demonstrated that 733 nucleotides               
              from the 3'-region of the mRNA are sufficient to confer the cAMP               
              regulation of mRNA turn-over.  The main goal of this proposal is               
              to delineate the nucleotide domains that mediate the cAMP                      
              regulation of PEPCK mRNA as well as the determinants that confer               
              the short half-life of PEPCK mRNA.  These studies will involve                 
              monitoring the half-lives of mRNA transcripts of a variety of                  
              hybrid genes containing different sequences of PEPCK, after these              
              genes have been introduced into hepatoma cells.  In addition, we               
              propose to examine the role of RNA-protein interaction at the cAMP-            
              responsive element in the control of the half-life of PEPCK mRNA.              
              It is hoped that these studies will result in a better                         
              understanding of the molecular events which control gene expression            
              and also will find a practical use in the construction of an                   
              efficient expression system in which the control of mRNA stability             
              is considered when a foreign gene is to be introduced into cells.//
