Title       : POWRE: An Experimental Study of Power, Equity, and Distributional Preferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9973669

Award Number: 9973669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73557              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Elisabet Rutstrom lisar@darla.badm.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1592,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This POWRE study will elicit preferences over income distribution from groups of
              subjects recruited to participate in controlled laboratory experiments.
              Recently, the assumption of self-interest, and particularly the interpretation
              that self-interest leads to payoff-maximization, has been challenged as
              behavior observed in experiments have consistently indicated a willingness
              to
forego earnings in order to affect payoffs to others.  Not all experiments
              have shown non payoff-maximizing behavior, however. A baseline experiment by
              the PI and a collaborator stands in stark contrast to other experimental
              findings: they found an overwhelming absence of non payoff-maximization.
              Beginning from this baseline study, the research will systematically vary
              conditions to reflect properties employed in other experiments. This will
              enable the determination of conditions under which non payoff-maximizing
              choices emerge. The research will focus on questions of symmetry in power over
              affecting final distributions, the effect on perceptions of equity from
              assigning initial income positions based on considerations of either
              productivity or effort (i.e. the potential sources of perceived property
              rights), and the size of the group for which the distribution will apply. Data
              for analyzing the relationship between payoff-maximizing choices and these
              contexts will be provided by controlled laboratory experiments.

The central
              place that self-interest and payoff-maximization hold in economic theory makes
              it important to identify the causes of non payoff-maximizing choices in
              previous experiments. The purpose is to elicit preferences under an array of
              systematically imposed conditions, in order to build a bridge between
              experiments that have found payoff-maximizing behavior and experiments that
              have found non payoff-maximizing behavior. A deeper understanding of the causes
              of
individuals' perceptions of fairness will emerge from the study of the
              roles of property rights and power.

The POWRE funding will give the PI a
              unique opportunity to establish a major research program that will re-install
              her as an active and more prominent researcher in the field of behavioral and
              experimental economics. The timing of the funding is important to the success
              of the PI in the field. Due to family commitments she has not been able to
              maintain visibility in the field by
participating in conferences for the last
              several years, but with a child now of an age that allows her more time away
              from home this constraint is now removed. In addition, the awarding of an
              instrumentation grant, jointly with Dave Willer in sociology in 1998, gives her
              the laboratory capacity to pursue higher volume research. The POWRE funding
              will add the crucial ingredient of an independent research program which will
              allow the PI to gain prominence, visibility, and influence in the field. 


