Title       : Modeling Nature: A Route to Understanding Central Themes in Elementary and
               Middle School Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a9973004

Award Number: 9973004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1124688            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard Abbeduto abbeduto@waisman.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leona Schauble  (Principal Investigator former)
              Richard Lehrer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              National science standards agree that science literacy involves coming to
              understand central themes in science-ideas like growth and diversity, behavior,
              structure and form.  However, little is known about how student understanding
              of these "big ideas" evolves over the sweep of a student's education. Most
              research focuses on student learning of particular topics of science (e.g.,
              "weather" or "evolution") and lasts for relative brief periods of time. As a
              consequence, educators receive little guidance about how to orchestrate
              instruction toward the long-term development of core thematic ideas.  

In
              this project, researchers, administrators, and classroom teachers in a school
              district will work together to develop and study a modeling approach to school
              science.  Model-based reasoning is the cornerstone of scientific practice and
              the most promising route to the themes outlined in the standards.  Researchers
              and district teachers will work to put these forms of instruction in place and,
              over a three-year period, to study transitions in student thinking.
              Participants include nine teachers and their students:  six at elementary
              school and three in the sixth grade (first year of middle school). 
              Administrators agree that students will "graduate" across grades within the
              participating classrooms during the project, affording the opportunity to
              conduct longitudinal study to learn how students' understanding of these "big
              ideas" emerges and takes hold. 

An existing long-term professional
              development collaboration provides the site for this research.  In this
              collaboration, teachers within the district have made substantial progress
              toward adopting standards-based mathematics and using it as a resource for
              reasoning about science. This surrounding teacher community provides collegial
              and material support for this work, and also serves as a context for its wider
              spread. The research includes:  yearly administration of science achievement
              benchmark items (with comparison to both local and national samples), an
              experimental study of the development of students' representational
              repertoires, analysis of videotapes of classroom interactions during targeted
              instructional units with follow-up interviews, analysis of student reasoning
              and justification of their models during classroom "critique" sessions, and
              analysis of student performance on transfer "model-eliciting tasks."  A second
              component of the research focuses on the changing content and pedagogical
              knowledge of the participating teachers.  Interviews, discussions of student
              work, and videotapes of practice will be used to track these changes. 

The
              standards paint a picture of the kind of science literacy that can emerge over
              years of well-planned education supported by thoughtful curricula and excellent
              pedagogy.  To create these conditions for all children, research is needed to
              illuminate the outcomes that can reasonably be expected (both products and
              processes of learning by students and teachers) and to enhance understanding of
              what it takes to achieve them-not over a few weeks or months, but over
              years-the time span required to grasp profound idea. 


