Title       : Charge States in Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9973894

Award Number: 9973894
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339844             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Spence spence@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jian-Min Zuo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9973894
Spence

The properties of new functional ceramics are controlled by
              small changes in the charge state of the constituent ions.  This state can now
              be determined by quantitative convergent-beam electron microdiffaction (QCBED).
               This project continues the PI's previous work (DMR9412146) on the measurement
              and use of charge state to model and predict ceramic properties.  Three tasks
              are planned: (i) Charge-density measurement in transition metal monoxides for
              the purpose of testing ab-initio algorithms in difficult systems. (ii) Mapping
              of the three-dimensional charge-density and hole distribution in oxide
              superconductors using QCBED.  Elastically filtered static diffuse scattering
              will also be used to determine the strain around dopant atoms. By comparing
              this measured ground-state charge density with ab-initio crystal computations,
              the most successful theoretical approximations can be identified and used to
              predict the properties of modified (e.g. differently doped) material. This work
              may readily be extended to the CMR manganites, where similar small polarons are
              important. In both cases we are interested in the relationship between the
              charge state of ions and the resulting lattice relaxation. (iii) Experimental
              tests of a new solution to the inversion problem of electron diffraction, which
              allows crystal charge density maps to be computed directly from experimental
              microdiffraction patterns. As in X-ray crystallography, these maps reveal the
              position and type of every atom in the unit cell, and may be obtained from
              nanometer sized regions of material. The spatial resolution of this diffraction
              method for solving microphase crystal structures is not limited by imaging
              lenses. Microphase identification is an important requirement for understanding
              the properties of intergranular phases, sintered or precipitation hardened
              materials and the new nanophase composites, amongst many other applications.
              All this work is based on the existing Leo/Zeiss Omega-filter electron
              microscope at ASU.  A new CCD camera and liquid-helium cold stage will be
              acquired. 
%%%
This work advances our knowledge of bonds between atoms (which
              control the properties of materials) and furthers the effort to design and
              synthesize new materials with wanted properties. 
***

