Title       : GOALI: Electric Field Microscopy of Computer Chips using a Scanning Single
               Electron Transistor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9973268

Award Number: 9973268
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick C. Wellstood well@squid.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Knauss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Lobb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1024,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9973268
Wellstood

This GOALI project involves the design, assembly and
              evaluation of an extremely sensitive scanning electric field microscope.  To
              achieve a high sensitivity to electric field, the microscope will use a
              nano-electronic device, the Single Electron Transistor (SET), as its sensor. 
              In operation, the SET sensor will be cooled to the 4.2 to 10 K range while the
              samples will be in air at room temperature.  The hot and cold parts of the
              system will be thermally isolated from each other by vacuum and a thin
              transparent window.  After it is constructed, the microscope will be used to
              image the fields produced by voltages on wires in multi-chip modules and
              computer chips that will be provided by our industrial collaborators (Neocera,
              Inc).    We will evaluate the performance of the system and its potential for
              application to failure analysis detection of open circuit faults in
              semiconductor circuits.  For real chips mounted on standard carriers, our
              overall goal for the project will be to achieve a spatial resolution in the 50
              um range while looking from a distance of 300 um, more than sufficient for
              present needs for diagnosing opens in multi-chip modules.
%%% 
This GOALI
              proposal involves a close collaboration between the University of Maryland and
              a small high-tech company (Neocera, Inc.) and with other potential industrial
              customers.  While students are developing the electric field microscope, they
              will not only undertake state-of-the-art research on nano-electronics but will
              also get exposed to modern manufacturing techniques in the computer industry.
              To keep the project on track, the students will work closely with the companies
              involved and will meet regularly with industrial physicists and engineers in an
              industrial environment. During the project, the students will also have the
              opportunity to meet entrepreneurs, company presidents, and potential customers,
              from very large to very small companies.  In addition to providing students
              with a technical mastery of key technology and science, the project will also
              offer a breadth of experience that will prepare them for industrial research
              positions or an entrepreneurial role.
***


