Title       : Variational PDE Models and Computational Methods in Image Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9973341

Award Number: 9973341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony F. Chan chan@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Chan
9973341

     The investigator and his colleaques study modeling and
              computational questions that arise in applying variational and partial
              differential equation methods to problems of image processing, and they develop
              effective new algorithms.  These problems are computationally intensive and
              accurate and efficient methods are needed.  They consider dual methods for
              image restoration by total variation, blind deconvolution of multi-channel
              images, ENO-wavelet compression of images with sharp edges, reduced
              Mumford-Shah models and multi-channel extensions for image restoration and
              segmentation, and new active contour models without edge-stopping.  Topics of
              study include image restoration, compression, multispectral images,
              segmentation, and active contours.  Applications in medical and chemical
              imaging, astronomical imaging, and multispectral automatic target recognition
              are pursued.

     Image processing arises across engineering disciplines and
              the physical and medical sciences.  Applications in the medical sciences and
              biotechnology field range from computer tomography to processing of microscopic
              images of molecular structures.  In the enviromental area, satellite imaging
              has been used to map natural resources as well as enviromental pollution.  In
              the area of manufacturing, imaging systems are used to detect defects
              automatically.  In all of these applications, a key process is that of image
              restoration, namely, cleaning up an image polluted by noise and blurring.  This
              is a central subject of this project.  These problems are very computationally
              intensive due to the large number of pixels and the possibility of sequences of
              images (e.g. videos).  Solving them requires clever mathematical algorithms as
              well as high performance computers.  Beyond this, in the current revolution in
              commmunication and the use of the information highway, more images are being
              transmitted and better mathematical algorithms are needed to compress and
              remove noise and other distortions occuring in the transmission.


