Title       : Some Approximation Problems in Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1999      
File        : a9973266

Award Number: 9973266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luca Dieci dieci@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dieci
9973266

The investigator and his collaborators analyze and implement
              techniques to tackle several problems in differential equations and matrix
              analysis.  The following topics are studied: (1) smooth orthonormal
              factorizations of parameter dependent matrices and connected applications,(2)
              computation of Lyapunov exponents with applications, (3) stability and
              bifurcations of invariant tori, (4) computation of matrix exponential and other
              functions of a matrix, and Riccati equations.  In all cases, theoretical
              analysis and extensive computational testing are undertaken, and codes for the
              outlined tasks are developed.  Specific aims include implementation of
              techniques to compute QR and SVD of fundamental matrix solutions, techniques to
              update invariant subspaces factorizations and SVDs of parameter dependent
              matrices, and applications connected to such techniques; implementation of
              methods to compute Lyapunov exponents and related stability information of
              continuous dynamical systems; techniques to compute the Lyapunov type numbers
              of Fenichel and use these quantities to monitor continuability and bifurcations
              of invariant tori; approximation of the exponential of a matrix in case the
              matrix is block triangular, and other aspects of computation of functions of a
              matrix.

To model physical phenomena in a compact way, differential equations
              are probably the most powerful tool we have.  Differential equations can model
              complicated chemical interactions and biological phenomena, manufacturing
              plants, robot and satellite motions, transport properties of materials, and a
              host of other phenomena of interest in the applied sciences.  However,
              typically one can only guarantee that differential equations have a solution,
              but it cannot be provided in closed form.  Moreover, in a typical situation,
              there will be uncertainties in the phenomenon under study, and these will show
              up as parameters in the differential equation model.  Loosely speaking, the
              fundamental question is then to understand the stability of solutions (as
              parameters change).  Now, suppose that we have obtained (at a high price)
              detailed information on the solution to our model for a certain parameter value
              in the model.  We may hope that if we change the parameter just slightly, we
              will be able to obtain detailed information for the new parameter value at a
              fraction of the cost we previously paid.  Basically, this expectation forms the
              principle of so-called "continuation techniques."  The investigator studies
              approximation techniques to solve differential equations which aim at assessing
              the stability of the solutions and at exploiting continuation techniques.  The
              goal is to eventually obtain approximation of a differential equation model in
              a way which will give the complete picture of solutions of the model as its
              parameters vary inside a certain (physical) range.  This goal finds its
              concrete realization in the study of quantities which serve as indicators of
              stability (the so-called Lyapunov exponents) and in computer programs which
              approximate these quantities.  The investigator also uses these Lyapunov
              exponents for predicting bifurcation phenomena and assessing error propagation
              when solving differential equations.  Finally, the investigator studies
              continuation techniques for matrix factorizations and produces computer
              programs for continuation techniques.

