Title       : POWRE: Regulation of Glycosylation in Campylobacter jejuni
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9973861

Award Number: 9973861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74943              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah S. Threadgill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt U Med Ctr
	      Office of Biomedical Sciences
	      Nashville, TN  372322103    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Threadgill 
This research will assess the effects of different environmental
              conditions on the glycosylation status of surface molecules of  the bacterium
              Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni) under in vitro and simulated in vivo
              conditions. Environmental factors that may impact glycosylation include growth
              conditions such as temperature, iron availability, pH, and osmolarity, along
              with host specific conditions.  Such host specific conditions will be modeled
              using intestinal cell lines and an artificial gut simulation.  C. jejuni has a
              large number of glycoproteins, in addition to
              lipooligosaccharide/lipopolysaccharide (LOS/LPS) and polysaccharide capsule. 
              The environmental cues leading to LPS/LOS biosynthesis and capsule production
              have been studied in several bacterial species, but not previously in C.
              jejuni.  Additionally, the potential signals resulting in glycosylation of
              bacterial proteins have largely been ignored. Thus this study will extend the
              information about glycosylation regulation to both a bacterial species and  a
              class of molecule in which it has been little examined.

The glycosylated
              surface molecules of bacterial species are important to their adherence and
              invasiveness.  This research will increase the understanding of signals
              necessary for the production of these sugar-containing structures.  This
              project is being funded under the NSF POWRE program.


