Title       : POWRE:Development of a Problem Solving Skill Assessment Tool For Use In
               Evaluation of Introductory Physics Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9973555

Award Number: 9973555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61013              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Cummings   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many physics instructors and potential employers agree that the most valuable
              aspect of an effective physics course is the development of versatile and
              robust quantitative problem solving skills in our students.  Significant gains
              have been made in our ability to teach introductory physics courses in such a
              way that students gain a deep conceptual understanding of the material. 
              Quantitative assessment tools like the Force Concept Inventory and Force and
              Motion Conceptual Evaluation, which measure the increase in student conceptual
              understanding resulting from instruction, have been instrumental in motivating
              and guiding curricular reform along these lines.  To make similar gains in our
              ability to teach quantitative problem solving skills,  a valid assessment
              instrument that can identify the effective pedagogical techniques for problem
              solving skill development in our students needs to be developed. This project
              focuses on the development and preliminary validation of a quantitative
              assessment tool to measure problem solving ability.  The tool is based on a
              guided interview protocol in which students are asked to solve a realistic,
              novel and quantitative problem.  The student's responses during the guided
              interview are numerically evaluated based on: whether the action or response is
              independently generated rather than provided in response to prompting by the
              interviewer, correctness, and potential to result in the solution of the
              problem.   Comparison of  the score assigned to a given student by the tool and
              the student's instructor's evaluation of the student's performance on
              quantitative problem solving tasks provides the mechanism for preliminary
              evaluation.  With an appropriate, reliable and valid tool,  comparisons
              regarding the effectiveness of instructional techniques can be made. Comparing
              curricula and pedagogies is imperative if we are to realize the same
              improvement in teaching for robust problem solving ability as we have seen in
              the area of conceptual learning.  
