Title       : Summer Research Conferences: A Collaboration Between AMS, IMS & SIAM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a9973450

Award Number: 9973450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1699612            (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Ewing jhe@ams.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Crowley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Mathematical Soc
	      201 Charles Street
	      Providence, RI  029402294    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The American Mathematical Society (AMS), the Institute of Mathematical
              Statistics (IMS) and the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM)
              propose sponsoring an annual program of research conferences,
spanning the
              full range of the mathematical sciences, and including connections with other
              sciences as well as applications to industry. This series builds on the long
              standing and highly successful series of research
conferences known as the
              AMS-IMS-SIAM Joint Summer Research Conferences (SRCs), funded by the National
              Science Foundation since 1982, and the AMS-SIAM Summer Seminar in Applied
              Mathematics and the AMS Summer Institute, both with NSF support for over thirty
              years. There are important changes, however, that add flexibility and promote a
              high quality scientific program.

Scientific oversight of this activity will
              be carried out by a committee of leading research mathematicians, representing
              the three societies. The collaboration of the three societies on this series
              will permit coverage of the entire breadth of the mathematical sciences and
              will foster an interdisciplinary character to some topics. The three societies
              are ideally suited to provide the infrastructure necessary to solicit, promote,
              and
carry out these kinds of conferences.

The (new) SRCs will consist of
              from six to eight conferences held in contiguous weeks in the summer at a host
              academic institution. Most of the conferences will be one week long with
              between forty-five and sixty-five
participants attending a limited number of
              plenary hour-long lectures by leaders in the field. Additional sessions will be
              scheduled for presentations by conference participants, including work in
              progress by
researchers at an early stage in their careers. Time will be
              reserved each day for informal research discussions. One group social outing
              will be provided each week, and a convenient space suitable for informal
              evening get togethers will be arranged.

In some instances, two or three
              scientifically linked one-week conferences will be scheduled for consecutive
              weeks. This arrangement may include either topics that are tightly coupled,
              with a common organizing committee and a single set of participants (100-150),
              or scientifically related topics with separate organizing committees, and some
              expected overlap in attendance. The former will essentially represent
              conferences similar to the AMS-SIAM Summer Seminar and the AMS Summer
              Institute, which this series
also replaces. The latter will be a new
              arrangement serving to highlight different aspects of the same research theme.
