Title       : Strain-Induced Ferromagnetism in Intermetallic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a9973977

Award Number: 9973977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252267             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Baker ian.baker@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9973977
Baker

Several intermetallic compounds which are paramagnetic in the
              well-annealed, well-ordered state and which contain at least one ferromagnetic
              element have been shown to become ferromagnetic after plastic deformation.  For
              severely deformed compounds, where the lattice is largely disordered, this
              ferromagnetic behavior is described by the local environment model in which the
              magnetic moment of a ferromagnetic element varies according to the number of
              its like nearest neighbors.  In less severely deformed compounds that deform by
              the glide of antiphase boundary (APB)-coupled dislocations, disorder resides
              within the APBs.  For this case, calculation of the magnetic behavior by
              applying the local environment model to the APBs between partial dislocations
              requires the use of physically unrealistic values for the width and thickness
              of the APBs.  Consequently, it appears that the major contribution to the
              strain-induced ferromagnetism in FeA1 is not due to the APBs between partial
              dislocation pairs (although these would contribute to a small extent).  It is
              proposed that the major contribution arises from the APB tubes which form
              behind gliding APB-coupled dislocations.  The aim of this project is to
              determine if the plastic strain-induced ferromagnetism that occurs in some
              magnetic element-containing intermetallic compounds can be modeled effectively
              by applying a local environment model to both the APBs in deformation-produced
              APB tubes and the APBs between partial dislocations.  To this end, measurements
              are made on a number of B2-structured FeAl alloys to determine the number of Fe
              atoms in these APBs that have three or more Fe nearest neighbors and a magnetic
              moment.  These results will be related to the saturation magnetization.  Having
              successfully developed this approach for FeAl, it will be applied to other
              appropriate intermetallic alloys.
%%%
This research explores an interesting
              phenomenon whereby ferromagnetism is induced in some intermetallic alloys by
              plastic deformation.  The scientific explanation for this behavior is lacking,
              and there are possible technological applications as well, such as using the
              behavior to create embedded strain sensors in materials.
***

