Title       : POWRE: Model Experiments for Probing the Spreading Behavior of Exogenous
               Surfactant in Pulmonary Airways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9973538

Award Number: 9973538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra M. Troian stroian@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9973538
S. Torian/Princeton U.

Much of the effort devoted to
              understanding the dynamics or no-equilibrium behavior of a surfactant monolayer
              spreading on thin liquids films has fallen on the side of theoretical models. 
              Despite the increasing attention paid to the theoretical aspects of this
              problem, the models have yet to be tested in any detail experimentally.

This
              proposal outlines experimental studies with real lung surfactants on a liquid
              support the closely approximates the constituency and composition of the lining
              in the alveolar sacs.  The surfactant solutions are commercially available and
              represent both natural and
Synthetic surfactant mixtures used in clinical
              studies.  Area wide refractive Moire topography will be used to measure the
              time variant surface slope during the spreading event.  From this data the
              entire time variant film shape and the speed of the spreading front can be
              reconstructed.  In particular, the rate of thinning close to the surfactant
              source, a region which is highly susceptible to film rupture and the formation
              of arterial spreading patterns, will be quantified.  From theoretical
              considerations, most of the variables affecting the spreading process are
              unknown.  Experimentally, it is planned to quantify the relationship between
              the film shape and surfactant speed as a function of these variables.  It is
              also planned to concentrate on the role of the initial shear stress, which
              controls the degree of  film thinning and therefore the mass of surfactant
              actually delivered to distal regions.

The POWRE, program will provide
              critical funding for a 12 month period to conduct the first set of spreading
              experiments in this field.  Given the principal investigator's (PI's) lack of
              formal training in biomedical engineering, it has been practically impossible
              to secure funding for these type of studies from the biomedical community. 
              Given the success in formulating the mathematical framework for the spreading
              dynamics and given the previous experience in carrying out experimental studies
              using Moire topology, laser shadowgraphy and laser interferometry, the PI is
              confident that a one time infusion of funds can launch this experimental
              program.  This funding will help run these studies to be published in the
              biomedical literature, which is a new area for the (PI).  These results will
              hopefully convince the biomedical community that the PI is  knowledgeable in
              the area of lung surfactant spreading and that her training in fluid physics
              can contribute significantly to this important problem. 
    

