Title       : POWRE: Glycosyl Phosphatidylinositol Anchors of Cryptococcus neoformans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9973554

Award Number: 9973554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84386              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamara L. Doering   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Weill Med Coll of Cornell
	      1300 York Avenue
	      New York, NY  100214805    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Doering
	Glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors are post-translational
              modifications found ubiquitously in eukaryotes.  These glycolipids become
              covalently linked to the C-termini of cer-tain newly synthesized proteins in
              the endoplasmic reticulum, modifying a tremendous variety of cell surface
              enzymes and antigens.  The presence of a GPI has been implicated in processes
              ranging from intracellular targeting and protein mobility to signal
              transduction.  GPI structures are based on a linear core of ethanolamine (in
              amide linkage to the protein), phosphate, four hexoses, and an inositol
              phospholipid.  The lipid moiety inserts into the extracy-toplasmic leaflet of
              the membrane bilayer, thereby mediating the association of the protein with the
              membrane.  Although the core GPI structure is precisely conserved across
              evolution, it often bears side chains that vary with the cell type and
              organism.  Additional structural variation is intro-duced by the molecular
              species found in the lipid portion, as well as the type of lipid linkage (e.g.
              ce-ramide, diacyl glycerol, or alkyl acyl glycerol).  Biosynthesis of GPI
              anchors has been examined in most detail in the protozoan parasite Try-panosoma
              brucei, mammalian tissue culture cell lines, and the model yeast Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae.  In each system fundamental differences exist in structure and
              biosynthesis.  The aim of this project is the study of  GPIs in the
              basidiomycete Cryptococcus neoformans, a fungal organism in a different phylum
              from the yeast commonly used as experimental models.  C. neoformans contains
              quite unusual glycan structures in the form of an extensive polysaccha-ride
              capsule.  Almost nothing is known, however, about other forms of glycosylation
              in cryp-tococcus, including GPI addition. The first objective will be to
              establish the importance of GPI synthesis to C. neoformans viability.  This
              will be done by PCR-based cloning of the cryptococcal homolog of a gene
              involved in GPI synthesis, followed by construction of a knockout strain to
              assess viability.  Methods will include use of regulatable promoters, Southern
              blotting, and library screening.  The second objective will be to purify a
              GPI-anchored protein from C. neoformans by a biochemical approach, using
              specific chemical and enzymatic treatments to selectively purify anchored
              proteins.  Peptides from the protein will be sequenced, and the data used to
              clone the gene (to allow future antibody production and studies of regulation).
               Purified protein will also be useful for determination of anchor structure
              (beyond the scope of this proposal).  If there is time in the granting period,
              a third objective, to initiate studies of GPI biosynthesis in C. neoformans,
              will be pursued.

	A recurring theme in cell biology is how proteins that
              function outside of cells are targeted to the cell surface, and how they remain
              in place attached to the outer layer of the cell membrane.  One way of
              anchoring proteins to membranes is via a complex structure composed of sugars
              and fatty molecules termed a GPI (glycosyl phosphatidylinositol).  Proteins
              linked to the cell surface in this way play important roles in cell protection,
              the immune response, and metabolism.  The presence of an anchor retains such
              proteins on the cell surface, and also influences their localization, movement,
              and function.  GPI anchors have been found in all eukaryotic organisms studied,
              although they exhibit tremendous variations in structure depending on the
              species.  This project is designed to investigate GPIs in Cryptococcus
              neoformans.  This understudied but important fungus has unusual sugar
              structures that comprise a protective capsule, but almost nothing is known
              about its GPI anchors or other sugar-containing modifications. In addition to
              helping elucidate the basic biology of this organism, the work will also 
              increase our understanding of GPI structures and biosynthesis in general. This
              project is being funded under the NSF POWRE program. 



