Title       : POWRE: Molecular Genetics of Ligule Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9973568

Award Number: 9973568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria A. Moreno maria.moreno@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This POWRE award will allow Dr. Moreno to complete her research on leaf
              development in maize (Zea Mays), work begun as a postdoctoral student, and to
              re-establish herself as an independent investigator.  The overall goal of this
              research project is to understand the process of ligule formation in maize. 
              The ligule is a defined group of cells that change their polarity and their
              rates of cell division during leaf formation to form a hinge-like structure. 
              This process is highly amenable to genetic dissection and molecular analysis
              because ligules are dispensable organs that can be completely abolished by
              mutations that have little effect on plant viability or fertility.  Recessive
              mutations of the liguleless1 and liguleless2 genes block the formation of
              ligules at a very early time in development.  This project has specific aims. 
              The first is to perform a fine structure genetic analysis of the liguleless1
              gene by insertional mutagenesis in order to establish whether or not it is
              possible to obtain lg1 mutations that selectively affect various aspects or
              stages of ligule development.  The second goal is to identify new mutations
              that affect the ligular region of maize.  This study will focus on the genetic
              and molecular characterization of two novel classes of previously undescribed
              mutations.  Heritability tests as well as dominance relationships with the
              wild-type genes will be determined.  If, in fact, the new mutations correspond
              to new loci, an attempt will be made to assign chromosomal location and
              gene-tagging efforts will be initiated.  The final goal will be to determine
              the structure and function of the liguleless2, and possibly liguleless1,
              homologues in Arabidopsis by PCR-assisted site-selected mutagenesis.  Through
              DNA and protein database comparisons, putative lg1- and lg2-like genes will be
              identified.  Mutations in these genes will address the question of whether
              structural homologies exist between monocot and dicot leaves.
