Title       : A Qualitative and Quantitative Study of Self-Adjoint and Non-Self-Adjoint
               Sturm-Liouville Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1999      
File        : a9973108

Award Number: 9973108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anton Zettl zettl@math.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hongyou Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Qingkai Kong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zettl

Technical description. In a series of papers over the last five years
              or so, 
the three authors of this proposal, together with a number of
              collaborators, 
embarked on a systematic study of the dependence of the
              spectrum of self-adjoint 
Sturm-Liouville problems on the problem. This
              project is a natural
continuation of the above work. It is planned to enlarge
              the class of self-adjoint
problems covered (e.g. by including the so called
              "left-definite" problems) and,
especially, extend the above work to the
              non-self-adjoint case. The latter case is
formidable: there is no general
              theory that can be compared with the well developed
theory for the
              self-adjoint case. A new approach introduced by the authors for
the
              self-adjoint case, using tools from algebraic geometry, has yielded
              considerable
insight for this case and is expected to do so also for the
              non-self-adjoint case.

General description. Sturm-Liouville problems have a
              celebrated history dating back
to the seminal papers of Sturm and Liouville in
              1836-37. Thousands of papers have 
been written on these problems by
              mathematicians and by scientists, and engineers.
Yet the field is still
              intensely active today with dozens of papers published every year. 
These
              problems have a wide range of applications in pure mathematics, applied
              
mathematics, quantum mechanics, the sciences and engineering. For example,
              they 
can be used to study the spectrum of the hydrogen atom, eddies in the
              atmosphere, 
neutron transport, etc. etc. The main purpose of this project is
              to study, both 
qualitatively and quantitatively, some major and difficult
              classes of such problems 
about which little is known.

