Title       : Scalable Parallel Multilevel Algorithms for the Solution and Optimization of
               Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1999      
File        : a9973276

Award Number: 9973276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph E. Bank rbank@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip E. Gill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Holst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973276

This proposal focuses on several fundamental computational issues
              involved in the parallel implicit solution of partial differential equations
              arising from optimal control and the variational formulation of physical
              problems.  The goals of the research include, but are not limited to, the
              following:

    (1) The formulation and analysis of provably efficient,
              robust and scalable multilevel algorithms for the optimization and solution of
              systems defined by partial differential equations.

    (2) The development
              of software embodying the above algorithms and its dissemination within the
              manufacturing, engineering and scientific community. The proposed software will
              extend the scope and effectiveness of the existing codes PLTMG, MC, and SNOPT
              that have been developed by the investigators at UC San Diego.

    (3) The
              attraction of advanced graduate students into this research area, which
              generally concerns the analysis and computational study of systems arising in
              the sciences and engineering.

The investigators have combined expertise in
              optimization, numerical methods for partial differential equations, and
              parallel computation.  This research program is intended to provide graduate
              students with a broad educational experience in an environment in which these
              different aspects of scientific computation are integrated.  A key aim of the
              research is the transfer of new results to the manufacturing, engineering and
              scientific community.  Mathematical software is one of the most effective means
              of technology transfer.  Conversely, a crucial component of effective algorithm
              development is close association with engineers and scientists facing
              real-world problems.  The investigators will continue and broaden their
              collaboration with researchers in other areas of applied science and
              technology, including manufacturing, environmental modeling, electrical power
              optimization, biomolecular modeling, computer graphics, solid mechanics,
              aerospace and finance.  All these applications have benefited from and
              contributed to existing algorithms and software.


