Title       : Noninvertible Dynamical Systems: A Computer-Assisted Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9973926

Award Number: 9973926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Peckham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9139,9229,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator studies the dynamics and bifurcations of
discrete-time
              systems featuring nonunique reverse-time behavior.
He and his colleague
              investigate two-dimensional endomorphisms
and aspects of three-dimensional
              endomorphism dynamics, and
develop scientific computation, stability, and
              visualization
tools necessary for these studies.  The basic tool for the
              study
of noninvertible maps is the notion of a "critical set": the
locus of
              points where the linearized map becomes singular.
Understanding the forward
              and backward iterates of the critical
set is the key to understanding the full
              dynamics of
noninvertible maps.  Because trajectories backward in time
              are
not unique, definitions (e.g. unstable manifolds of saddle
points) and
              computations (e.g. stable manifolds of saddle points)
involving backward
              iterates must be extended from the
(invertible) diffeomorphism case to the
              (noninvertible)
endomorphism case.  The interactions of these sets and the
              system
attractors with the critical set give rise to a class of
important
              dynamical phenomena distinct from those arising in
diffeomorphisms, and the
              dependence of such interactions on
parameters gives rise to new bifurcations. 
              Current computational
tools used for simulation, computation of invariant
              sets, and
study of bifurcations are correspondingly extended, and new
              tools
are constructed to deal with multiple backward trajectories and
their
              consequences.  The possible geometric explosion of the
number of distinct
              preimages of a point (or a set) requires new
programming approaches, and
              scientific visualization becomes
crucial in numerical exploration of global
              dynamics and their
parameter dependence.  Thr project involves work in
              software
development, numerical investigation, and mathematical analysis.
The
              interplay of all three is necessary to have any hope of
understanding the
              dynamics of nontrivial systems.  The
investigator plans a systematic
              computer-assisted study of the
dynamic behavior of noninvertible maps, carried
              out in a
continuous dialogue between computation and theory, and
              with
illustrative and technologically relevant applications in mind.
     The
              investigator and his colleague continue studying the
dynamical behavior of
              typical systems of equations that are used
to model a variety of physical,
              chemical, and ecological systems.
The goal is to study changes, or
              "bifurcations," in the
qualitative behavior of these systems as parameters are
              changed.
The class of models being studied is called "noninvertible
discrete
              dynamical systems." A discrete dynamical system is one
which provides a rule
              for predicting some quantity or quantities
at some point in the future (say,
              one year from now) based only
on the value of that quantity now.  By iterating
              the rule, we can
predict what the quantity will be at any year in the
              future.
When the rule can be "inverted" to produce a rule to go backward
in
              time, the system is called invertible.  Otherwise it is
noninvertible.  The
              project includes software development,
numerical investigation, and
              mathematical analysis.  The behavior
of these systems is typically so
              complicated that there is no
hope of understanding them without the aid of
              computers.  On the
other hand, computer investigation alone, without the
              acompanying
mathematical analysis, generally leads to a very
              incomplete
understanding.  Consequently, all three activities must be done
in
              concert with each other.  With respect to all three activites,
there has been
              much previous work on one-dimensional (the
dimension is the number of
              quantities that is being monitored)
invertible and noninvertible systems and
              on higher dimensional
invertible systems, but work on two-dimensional and
              higher
noninvertible systems is still in relative infancy.  It is this
area
              on which they focus.  Advances will lead to a greater
understanding of this
              class of models, and therefore the
phenomena that are modeled by them.  In the
              process, they develop
software tools that are of use to others for continued
              study of
these systems, as well as tools for scientifically
              visualizing
objects, whether they come from dynamical systems applications
              or
from any area of science, engineering or mathematics.

