Title       : Systemic Reform in Engineering Education at Penn State - Educating World Class
               Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9973002

Award Number: 9973002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169656             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Litzinger tal2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9973002
Litzinger

The proposed work addresses the systemic reform that is
              required to produce engineers who are "world-class," i. e., capable of
              operating in the global, environmentally conscious and highly competitive world
              of today.  Five engineering departments will undertake systemic reforms of
              their core curricula and their approaches to teaching and learning.  The plans
              for these reforms were created with the following common goals:

1.	Students
              will apply and integrate their knowledge and skills, and develop lifelong
              learning
skills through  multiple design/project-based
              experiences;

2.	Students will develop a "customer-orientation" and higher
              levels of motivation for meaningful learning through direct, multi-faceted
              involvement with industry and industry-based projects;

3.	Students will be
              engaged in meaningful learning through extensive use of collaborative and
              cooperative learning methods.

While these goals have been addressed
              successfully in individual courses at Penn State and elsewhere, they have not
              previously been implemented in the systemic fashion envisioned in this
              proposal; nor have the development and assessment of lifelong learning skills
              been so extensively addressed in engineering education.  When completed, the
              proposed work-will reform 24 courses and affect more than 1400 students each
              year in Chemical, Civil, Industrial and Mechanical Engineering, as well as
              Engineering Mechanics.  As the continuation of a long-term transformation of
              engineering education to produce "World-Class Engineers," these efforts will
              also put into place the foundations upon which future reforms will be built. 
              In addition, dissemination of results from the proposed work, to the wider
              engineering community, will contribute thoroughly assessed approaches to
              systemic reform in five different departments as well as methodologies and
              assessment tools for the development of lifelong learning skills.

