Title       : Numerical Methods for Multimaterial and Multiphase Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9973291

Award Number: 9973291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139171             (Estimated)
Investigator: Smadar Karni karni@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973291

This proposal concerns the development and implementation of
              algorithms for 
compressible multimaterial and multiphase flows.  In both
              types of flows, a major numerical stumbling block is accounting correctly for
              thermodynamical relaxation processes and equilibrium between the fluid
              components.  Failure to do so is the reason why state-of-the-art single fluid
              algorithms often do not work in multifluid flows.  Karni was among the first to
              realize that the key to robust multifluid algorithms is good control over the
              pressure field, and has been active in developing and implementing algorithms
              for complex multimaterial flows.  It is proposed: (i) to develop multimaterial
              algorithms for stiff fluids with surface tension.  Numerical issues such as
              stiffness, singular source treatment, interface sharpening and efficient time
              integration will be studied.  Comparison with asymptotic theories and
              experiments of oscillating bubbles will be conducted; (ii) to extend
              multimaterial algorithms to multiphase flow models, in particular to the
              2-velocity 2-pressure multiphase model which is sufficiently general and is
              time hyperbolic.  Numerical aspects such as global conservation, positivity,
              efficient integration of stiff source terms will be addressed.  The methods
              will be validated against numerical benchmark tests. (iii) to use multimaterial
              computations to 'validate' multiphase flow models by numerical averaging.
              Studying mean flow properties might provide numerical Hugoniot curves for the
              multiphase (nonconservative) systems, and might shed light on the controversial
              issue of constitutive closures.  This part will be done in collaboration with
              H.M. Glaz of the University of Maryland.

Multimaterial and multiphase flows
              are flows consisting of several 'pure' gas or liquid components.  For example,
              hydrogen and air, air in water, liquid droplets in air or even dust in air. 
              Depending on the application, the interest may be to follow the motion of the
              interface that separates the different fluids and study its dynamics and
              stability.  For example, computing the dynamics of a an oscillating gas bubble
              in water is useful for understanding the propagation of sound waves underwater,
              and for studying underwater explosions.  In order to burn fuel efficiently in
              combustion chambers one needs to understand mixing processes, which in turn are
              governed by the dynamics of, say, a hydrogen jet in air.  In some other
              applications, the number of interfaces may be huge and following the dynamics
              of individual interfaces is not only impossible but is also not interesting.
              For example, in bubbly liquids such as soda cans, in liquid suspensions such as
              in sprays or in dusty gases, the motion of a single bubble or droplet is not of
              interest.  Rather, the interest is in understanding how the fluid mixture
              behaves 'on average'.  Both types of flows lead to mathematical models that
              need to be solved on computers, and are computationally very intensive.  They
              are also not easy to compute. The 'average' models are also mathematically less
              well understood.  Experiments, while available, are difficult to conduct and
              are restricted by the accuracy of the instruments and their often large margins
              of error.  Computer simulations provide therefore a complementary tool which
              may shed light and give insight into the complex problems of interest.  The
              past few years have seen a growing interest in developing methods suitable for
              computing multimaterial/multiphase flows and in their efficient implementation
              to studying complex flow phenomena.  This project concerns further development
              and implementation of such methods.

