Title       : POWRE: Prefrontal Cortex Modulation of Accumbens Dopamine Levels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9973495

Award Number: 9973495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine Duvauchelle duvauchelle@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The prefrontal cortex (PFC) has been identified as an essential component in a
              range of mental and physical processes, including higher level cognition,
              emotional response to stress, incentive motivation and motor behavior. Diverse
              structural and functional relationships are enabled by extensive neural
              connections linking the PFC to other heavily inputted brain regions. For this
              proposal, the dynamic association between the PFC and the nucleus accumbens
              (NAcc) is of particular interest.  As projection terminal regions, the PFC and
              the NAcc  share a common point of origin in subcortical dopaminergic cell
              bodies.  It has been shown that manipulation of dopamine neurotransmission in
              the PFC can alter  dopamine activity in the NAcc. The purpose of this proposal
              is to investigate changes in NAcc dopamine as the result of PFC dopamine
              manipulations.  After intra-PFC injections of  dopamine agonists or
              antagonists, the transsynaptic effects of these manipulations will be assessed
              by analyzing brain dialysate samples from the NAcc through the use of in vivo
              microdialysis coupled with electrochemical detection.
     It has been
              suggested that increased dopamine neurotransmission provides neural emphasis to
              biologically relevant stimuli, thus increasing the impact of the stimuli upon
              the organism.  If dopamine activity reflects relative importance of neural
              information, this study will show how information processing priorities and
              output can be affected transsynaptically.  It has been suggested that brain
              region interactions of this type occur routinely as normal brain homeostatic
              responses to drug use or disease processes. 





