Title       : Studies at Ultralow Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a9973255

Award Number: 9973255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans M. Bozler hbozler@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher M. Gould  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9973255
Bozler

This is a condensed matter physics project that focuses on
              superfluid He-3, 2D magnetism of  He-3, and a novel technique for absolute
              thermometry at ultralow temperatures. The results of magnetization measurements
              in the superfluid He-3 phases are inconsistent and depend on whether the
              measurements are performed with a SQUID or by NMR. The missing physics
              represents a significant challenge. Recent experiments measure the absolute
              magnetization of normal and superfluid He-3 using a SQUID and displacement
              technique. Continued work on the superfluid phases of He-3 includes studies of
              the A-B interface and the high field phase diagram of He-3 in restricted
              geometries such as aerogel. Thin films of He-3 exhibit two-dimensional
              magnetism which can be studied by NMR. These studies feature an NMR technique
              at very low applied field using a SQUID as the sensor. Early experiments are at
              ferromagnetic coverages. Extensions of this work to both higher coverages and
              single monolayer coverages are planned. We are developing an advanced DC SQUID
              system in collaboration with TRW. The SQUID is capable of following signals at
              much higher frequencies and slew rates than commercially available systems, and
              is used for a proposed method of absolute primary thermometry. Graduate
              students participating in the project benefit from exposure to exciting
              fundamental physics research and experience with state-of-the-art
              instrumentation. The provides excellent training for a wide range of careers.
              
%%%
This is a condensed matter physics study of materials at ultralow
              temperatures, together with the development of ultralow temperature techniques.
              Most of this work takes place at temperatures well below 1 K, and much of it is
              at temperatures below 1 mK. The USC Ultralow Temperature Laboratory is equipped
              to attain low temperatures and to make precision, low noise, and very low power
              measurements. Experiments focus on the study of the superfluid phases of He-3,
              the magnetism of two-dimensional films of He-3, and new techniques to measure
              the absolute temperature at milliKelvin temperatures. The experiments in this
              project are important to the fundamental understanding of the superfluid phases
              of  He-3 which is an important model system for many phenomena in condensed
              matter. The properties of the two-dimensional films provide an excellent
              laboratory for the study of two-dimensional magnetism because the interactions
              can be greatly varied by small changes in density, allowing us to test theories
              of two-dimensional phase order in a systematic way. The ability to measure
              temperatures in the milliKelvin range is still limited, with several very good
              relative thermometers, but no absolute thermometer. The project uses the
              frequency spectrum of thermal fluctuations to determine the absolute
              temperature. Graduate students participating in the project benefit from
              exposure to exciting fundamental physics research and experience with
              state-of-the-art instrumentation. The provides excellent training for a wide
              range of careers. 
***


