Title       : Boron Isotope Variation During Subduction, Melting, and Ascent of Arc Magmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9973040

Award Number: 9973040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Hervig hervig@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Holloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon M. Peacock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt Roggensack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973040
Hervig
Experiments to determine the behavior of boron isotopes under
              conditions occurring in subduction zones will be performed. These experiments
              are designed to measure boron isotope fractionation between a) mafic silicate
              melts and hydrous fluid and b) muscovite and hydrous fluid and to measure
              self-diffusion coefficients for boron isotopes in melts. The experiments will
              allow boron isotope analyses of subducted rocks, mantle wedge materials altered
              by fluids, and the arc magmas themselves to be considered in the context of
              isotopic fractionation that may be occurring during the devolatilization of
              subducted and erupted materials. When combined with analyses of natural samples
              the following hypotheses can be tested: 1) devolatilization is the dominant
              mechanism for mass transfer into the overlying mantle wedge, 2) degassing of
              magmas during ascent does not alter the boron isotope ratio of melts and thus
              boron isotopic composition of primitive and evolved melt inclusions are equally
              indicative of the source region.  The analyses of the experiments will be
              obtained using the secondary ion mass spectrometer (SIMS, or ion microprobe)
              ideally suited to obtain precise boron isotopic microanalyses.  Characterizing
              the boron isotopic composition of subducted and erupted rocks in the context of
              experiments showing how boron isotope ratios in these minerals and melts change
              will increase our understanding of the processes occurring in subduction zones
              and the crust-mantle recycling mechanisms that occur at convergent plate
              margins.


