Title       : POWRE: The Cuban Republic/State and Nation in the Caribbean Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9973790

Award Number: 9973790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marifeli Perez-Stable buendia7489@email.msn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will consist of two parts, finishing the principal investigator's
              book, The Cuban Republic: Themes and Interpretations (1898-1960) and teaching a
              graduate-level course on the Caribbean Basin.  In The Cuban Republic, the
              investigator will analyze twentieth-century Cuba before the revolution of 1959.
               The book will address three major questions.  The first deals with the upper
              classes and their relations within different sectors (sugar and nonsugar,
              especially), with the middle and working classes, with the political system,
              and with the United States (government and private sector).  The second will
              develop political themes, i.e., the formation of a political class, issues of
              conflict and consensus, political parties and institutions, the interaction of
              democracy and dictatorship.  The third will address the ways in which Cubans
              themselves influenced and shaped relations with the United States.  This book
              will draw a portrait of the old Cuba on its own terms, i.e., for what it was
              and was becoming, but did not.  With a prospective transition on the island,
              the new Cuba that is yet to be will need to take a new look into the
              prerevolutionary past.  The Cuban Republic will offer historical
              interpretations that look forward to a democratic and prosperous Cuba.  As a
              second component of the award, the investigator will teach a graduate-level
              seminar, "State and Nation in the Caribbean Basin (19th and 20th Centuries)." 
              Her primary focus will be to understand the region's small nations within their
              own histories and cultures, not just as mere reactive actors to the actions and
              policies of the United States.  She will especially highlight the different
              experiences of Cuba, Puerto Rico, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, and Nicaragua.
               The course will conclude with a critical overview of the challenges of
              democracy, social justice, and sovereignty at the turn of the new century. 
              This POWRE award will provide the Principal Investigator with opportunities for
              career advancement and professional growth.  The Cuban Republic will be a
              sequel to her well-established The Cuban Revolution: Origins, Course, and
              Legacy (Oxford University Press, 1993, 1999).  The Caribbean course will allow
              her to expand into other countries in the region and develop a comparative
              research agenda.  Her residence at Florida International University will
              connect her with faculty, students, and a community keenly interested in her
              areas of study.
