Title       : POWRE: Enhancing Geoscience Education By Training Research Geoscientists in
               Education Principals and Research Practices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9973512

Award Number: 9973512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62048              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula N. Wilson pnwilson@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1592      PROF OPPOR FOR WOMEN IN RSCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	This award will open up new research and professional development opportunities
              so that the PI can achieve career advancement in a nontraditional
              cross-disciplinary position between the geosciences and science education. 
              Currently, she is in a non-tenure track Assistant Professor position, which she
              has held for six years.  
	The PI will further her professional development in
              earth science education so that she can establish a regional earth science
              education center.  The PI currently directs a small, local program for teacher
              professional development in the earth sciences, but has found her current
              background is insufficient to advance her career goals.  In particular, the PI
              has been extensively involved in curriculum development and evaluation, mostly
              at a local level but more recently at the national level.  this work will allow
              her to develop these curriculum and evaluation skills to the level required for
              earning a strong national reputation.
	This grant will provide the required
              educational and research background necessary for the PI to jointly conduct
              conceptual learning research in earth science concepts with University of Utah
              colleagues in the department of Educational Studies and at other universities. 
              After she attains the necessary background, she will develop a long term
              research collaboration on earth science conceptual learning.  Upon completion
              of this project, the PI will combine this new training with her strong
              geoscience background and science research skills and be positioned to make
              significant contributions to the field of geoscience education.

