Title       : Studies in Knot Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9973232

Award Number: 9973232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60025              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan S. Birman jb@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9973232   
PI: Joan S. Birman

We propose to investigate
              several problems relating to knots and to3-manifolds:  (1) We hope to find new
              invariants of Legendrian and transverse knots in 3-space, using the standard
              contact structure.  Every transverse knot can be represented as a closed braid,
              and we begin by seeking an appropriate modification of the classical Markov
              theorem for transverse knots.  We hope to extend the work of Eliashberg and
              Fraser, which shows that transverse knots are determined by their knot type and
              Bennequin number, to a wider class of knots. After that we hope to study knots
              for which we conjecture that their theorem fails.  We have candidates.   (2) We
              propose to study the complexity of the problem of recognizing the unknot
              algorithmically. We conjecture the existence of a polynomial-time algorithm.
              (3) We propose to study invariants of Heegaard splittings of closed, orientable
              3-manifolds which arise through representations of the mapping class group of a
              surface onto various(initially  finite) groups.  One such collection of groups
              arises through the work of Wright and the related work of Masbaum on the
              Reshitikhan-Turaev representations of the mapping class group.   

The planet
              earth is an example of a 2-dimensional manifold.   If you stand at any 2 points
              on the earth (which, to a mathematician, is to be thought of as having no
              geographical features and being perfectly round and smooth), then your
              surroundings look identical at the 2 points, and give you no hint of the global
              topology.  A major leap in thinking about the earth occurred when it was
              learned that in fact the earth is round, i.e. it is a 2-dimensional manifold,
              in particular it is a 2-sphere.  But if we add one more dimension, we are in
              the position of people before Columbus made his discovery:  A `neighborhood of
              one point looks just like a neighborhood of another, and we have no idea of the
              global picture.  All we know is that the world is a 3-dimensional manifold.  It
              could be a3-dimensional sphere, but there are many other possibilities too, and
              the existence of black holes suggests a very complicated structure.  The work
              is this proposal studies the most accessible examples of
              3-dimensionalmanifolds, namely the space which remains when one removes a
              knotted circle from a 3-dimensional sphere.  Knots are incredibly complicated
              objects, and understanding them is very basic to 3-manifold geometry and
              topology.  By finding ways to recognize individual knots algorithmically, and
              by finding partial ways to tell them apart, mathematicians gain insight into
              deep questions about topology.  We will also study other3-dimensional manifolds
              by cutting them apart into two handlebodies which are pasted together along a
              so-called Heegaard surface.

