Title       : Behavioral and Chemical Analyses of Trail Pheromones in the Amazonian Bumble Bee
               (Bombus transversalis)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9973447

Award Number: 9973447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sydney A. Cameron scameron@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


Animal Behavior Program

Non-technical Abstract



Title:  POWRE: 
              Behavioral and Chemical Analyses of Trail Pheromones in the Amazonian bumble
              bee (Bombus transversalis)

PI:  Sydney A. Cameron

Proposal #: 
              9973447

	Social insects are endowed with complex chemical communication
              systems that rival the sophisticated communication systems of humans.  It is
              well known, for instance, that foraging ants follow ground trails they
              chemically mark with pheromones to mediate communication with other members of
              the colony.  The recent discovery by Dr. Cameron that a social bee in the
              Amazonian rain forest clears and follows trails resembling the ground trails of
              ants is striking because bees (and wasps) are not known to use ground trails
              for collecting resources.  The focus of Dr. Cameron's POWRE research is to
              determine whether the recently discovered trail-following bees mark their
              trails with communication pheromones, as ants do.

	Ecological convergence
              between ants and this unusual rain forest bee in the use of trail pheromones
              seems quite possible.  The POWRE activities are organized to test this
              hypothesis with behavioral observations, experimental manipulations, and
              chemical analyses, and to demonstrate the feasibility of a larger comparative
              study of trail pheromones in bees.  The POWRE grant allows Dr. Cameron to
              conduct a pilot study to collect critical preliminary data, and affords her the
              opportunity to acquire the basic chemical-analytical skills required to carry
              on an expanded program in comparative exocrine-gland research.  These skills
              will be acquired through contact at the host institution (Tel Aviv University)
              with a leading scientist in the field of chemical communication in insects. 
              This collaboration will advance our knowledge of chemical communication in
              social insects and advance Dr. Cameron's own research program by enabling her
              to ultimately integrate behavior and chemical ecology with ongoing research
              into the evolution of social behavior in bees.


