Title       : POWRE: Polysomes: Biologically-Inspired Vesicles of Block Copolymers for
               Targeted Delivery and Controlled Release Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9973524

Award Number: 9973524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria M. Santore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-9973524
Santore, Maria M
Lehigh University

Phospholipid bilayer
              vesicles, or liposomes, a focus of research for several decades, form the basis
              for cellular membranes and have been at the core of vesicle technology for
              biotechnological and non-bio applications alike.  It has generally been assumed
              that surfactants like phospholipids, which offer large possibilities for
              chemical variations, should be the primary building blocks for vesicle walls. 
              The proposed Visiting Professorship and follow-up research program was,
              however, motivated by the extremely recent discovery that certain copolymers,
              even those based on commodity materials such as polyethylene (PE) and
              polyethylene oxide (PEO), form vesicles or "polysomes" that appear similar to
              classical liposomes.  Polysomes have the potential to revolutionalize
              technologies such as targeted delivery, microreactors and microfermentors,
              sensors and actuators, and even form the basis of artificial cells because they
              can broaden the range of conditions where bilayer membranes can survive and
              they increase the types of properties that can be engineered into
              membranes.

This proposal addresses a number of fundamental issues which must
              be resolved in order for polysome technology to be developed and implemented. 
              The first quest is to establish the range of copolymer chemistries and
              architectures that form polysomes, and the robustness of these membranes to pH
              and perturbations in the chemistry.  At the time this proposal was written,
              only one system was examined and shown to form vesicles.  This work presents a
              strategy for anticipating other chemistries which may also succeed.  The next
              issue is what range of basic membrane properties can be achieved (mechanical
              properties and lateral diffusivity) and how these compare with phospholipid
              vesicles.  Since the ultimate performance of polysomes will depend on their
              permeability and the extent to which functionalized moieties can be
              incorporated into the membrane, the issues will also be considered with
              polysomes.  Finally, in many controlled delivery applications and instances
              that mimic cell behavior, the adhesion of the polysome with other polysomes and
              external surfaces will be critical.  The proposed program includes pilot
              studies in this area to form the basis of work beyond the sabbatical
              leave.

POWRE monies are requested to support a sabbatical leave for
              Professor Santore to spend a year in Professor Hammer's lab at the University
              of Pennsylvania, where polysomes were first discovered.  This laboratory is
              well-quipped for the fabrication and study of basic vesicle adhesion studies. 
              During the sabbatical, Santore will learn the basic techniques for fabricating
              and manipulating vesicles, knowledge that could not be acquired at Lehigh. 
              Work will be done towards the questions of which copolymers form polysomes and
              the mechanical, diffusional, and permeation properties of polysomes membranes. 
              Also during the Visiting Professorship, work will be initiated to study the
              issues of vesicle adhesion and the incorporation of specialized molecules into
              the polysome wall.  Results from these last tow subtopics will form the
              foundation for future programs at Lehigh, beyond the Visiting Professorship,
              and future collaborations between Hammer and Santore.  Funds are requested for
              of Professor Santore's salary during the sabbatical, and basic equipment for
              vesicle studies at Lehigh beyond the sabbatical leave.

Key Words: Materials;
              Membranes; Vesicle; POWRE; Biomedical; Surfactants


