Title       : POWRE: Research in Applied Analysis and Conservation Laws
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9973475

Award Number: 9973475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35723              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Keyfitz keyfitz@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI will use this grant as partial salary support for a sabbatical leave at
              Brown University, visiting mathematicians in the Mathematics and Applied
              Mathematics Departments.

Research and scholarly activities planned for the
              period include preparing a monograph on nonstrictly hyperbolic conservation
              laws and conservation laws that change type.  The proposer has worked
              extensively on problems in this area since 1976.  Recognition of the possible
              utility of these models in engineering applications, along with continuing
              mathematical advances, has inspired this effort to bring together in one place
              the results of the proposer and of other researchers in the field, to broaden
              the scope of examples treated, and to make the subject accessible to
              practitioners in other fields.  A major contribution of the book will be to
              introduce to mathematicians interested in the theory and numerical analysis of
              conservation laws
a number of interesting new prototype problems and
              applications.  Some of the motivation for studying nonstrictly hyperbolic
              problems comes from elasticity and continuum mechanics.  Other application
              areas that have furnished examples include flow through porous media (petroleum
              reservoirs) and multiphase flows (for example, mixtures of liquid and steam,
              bubbly liquids, and fluidized bed reactors) which are important in several
              fields of engineering and technology.

Keyfitz also proposes to advance her
              recent research on multidimensional conservation laws, in cooperation with
              Dafermos, Strauss, and other Brown faculty.  The lack of a good existence
              theory in more than one space dimension is the outstanding theoretical problem
              in quasilinear hyperbolic equations.  One approach is through the study of
              self-similar problems.  Results obtained so far by Canic and Keyfitz indicate
              that some basic questions in both elliptic and hyperbolic equations must be
              answered.  Many aspects of nonlinear analysis may play a role here.  Brown's
              mathematics department offers great strength in this area,
both in its
              permanent faculty and in the visitors who have planned to be there in
              1999-2000.
In addition to the theoretical importance of existence questions,
              there is much applications interest in self-similar problems, which include
              such benchmark flows as shock reflection by a wedge.

The POWRE grant offers
              the proposer focussed support for research and scholarship at a critical time,
              when she has been able to conclude some administrative and family
              responsibilities.  It will also allow her to learn new methodologies (in
              nonlinear analysis) and to engage in cross-disciplinary study.  The outcome,
              both in the form of the eventual book and in research advances in
              multidimensional conservation laws, will mark a significant increase in the
              proposer's research strength and visibility.
