Title       : POWRE: Investigation of Laser-Target Interactions in Pulsed Laser Deposition
               Using a Picosecond, Tunable Free Electron Laser
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9973697

Award Number: 9973697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69556              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne C. Reilly reilly@physics.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to investigate laser-target interaction during
              pulsed laser ablation using a high average power, tunable, fast repetition
              rate, picosecond-pulse duration free electron laser (FEL). The study is
              expected to lay the groundwork for determining laser parameters for
              optimization of film properties with the ultimate research goal of producing
              high quality thin films and multilayers, specifically of magnetic and metallic
              materials. The starting point in understanding the deposition of thin films is
              understanding the laser-target interaction and the generation of the ablated
              material plume. Three materials will be studied: a magnetic material (Co), a
              noble metal (Ag), and a dielectric (LiNbO3). The laser source will be Thomas
              Jefferson National Accelerator Facility Free Electron Laser. The laser-target
              interaction will be studied in-situ by ultrafast pump-probe optical microscopy,
              spectral analysis of the ablated plasma, pump-probe reflectivity and ex-situ
              using surface characterization techniques.
%%% 
This is a research
              enhancement grant made under the Professional Opportunities for Women in
              Research and Education (POWRE) program. The research will contribute basic
              materials science knowledge relevant to the deposition of thin films and
              multilayers of magnetic and metallic materials. The project also places
              emphasis on the integration of research and education by incorporating graduate
              student participation into research and  the results of research into classroom
              activities in a university setting. The project is co-supported by the Division
              of Materials Research, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities).
              
***

