Title       : POWRE: A New Method to Test Hypotheses about the Development and Evolution of
               Endothermy in Tunas: Pilot study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9973916

Award Number: 9973916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30006              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn A. Dickson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This POWRE project will provide the resources needed for the PI to adapt a
              technique to measure proton "leak" across the inner mitochondrial membrane as a
              measure of tissue heat production to her established study system of the
              development and evolution of endothermy in tunas.  During the summer of 1999
              (prior to the start of POWRE funding), the PI will learn the technique in the
              lab of Dr. Martin Brand (funded by an NIH grant).  The POWRE grant will enable
              the PI to establish the technique at the home institution and to conduct pilot
              studies there on several fish species, with undergraduate student
              collaborators, to test the hypothesis that endothermic fishes have an elevated
              rate of proton leak across the inner mitochondrial membrane of the thermogenic
              tissue (red muscle).  These tests will involve comparisons of tunas with their
              ectothermic sister taxa (chub mackerel and eastern Pacific bonito), and of the
              mako shark with ectothermic sharks.  If the hypothesis is supported, the
              resultant elevation in tissue heat-production rate would correspond to the
              elevated standard or "maintenance" metabolic rates of tunas (and presumably in
              makos).  Future studies will test two hypotheses:  (1) that the change in
              mitochondrial proton leak was an important step in the evolution of endothermy;
               this will involve phylogenetically based comparisons of a number of species
              and additional ectothermic sister taxa.  (2) As juvenile tunas develop the
              capacity to maintain elevated temperatures in their slow-twitch, oxidative
              locomotor muscle (red myotomal muscle) across the size range of 100-300 mm fork
              length (FL), the heat production rate of this tissue is increased by increasing
              the rate of proton leak across the inner mitochondrial membrane.  POWRE funding
              will allow the PI to explore a new research approach and apply it to advance
              the field by more directly testing for unique features of the thermogenic
              tissue in tunas and the  mako shark.
