Title       : Numerical Analysis of Qualitative Dynamics in Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9973331

Award Number: 9973331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33411              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Kalies wkalies@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kalies
9973331

The investigator develops numerical methods for determining
              the qualitative dynamical behavior of solutions to ordinary differential
              equations.  For these methods, input requires only a system of differential
              equations, a region of the phase space, and no a priori knowledge of the
              dynamics.  The output is a Morse decomposition of the invariant set into
              regions containing nontrivial dynamics.  Information about the behavior in
              these regions is given in terms of the Conley index, and connecting orbits
              between Morse sets can be detected.  Such an algorithm is beneficial as a first
              step in the study of systems of differential equations for which little
              information is known, particularly in higher dimensions where visualization of
              numerically simulated solutions is difficult.  The type of computation
              envisioned here provides a somewhat coarse, qualitative description of a
              dynamical system.  However, the Conley index, a tool from dynamical systems
              theory, is an algebraic topological index, which also allows for the
              development of algorithms for rigorously proving the existence of specific
              dynamical behavior.  Therefore, a reliable algorithm can be used both as a tool
              for analyzing unfamiliar systems and as a tool for obtaining computer-assisted
              proofs of specific dynamics; both would have a wide variety of applications. 
              The algorithms developed here also have potential applications in computational
              topology, in particular the computation of the homology of cellular complexes,
              and connections to mesh generation and Delaunay triangulations.

Differential
              equations are used to model many phenomena in the physical sciences: mechanical
              systems, chemical reactions, and biological systems.  Understanding the
              dynamics of such inherently nonlinear systems is a problem in global analysis. 
              When the underlying space has dimension higher than three, the study of such
              systems is often beyond the scope of current analytic techniques.  Computers
              are capable of performing many calculations of solutions to such equations, but
              most current numerical methods are not well suited for extracting asymptotic
              dynamical behavior from systems in higher dimensions.  One problem is that
              computers can generate a large quantity of data that is difficult to analyze;
              often a graphical analysis is performed, which is impractical in higher
              dimensions and can miss unstable objects.  The purpose of this project is to
              design and implement algorithms to study the asymptotic dynamics of
              differential equations in higher dimensions.  The output of the algorithm is an
              algebraic index (designed by C.  Conley) that could be thought of as a tool for
              extracting the essential dynamical information (including unstable objects)
              from computational data and that does not require visualization to be
              understood.

