Title       : POWRE: A Pilot Study of the National Asian American Political Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9973435

Award Number: 9973435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pei-te Lien plien@poli-sci.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main activity of this POWRE award is to conduct a feasibility study of
              surveying a rare, diverse, and rapidly growing minority population severely
              underrepresented in the curriculum of American politics and government.  A
              major reason for the absence of data is the difficulty in systematically
              surveying a small, bicoastally-distributed, and ethnically and linguistically
              diverse population.  However, the regionally-concentrated and highly
              metropolitan residential pattern of the population also permits opportunity to
              selectively sample Asian Americans from localities where they are most likely
              to congregate.  Telephone households in the top metropolitan areas of Asian
              populations in the United States will be sampled using a multi-frame approach
              consisting of unrestricted random-digit dialing Asian exchange density,
              random-digit dialing at targeted Asian exchange density, and listed-surname
              frames.  A total of 1,000 adult Asians belonging to the six largest Asian
              ethnic groups and residing in Los Angeles, New York, San Francisco, Honolulu,
              and Chicago will be interviewed by phone, with 200 completed interviews from
              each of the five locations.        

An initiative to gather primary data on
              the political attitudes and behavior of Asian Americans is direly needed to
              bridge the research and data gaps in the studying of American political
              behavior and the state of the U.S. democracy as a multicultural society. 
              Although large-scale, nationally representative public opinion data have been
              collected specifically from the African and Hispanic American population, no
              such data exist for the studying of the political opinion of the nation's third
              largest and fastest growing minority population.  Without such data, it is
              difficult to gauge the shape of the Asian American political community at the
              national level.  Neither is it possible to advance our understanding of the
              sources of uneven incorporation of this minority population into the U.S.
              economic and political systems.  Information gathered from this initiative
              would represent a significant expansion in hypothesis testing concerning race
              and political behavior as well as of research coverage to geographic locations
              and American ethnic groups neglected in the extant literature.  

This
              research is an integral part of the investigator's career plans and goals to
              advance the scholarship, visibility, and influence of Asian
              Americans--particularly Asian immigrant women--in Political Science and Ethnic
              Studies.  Data and experience gained from this pilot study will be evaluated
              and used to secure research partnership and major foundation support for the
              conducting of a larger and more comprehensive multiracial survey to address the
              nation's issues of inequality in social and political participation and
              incorporation.  This ultimately will contribute to the larger goal of promoting
              equal opportunities in social and political participation regardless of race,
              ethnicity, gender, class, and nativity through rigorous social science research
              and cross-disciplinary intellectual exchange.  In these ways, an award from
              POWRE is critical not only to the advancement of the investigator's career at
              this juncture, but to the expansion of knowledge and understanding about Asian
              Americans as a political community and about America as a multicultural
              democracy.

