Title       : POWRE: Social Power and Implicit Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9973493

Award Number: 9973493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96302              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie Goodwin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People who occupy social roles in which they control what happens to others are
              relatively powerful, whereas people occupying social roles in which what
              happens to them is contingent on others' control are relatively powerless. 
              Thus, power roles are often defined by the nature of the control of outcomes
              and contingencies that are ascribed to different partners in a social
              relationship.   Notably, members of certain social groups (e.g., women, ethnic
              minorities) remain underrepresented in the higher echelons of social power. 
              This inequality in the distribution of power among various social groups
              persists despite both increasingly egalitarian attitudes toward these groups
              and increasing numbers of qualified women and ethnic minorities in the
              workforce. Given recent evidence that powerful individuals are motivated
              (perhaps unconsciously) to maintain stereotypes when forming impressions of
              subordinates, it is possible that automatic stereotyping may account, in part,
              for these biased outcomes.  Regardless of explicit egalitarianism, powerholders
              may neither be aware of nor be able to control the influence of automatic
              stereotyping on their perceptions of subordinates.  Consequently, those holding
              power may inadvertently be creating the "glass ceilings" that maintain the
              status quo in power relations between social groups.  This research will employ
              newly- developed experimental methodologies to examine the possible link
              between power and stereotype automaticity.  Participants will engage in
              experimental procedures that preclude their intentional use of stereotyping or
              control over it.  The experiments have three specific aims: (1) to test whether
              situational power automatically activates group stereotypes about subordinates;
              (2) to test whether individual preferences for power roles moderate these
              effects; and (3) to determine how stereotype activation influences
              powerholders' attitudes toward subordinates.   The hypothesis underlying the
              experiments is that power will increase stereotype activation and promote
              preferences for subordinates who fit group stereotypes.  This POWRE award will
              support the investigator in an 18-month Visiting Researcher position at Yale
              University.  During this time, she will engage in a variety of research and
              professional development activities.  In addition to devising a new line of
              research, she will receive training in computer technologies essential to
              implicit cognition methodologies and will prepare a theoretical paper
              integrating the literatures on social power and impression formation with
              literature on implicit cognition.  These activities will serve to strengthen
              her current research program and methodological skills while increasing her
              visibility among scholars within the field. 
