Title       : Server Selection in Emerging Information Delivery Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a9973115

Award Number: 9973115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399569             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mostafa H. Ammar ammar@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen W. Zegura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Timely delivery of information from content servers to clients is now clearly
              one of the primary roles of ubiquitous networking.  As the number of people
              seeking information through networks increases, scalability of information
              delivery services becomes an important issue.  Server replication is one common
              technique used by service providers to accommodate the increasing information
              demands.  Effective server replication, however, demands appropriate server
              selection approaches, without which the full benefits of replication will not
              be realized.  Poor server selection often leads to an array of associated
              system performance implications: degraded performance as perceived by the
              client, possible rejection of the request due to server overload, degraded
              performance observed by other clients accessing the selected server, and poor
              performance observed by other network connections due to hot spots resulting
              from unbalanced load.
The focus of this proposal is on the design and
              evaluation of server selection approaches specifically in the context of
              wide-area server replication.  We propose a research program that provides a
              systematic investigation of the server selection problem starting with the
              current state of services and networks but mostly concerned with future
              networking and service environments.  Continuous evolution and innovation in
              the capabilities of wide-area networking and the nature of information services
              will result in a much more complex server selection problem with a wider
              diversity of performance and policy concerns that affect selection.  The work
              will consider five types of service: traditional Web and FTP services,
              multicast services, multimedia streamed services, multi-source services and
              brokered services.  The researchers consider these as different service
              dimensions that may be present in some combination in deployed services and
              explore the challenges in server selection for each dimension.  The researchers
              will also consider how new network infrastructure capabilities (ranging from
              support for some form of differentiated service to the more far-reaching Active
              Networking proposals) can be used to enhance and support the server selection
              function.
The main contributions of the research will be:
1. Development and
              evaluation of techniques for the use of network support to aid the server
              selection function.
2. Characterization, mechanisms, policies and their
              evaluation for the multicast server selection problem.
3. Techniques for
              streamed video server selection in current and future network environments.
4.
              The use of the Interactive Multimedia Jukebox (IMJ) (http://imj.gatech.edu) and
              the researchers' previously developed multicast web server to provide proof of
              concept for the proposed server selection protocols for multicast and
              multimedia stream servers.                                                     
                                             5. Further characterization and server selection
              proposals for two novel service paradigms (multiple-source and brokered
              services).
6. A reusable experimental platform for experimenting with server
              selection proposals.
The proposed work will go beyond server selection
              mechanisms in today's environment which do not need to be complex; round-robin
              or other simple techniques for allocating clients to servers are currently
              adequate. Such simple and ad-hoc techniques will not, however, work well in the
              richer environment that the trends above will lead to.  The work considers the
              architecture, mechanisms and policies by which server selection may be
              accomplished in this future networked service environment.  The researchers 
              believe that their research will, in fact, play an enabling role, since this
              future's benefits cannot be realized without a workable system for server
              selection.

