Title       : The Exploration of Phylogenetic Tree Space through Combinatorics, Statistics and
               Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9973891

Award Number: 9973891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan P. Holmes susan@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research  proposal I am developing aims to help biologists understand the
              properties of the space of
all phylogenetic trees.  I propose to combine three
              approaches to tackle this problem,
combinatorial, statistical and
              geometrical.

I have already made some good progress through a combinatorial
              approach to the problem that I have started with Persi Diaconis.  We have built
              a bijection between the space of all phylogenetic trees and the space of
              perfect matchings.  This has provided new distances between trees, ways of
              doing random walks on tree space, and a new approach to the $NP$ complete
              optimization procedures involved in building phylogenetic trees.

The
              embedding of tree estimation in a statistical framework allows one to see trees
              as a special type of parameter to be estimated.  The next step needed is the
              ability to construct confidence regions.  My first work on this subject was
              done with Brad Efron and Betz Halloran a few years ago and started me on this
              project.

Currently biologists validate the tree estimated by perturbing the
              data and then summarizing this simply
by associating p-values to the branches
              of the tree.  Communication between statisticians and biologists
has a
              difficult history in this field.  One school of taxonomists has been
              encouraging the use of maximum likelihood for the estimation of the
              tree.

Other taxonomists have been using parsimony as their criterion, and
              have been highly critical of
what they called the `statistical approach'.  In
              fact their own method is statistical also, but the parsimony method is a
              nonparametric approach, whereas the Maximum Likelihood is a parametric one. 
              The MLE model is finite dimensional, however, statisticians know that if one
              allows the number of parameters to increase as this number becomes larger than
              the amount of information contained in the data, the method becomes
              nonparametric.  Making this interpretation known to biologists would be a
              worthwhile enterprise, the consequence would be that nonparametric-parametric
              discussion in statistics could enlighten the parsimony-MLE
              debate.

Understanding the geometry of the tree-space would help understand
              how to  combine trees obtained from perturbed data or different genes  on the
              same set of species.  I hope to continue a collaboration I have started with a
              combinatorialist, Louis Billera and a topologist, Karen Vogtmann on a more
              mathematical understanding of tree space that would allow for a more natural
              definition of distances between points in the `tree polytope'. This topological
              study of tree space is crucial in the definition of a notion of neighborhood
              that would then allow a definition of continuity in the estimation
              function.

The notion of confidence region could then be defined, and it
              would also be possible to combine trees from built from different datasets or
              to combine trees  with other data (biogeographic, for instance).  Finally I
              will diffuse my matlab  tree analysis programs and preliminary results through
              a web site `Geometry of Tree Space'.   This POWRE project is supported by the
              MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA).
