Title       : POWRE: Characterization of the Yeast Cell Wall Protein FLO11
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9973776

Award Number: 9973776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88292              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Dranginis drangina@stjohns.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint John's University
	      8000 Utopia Parkway
	      Jamaica, NY  11439    718/990-6236

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The yeast cell wall is not well understood, but is an increasingly important
              subject of research.   Fungi include important pathogens of plants and animals,
              including man. Fungal cell walls represent good potential targets for
              therapeutic intervention in fungal diseases. In addition, understanding the
              structure and biogenesis of the yeast cell wall is crucial for understanding
              the yeast developmental processes such as mating, cell division, invasion, and
              pseudohyphae formation.  

The long term goal of Dr. Dranginis' work is to
              understand development in yeast at a molecular level. Recently, she discovered
              a gene that is regulated by the mating-type locus (MAT) and which encodes a
              cell wall protein, Flo11p. Flo11p causes cell adhesion of the type known as
              flocculation, and is critically required for invasion and filament formation in
              yeast. FLO11 is regulated by a MAP kinase signal transduction pathway which
              regulates both pheromone response and the invasion/filamentation response. The
              transcription factors Ste12p and Tec1p are downstream effectors of this pathway
              for the invasion response.  Remarkably, FLO11 is the only gene whose activation
              by Ste12p and Tec1p is required for invasion. FLO11 is the first (and so far,
              only) downstream effector gene of the filamentation response pathway in S.
              cerevisiae. FLO11 is the first specific cell surface requirement for invasion
              and the formation of pseudohyphae, and is therefore an important cell wall
              protein. 

This POWRE award is to support a research leave to facilitate a
              collaboration between Dr. Dranginis and Dr. Peter Lipke of Hunter College.  Dr.
              Lipke is a renowned expert in the area of the fungal cell wall.  This
              collaboration will provide an opportunity for Dr. Dranginis to expand her
              studies of Flo11p while developing mastery of an area that is new to her, i.e.,
              the yeast cell wall, as well as access to the rich facilities of Hunter
              College, particularly the BioImaging Facility with its confocal microscope. 
              These are facilities that are not available at Dr. Dranginis' home institution,
              St. John's University. A collaborative project is proposed with the following
              specific aims:  
1. To construct improved Green Fluorescent Protein
              (GFP)-FLO11 gene fusions suitable for use
with confocal microscopy to study
              the subcellular localization of Flo11p in yeast.
2. To use confocal microscopy
              to study haploid cells containing the GFP-FLO11 fusions during
vegetative
              growth, mating, and invasive growth and pseudohyphal growth. In order to study
              the
distribution of Flo11p in mating cells and in the zygote and the
              subsequently dividing diploid
cell, haploid cells containing the fusion
              proteins will be mated with unlabelled cells. The distribution of the label
              will be followed as the newly formed diploid begins to divide, providing
              information about the mobility of proteins in the cell wall and the
              rearrangement of the cell wall after mating, as well as to the question of
              turnover of haploid-specific proteins in the diploid cell wall. To study the
              localization of Flo11p during invasive growth of haploid cells, cells will be
              grown on cover slips and examined by confocal microscopy. The subcellular
              distribution of Flo11p, which is absolutely required for invasion, will help
              illuminate the mechanism of invasion.
3. To use confocal microscopy to study
              diploid cells containing the GFP-FLO11 fusions during
vegetative growth,
              pseudohyphal growth and sporulation. It is proposed that Flo11 functions
              to
cause adhesion of the cells in the pseudohyphal chains. The hypothesis that
              Flo11p is
concentrated at the mother-bud junction in pseudohyphal filaments
              will be tested by examining
diploid cells containing the GFP-FLO11 fusions
              growing as pseudohyphae on coverslips. To
study modulation of FLO11 expression
              during sporulation, diploid cells containing the GFP-FLO11
fusions will be
              cultured in sporulation media and examined at intervals.

