Title       : Early Holocene Prehistory in the Intermontane West: Reinvestigation of the Pine
               Spring Site, Southwest Wyoming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1999  
File        : a9973272

Award Number: 9973272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31282              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Kelly rlkelly@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Robert Kelly will conduct one field
              season of archaeological research at the site of Pine Spring located on the
              North face of Black Mountain in southwestern Wyoming. The site was originally
              excavated in 1964 by Floyd Sharrock from the University of Utah and it provides
              much of the earliest evidence for human use of this intermountain region.
              Although it is relatively shallow, based on Sharrock's data Pine Spring
              contains a long sequence from at least 10,000 year before the present to recent
              times. Thus it has the potential to shed light on human adaptation to the
              changing environmental conditions which characterize the period following the
              last ice age. Sharrock's notes indicate that the site appears to have three
              separate cultural horizons, the earliest of which may coincide with the
              Altithermal, a warm interval which had its greatest impact in Western North
              America from ca. 9,000 to 6,000 years ago. The problem however is that the
              evidence for the tripartite division is not definitive and before significant
              effort is expended on analysis of the Altithermal materials it is important to
              verify their integrity. Dr. Kelly and colleagues have conducted preliminary
              research at the site and working with a field school they will excavate in
              selected areas to obtain the necessary stratigraphic data. They will plot the
              location of individual artifacts to determine three dimensional distribution in
              space and collect large numbers of samples for radiocarbon dating.

The long
              term goal of the research is to test models derived from optimum foraging
              theory to determine how technologically simple prehistoric societies adapted
              through dietary and social means to a semi-desertic environment which
              fluctuated unpredictably over different time scales and at differing orders of
              magnitude. The Western United States provides an excellent venue for such
              research both because of its ca. 12,000 year archaeological record and its
              spatial variation ranging from the Great Plains through mountain and
              intermountain regions. Dr. Kelly's research will provide essential information
              for one important area and time period. Because the work will be conducted in
              the context of a summer field school, the educational impact will be
              significant.

