Title       : Collaborative Proposal: Protocols for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9973147

Award Number: 9973147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157772             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samir R. Das   (Principal Investigator current)
              Asis Nasipuri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mobile ad hoc networks are multi-hop wireless networks, with dynamically
              changing network topology.  In this project,the researcherse will investigate
              several protocol design issues corresponding to routing, medium-access control,
              and transport layers in mobile ad hoc networks.  The focus is on performance
              issues related to individual layers as well as inter-layer interactions. 
              Routing is recognized to be the central challenge in mobile ad hoc networks. 
              Many routing protocols use on-demand network-wide flooding to locate the
              destination. The researchers propose to evaluate two techniques to localize
              flooding to only a limited region | one based on location information, and the
              other based on locality heuristics.  The proposed approaches are expected to
              reduce routing overhead as well as end-to-end packet delivery delays.  This
              project will also investigate medium-access control (MAC) designs that aid
              efficient routing. In particular, the researchers propose to evaluate
              multi-channel CSMA schemes that minimize multiple access interference at high
              load.  These schemes are expected to reduce the detrimental effects of a
              broadcast flood.  Finally, this project will also consider the impact of MAC
              and routing protocols on transport protocol (particularly, TCP). The
              researchers will investigate how TCP's flow and congestion control mechanism is
              affected by mobility and medium access contention, and develop techniques to
              improve TCP performance on mobile ad hoc networks.
