Title       : Advanced Computational Stochastic Dynamic Programming for Continuous Time
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9973231

Award Number: 9973231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Floyd B. Hanson hanson@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,9216,9263,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The investigator and associates develop large scale
computational procedures
              for optimal stochastic control problems.
Massively parallel processor and
              parallel algorithm advances are
essential for managing massive computational
              and memory demands,
with particular emphasis on large scale applications in
              ground
water pollution remediation and manufacturing systems.
Implementation
              of advanced computational techniques, such as
parallelization, graphical
              visualization, and efficient data
structures make possible the solution of
              larger dimensional
problems.  The emphasis here is on formally justified and
              useful
computational methods rather than limited highly rigorous
results. 
              The objective is to develop fast algorithms coupled
with massively parallel
              processing for the optimal feedback
control of general continuous-time
              nonlinear stochastic dynamical
systems.  These stochastic systems include both
              Gaussian and
distributed Poisson white noise, thus hybrid stochastic
              models.
Advanced computational treatment of these systems, especially
with
              Poisson noise for modeling disastrous events, is a
particularly unique feature
              of this research.  The computational
methods are tested on ground water
              pollution models and
multistage manufacturing systems, but are applicable to a
              wide
variety of applications, yielding a higher level of robustness
for the
              computational methods.  The numerical approach directly
treats the partial
              differential equation of stochastic dynamic
programming.  New algorithms,
              including finite element and random
simulations, are developed to alleviate
              both memory and
computationally intensive demands from the "curse
              of
dimensionality."
     The investigator and associates develop
              optimal
computational solutions to ground water pollution and
manufacturing
              problems perturbed by uncertainty.  Ground water
and manufacturing problems
              are examples of grand and national
challenge problems, respectively.  In the
              case of ground water
the cause of uncertainty is the unexpected introduction
              of
pollution and varying environmental parameters, while in the case
of the
              manufacturing systems it is the failure and repair of
machines with
              fluctuating manufacturing parameters.  The reason
for seeking optimal
              solutions is to minimize costs.  Large scale
computations are necessary due to
              the complexity of the governing
physical equations and essential numerical
              approximations.  Since
the cleanup of polluted ground water sites can cost
              billions
where feasible, optimal solutions could save millions
              over
nonoptimal methods.  Similar savings can be obtained for
just-in-time
              manufacturing systems that are managed to minimize
costs, enhancing our
              globally competitive capabilities.  Advanced
computing techniques are
              developed to get optimal solutions using
high performance computation with
              massively parallel computers.
Graphical visualization is important to make the
              immense output
usable to the environmental resource or manufacturing
              plant
manager who would be the prime user.
