Title       : POWRE: Effects of CPG15 on Cells and Synapses in Mouse Barrel Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9973892

Award Number: 9973892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elly Nedivi nedivi@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plasticity, the property of the brain that allows it to constantly adapt to
              change, is a prominent feature of brain development as well as learning and
              memory in the adult.  Learning and memory is only a specific case of the
              brain's ability to modify connections in response to altered input. 
              Connections between neurons (synapses) that are used often become stronger,
              while those that are unstimulated gradually dwindle away.  How does activity
              modify a synapse to make it "strong"? Neuronal activity induces expression of
              specific plasticity genes whose protein products then bring about molecular
              changes in the neurons, strengthening their response to a given stimulus.  One
              approach to understanding the cellular mechanisms of activity dependent
              synaptic plasticity is to identify and characterize participating genes and
              their proteins' functions.

This POWRE proposal addresses the functional
              characterization of one plasticity gene that was previously isolated by Dr.
              Nedivi: cpg15.  Virally mediated gene transfer will be used to overexpress
              cpg15 in the cerebral cortex, and the effect on synaptic strength will be
              assayed several days later by electrophysiological recording.  Manipulating
              gene expression in vivo and examining the ensuing changes that occur in a
              functional cortical circuit can help elucidate how a specific gene, like cpg15,
              may participate in the synaptic events that lead to cortical plasticity.  The
              experiments in this POWRE project will add an electrophysiological dimension to
              Dr. Nedivi's study of synaptic plasticity, which until now only included
              molecular biology and imaging technologies.  Such a cross-disciplinary approach
              is absolutely necessary for integrating information obtained by different
              disciplines of neurobiology into a unified view of the molecular mechanisms
              underlying brain plasticity.

   

