Title       : Homoclinic and Heteroclinic Bifurcations, Shock Waves, and Singular
               Perturbations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1999      
File        : a9973105

Award Number: 9973105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Schecter schecter@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiao-Biao Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973105
Schecter

The investigators propose to continue their research on
              singular 
perturbations, systems of conservation laws and related systems not
              in 
conservation form, and homoclinic and heteroclinic bifurcation
              
phenomena.  These areas are related: sharp fronts in singular perturbation
              
problems, and shock waves in systems of conservation laws and related
              
systems not in conservation form, can be viewed as traveling waves, 
which
              correspond to heteroclinic (or sometimes homoclinic) solutions of 
an
              associated equation.  The proposed research falls into four areas: (1)
              
systems of conservation laws (failure of strict hyperbolicity, geometric
              
singular perturbation theory and the Dafermos regularization); (2) shock
              
solutions of initial-value problems for systems not in conservation form;
              
(3) chaos in a perturbed Rayleigh-Benard convection model that models 
the
              dynamo mechanism responsible for the earth's magnetic field; (4) other
              
applied problems involving singular perturbation or homoclinic 
bifurcation
              (forced Chua's circuit, multiple-stage cancer models, plasma 
and sheath
              models).

Sharp wave fronts occur in many areas of science.  At the first
              level of 
approximation, they are simple traveling waves that keep their shape
              and 
move at a constant speed.  Mathematically, traveling waves correspond to
              
"heteroclinic solutions of ordinary differential equations."  These can be
              
thought of as moving particles that start near an unstable equilibrium and
              
move toward another unstable equilibrium.  Cycles of such solutions often
              
give rise to chaos.  The investigators propose to continue their research in
              
these related areas.  For example, they will study certain unusual shock
              
waves that arise in model equations for oil recovery.  They will study
              
shock waves for systems "not in conservation form," which arise in fluid
              
mechanics and elasticity problems when the original systems are 
simplified
              to make them more tractable.  They will study chaos in a model 
for the
              earth's magnetic field, which is believed to be related to irregular
              
reversals of the magnetic field that have occurred in the past. They will try
              
to improve the "plasma-sheath" models used to model various industrial
              
situations, such as fluorescent light fixtures; the solutions include a sharp
              
front.

