Title       : Construction of Accurate, Robust and Efficient Numerical Techniques for Partial
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9973328

Award Number: 9973328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289842             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Bramble   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph E. Pasciak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raytcho D. Lazarov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973328

The main objectives of this research are the construction and study
              of finite element approximations to steady-state and transient problems of
              mechanics and engineering, including convection-diffusion-reaction problems,
              Stokes and Navier-Stokes equations, equations of linear elasticity, and the
              construction, analysis, and testing of fast methods for solving the resulting
              discrete systems.  The emphasis will be on the development of new accurate,
              robust and efficient computational techniques.  Approximation strategies
              involving standard Galerkin finite element methods,  least-squares methods, and
              mixed finite element methods will be  studied especially from the standpoint of
              their accuracy, stability, and efficient implementation.  The solution
              techniques which will be developed will emphasize preconditioning via domain
              decomposition or multigrid/multilevel methods.  Local grid refinement  and
              error control coupled with multilevel solution methods will be used in ground
              water and petroleum applications.

Technological development is becoming
              increasingly dependent on large scale scientific computation.  Such
              computations are often limited by accuracy of the numerical method and the
              amount of computational effort required for its solution.  The research funded
              by this proposal will provide better numerical methods and new techniques for
              the efficient solution of the resulting system of linear and non-linear
              equations.  Such advances will improve our ability to accurately model more
              complex processes (devices) as well as our ability to understand complex
              systems such as the behavior of a contaminant in a multi-component groundwater
              system.

