Title       : Applied Nonadaptive Group Testing and Superimposed Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9973252

Award Number: 9973252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jong-Shi Pang                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52720              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Macula macula@geneseo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Geneseo
	      
	      Geneseo, NY  14454    716/245-5211

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9973252

Abstract: Given a finite ground set of elements which can be
              uniquely characterized as positive or negative, the object of group testing is
              to optimize the identification of the positive objects by performing 0, 1 tests
              on  subsets or pools of the ground set.  Group testing algorithms are search
              algorithms.  If one thinks of a search algorithm as a battery of tests, then no
              test in a nonadaptive group testing algorithm can be modified by the results of
              any other test.  Thus the order in which the tests are performed is irrelevant.
               Depending upon the real world problem that is being modeled, it is often the
              case that the tests can be carried out simultaneously.  Hence, nonadaptive
              search algorithms are well suited for parallel processing and computing when
              memory or data storage capability is limited.  Every parallel algorithm is
              nonadaptive.  In this project, we propose to use and develop combinatorial and
              algebraic codes to construct nonadaptive group testing algorithms from the
              matrix representations of these codes.  A specific aim of this proposal is to
              develop more efficient high throughput group testing algorithms that find a
              large number of positives when testing error rates can range up to 10%.

From
              an applied point of view, the ability to effectively and efficiently search for
              unknown objects is essential to many endeavors in the areas of biotechnology,
              telecommunications, and national security.  The unknown
objects may be the
              locations of particular DNA sequences or a group of computer hackers.  Because
              of their computational power, group testing algorithms play a pivotal role in
              the Human Genome Project and they are essential in the screening many different
              kinds of biological and chemical data bases.  Group testing algorithms have
              also been applied to computer network protocols and can be used in the
              development of computer intrusion detection software. 


