Title       : POWRE: Thin Film Magnets Via Reactive RF Co-Sputtering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9973727

Award Number: 9973727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bethanie J. Stadler stadler@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project explores the intrinsic and extrinsic magnetic properties of
              permanent Sm/Nd:Fe/Co:N magnet films made via reactive rf co-sputtering for
              fine control of alloy composition. Reactive sputtering also allows precise
              in-situ insertion of nitrogen interstitials to enhance magnetic properties,
              such as elevated Curie temperatures, while reducing the number of processing
              steps. The effect of microstructural features, such as grain size and secondary
              phases, on the magnetic properties will be investigated. These features will be
              controlled through processing parameters, such as forward power, sputtering
              pressure, and substrate temperature, as well as through substitutional alloying
              additions such as Mo, Ti, V, Zr, Cu and C. An important aspect of the project
              is the clarification of phase diagrams and resulting microstructure-property
              relationships of sputtered compounds, which may vary substantially from
              equilibrium values.
%%%
This is a research enhancement grant made under the
              Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and Education (POWRE) program.
              This research has relevance to magnetic recording media, microelectromechanical
              systems, microsensors, micromotors and integrated isolators and circulators in
              photonic integrated circuits as well as monolithic microwave integrated
              circuits. The project also aims to enhance undergraduate, graduate, and
              underrepresented student research and to develop undergraduate and graduate
              courses in the area of thin film processing and optoelectronics. This project
              will also enhance the PI's current activities in K-12 outreach. The project is
              co-supported by the Division of Materials Research, and the MPS OMA(Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities). 
***

