Title       : Dynamics and Viscoelasticity of Semi-Flexible and Liquid-Crystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9973976

Award Number: 9973976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Morse morse@cems.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9973976
Morse
This is a new grant that will support theoretical studies of the
              molecular kinetics and rheological properties of solutions and melts of
              semiflexible polymers, in both isotropic and liquid-crystalline phases. 
              Current theoretical understanding of polymer dynamics is based to a large
              extent upon a few classic models that assume the polymers act either as
              completely flexible coils or as rigid rods.  A large class of semiflexible
              polymers exists, however, with a degree of rigidity intermediate between these
              two extremes, and whose dynamical behavior is not well understood.   In
              particular, this work has potential application to a variety of biopolymers,
              improving our understanding of the effects of the biopolymer structure and
              elasticity on biological function.  This proposed research is intended to
              provide a unified understanding of the dynamical behavior of solutions of
              worm-like chains over a wide range of physical parameters, which should serve
              as a theoretical basis for the analysis of future experiments.  Theoretical
              studies and Brownian simulations of dilute solutions of worm-like chains will
              examine the dependence of the linear viscoelastic shear modulus and other
              dynamic response functions upon frequency and chain length.  Large-scale
              Langevin dynamics simulations will be used to quantify the effects of
              interchain interactions and entanglement in non-dilute solutions of worm-like
              chains, and to identify the limits of various parameter regimes and
              corresponding theoretical approaches.

This is a new grant that will support
              theoretical modeling of the dynamics and viscoelastic properties of
              semiflexible polymers in both isotropic and liquid-crystal phases.  Current
              theoretical understanding of polymer dynamics is based to a large extent upon a
              few classic models that assume the polymers act either as completely flexible
              coils or as rigid rods.  A large class of semiflexible polymers exists,
              however, with a degree of rigidity intermediate between these two extremes, and
              whose dynamical behavior is not well understood.   In particular, this work has
              potential application to a variety of biopolymers, improving our understanding
              of the effects of the biopolymer structure and elasticity on biological
              function.  This proposed research is intended to provide a unified
              understanding of the dynamical behavior of solutions of worm-like chains over a
              wide range of physical parameters, which should serve as a theoretical basis
              for the analysis of future experiments.  


