Title       : POWRE: In Mixed Company: Psychological Responses to Mediated Representations of
               Oppositional Political Views
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9973236

Award Number: 9973236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93358              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana C. Mutz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ctr Adv Stdy in Behav Sci
	      202 Junipero Serra Boulevard
	      Stanford, CA  943058006    415/321-2052

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project centers on a single research question: How do people respond to
              mediated representations of political views that are dissimilar to their own? 
              More specifically, when, and under what conditions, if any, does exposure to
              representations of dissimilar political views on television produce the same
              kinds of consequences widely attributed to face-to-face exposure to dissimilar
              political views?  Exposure to crosscutting political perspectives has been
              argued to bring about at least three beneficial consequences for individuals
              who are so exposed in face-to-face contexts.  These include greater awareness
              of rationales for views one personally opposes, greater perceived legitimacy of
              a policy with which one disagrees, and a deeper understanding of the rationales
              for one's own views.  Drawing on the social psychological literature and
              research on human-media interactions, the investigator utilizes an experimental
              design to evaluate responses to televised representations of oppositional
              political views presented in a laboratory setting.  Three experimental factors
              will be manipulated in order to explore major differences in how conflict is
              handled in media as opposed to face-to-face encounters. 

Exposure to
              crosscutting political views is essential to large-scale pluralist democracies
              such as the United States. Yet previous research has demonstrated that in the
              contemporary United States people are exposed to relatively little face-to-face
              political disagreement. The one glaring exception to the tendency toward
              exposure to homogeneous political views comes from mass media.  Relative to
              their interpersonal contacts, people are exposed to an impressively large dose
              of dissimilar political views through mediated sources. Television and
              newspapers in particular expose people to far more dissimilar political views
              than do their interpersonal acquaintances.  What are the consequences of the
              fact that in the contemporary United States non-likeminded views reach people
              primarily through media?  The answer to this question has particularly
              important implications in light of the increased consumer control over media
              content that new media technologies makes possible, and the rising level of
              public discomfort with exposure to conflicting views, despite the integral role
              that exposure to oppositional views plays in a democratic system.  Political
              differences of opinion are often seen as unnecessary conflicts rather than as
              essential to resolving legitimate debates in a pluralist system. 

 This
              project meets multiple criteria for eligibility in the POWRE program.  First,
              being at the Center for Advanced Study for a year without administrative or
              teaching responsibilities will inevitably be a boon to the investigator's
              publication record and career.  Second, the close proximity of the Center to a
              specially designed laboratory makes this an excellent opportunity to answer the
              obvious next question in the research agenda in progress.  In order to do so,
              the investigator will need to venture into what is new methodological territory
              for her, using laboratory experiments involving physiological measurement. 
              Thus this proposal also fits well within a third POWRE guideline since it
              involves access to and utilization of special facilities and methodologies.
              Finally, the investigator also have served as Associate Chair of her department
              for the last three years, during which time she also assumed significant new
              family responsibilities (i.e., two children). The timing of this grant is such
              that it will give her a tremendous boost in terms of time and resources for
              research right after she finishes her three-year term as Associate Chair. 


