Title       : POWRE: Financial Incentives in Health: Understanding the Ethical Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a9973600

Award Number: 9973600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. Byrne mbyrne@bcm.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      One Baylor Plaza
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/798-6970

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This POWRE awardee's career goals as an economist in health services research
              are to develop and disseminate potential policy solutions for known problem
              areas in health care provision.  The objective for the award is for the
              investigator to gain a solid grounding in those ethical principles that are
              most related and relevant to the topics that she is currently and plans to
              continue studying, particularly the use of financial incentives in health care.
               An internationally respected medical ethicist, Dr. Baruch Brody, will take a
              lead role in structuring and advising the investigator's study in ethics.  The
              planned activities include directed readings and extensive discussion of these
              readings. Readings in general biomedical and economics-related ethics will be
              followed by concentration on four issues related to the use of financial
              incentives: problems of binding commitments, coercion, exploitation and
              commodification.  In addition, relevant conferences in biomedical ethics will
              be attended.

Currently, significant resources are spent in health care
              research to document the shortcomings and inequities of the health care system.
              To have a positive effect however, health services research must to move beyond
              standard research, where many products are only of interest to academic
              journals, to research into health policies that are feasible for implementation
              and will be successful in improving health care provision. Thus, a crucial
              research step is to develop and analyze solutions to health care problems.  The
              development of feasible and acceptable policy proposals often requires
              incorporating ideas from a number of disciplines.  The POWRE funding will
              provide the means for the investigator to acquire a firm grounding in ethics. 
              This in turn will enable her to do research in the development and analysis of
              potential solutions to health care problems that are both economically
              efficient and ethically sound. Recommendation and implementation of such
              policies have potential for significantly improving provision and financing of
              health care.  The study period will culminate in a comprehensive ethics paper
              that undertakes a rigorous ethical analysis of the use of financial incentives
              in health care policies. This paper will serve as a reference for future work,
              both by the applicant and other researchers, on the ethics of financial
              incentives.

The goals of the POWRE program coincide perfectly with the aims
              and potential impact of this proposal.  Funding will provide a critical, timely
              movement toward the investigator's personal career goals. Personal career goals
              of policy development and implementation require that the applicant acquire a
              firm grounding in ethical literature and analysis, both to analyze the ethical
              implications of economic-based policies, and also to inform development of
              policies. In addition, success in promoting health care policies that are sound
              on a cross-disciplinary basis will create visibility in a multidisciplinary
              forum for the investigator in particular, and women in health policy making in
              general.

