Title       : Laminations: geometry, harmonic analysis and ergodic theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9973086

Award Number: 9973086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67644              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto Candel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Proposal: DMS-9973086

PI: Alberto Candel

Abstract: This project proposes
              to study several problems in the area of
laminations/foliations. One of these
              problems is concerned with the
geometric structure of the leaves of a
              lamination. Some natural
questions that the proposer intends to study are:
              what do the leaves
of a lamination look like? how many different leaves
(e.g.
              quasi-isometry classes) are there? what geometric invariants can
be (and
              cannot be) used to distinguish them? Still concerned with the
geometry of the
              leaves, there are questions about two dimensional
laminations and metric 
              uniformization of their leaves. Especially
interesting are those which have a
              Euclidean conformal structure,
which are often encountered in problems of low
              dimensional topology
and geometric group theory. Other part of this project
              falls in the
area of rigidity of virtual subgroups of  semisimple groups
              and
harmonic analysis on them. Research in this area has been concerned
with
              virtual subgroups which have an invariant measure. The proposer
seeks to
              develop the study of harmonic measures, which are non
invariant in a
              reasonable way, and how they fit in the existing body
of work on rigidity.
              Other part of the project concerns the study that
certain geometric properties
              of the leaves of a foliation have on its
transverse or dynamical structure and
              on the topological structure of
the ambient manifold.


The research of the
              proposer is in the general area of qualitative
structure and behavior of
              dynamical systems. Dynamical systems are
used to model processes in many
              areas, for example the evolution of
living organisms and their morphology, the
              weather or other physical
or chemical processes. Other systems of interest
              come from processes
which evolve from a finite amount of data according to
              some set of
rules, either specified before hand or of a random nature. This
              could
be neural networks in the brain, systems of digital processors in
              a
computer, branching processes (as in nuclear fission, evolution and
growth
              of cells, etcetera). Even when appearing under different
circumstances, their
              dynamic behavior and structure follows similar
laws dictated by the individual
              elements and the nature of their
interaction. The purpose of the researcher is
              to study and classify,
from a geometric/qualitative viewpoint, invariants of
              these systems
relating to their long time asymptotic behavior, their
              dependence on
the initial data, the generic properties of the possible states,
              and
their global structure, all which can be used to understand
              the
mechanisms underlying such processes.

