Title       : POWRE: Antimicrobial Peptides from the Sea Lamprey (Petromyzon marinus), a
               Primitive Vertebrate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a9973585

Award Number: 9973585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann E. Shinnar ashinnar@barnard.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9973585
Shinnar
Antimicrobial peptides have been found in a variety of
              invertebrates and vertebrates, where they are thought to serve in the first
              line of defense against invading microbes. The overall goal of this research is
              to characterize the primary structure of antimicrobial peptides produced by the
              intestinal tissues of the sea lamprey, Petromyzon marinus. This
              phylogenetically and immunologically primitive fish shows distinct
              developmental stages and ingests a variety of microbes while feeding. The sea
              lamprey thus offers an unique opportunity to elucidate the structure of
              antimicrobial peptides from the host defense system of a primitive vertebrate
              and to examine their role during lamprey development and metamorphosis.
              Peptides exhibiting antimicrobial activity will be isolated from sealamprey
              intestines at distinct stages in development and purified via a multiple step
              purification scheme.  Both Edman sequencing and mass spectrometry  will be used
              to determine the amino acid sequence and any post-translational modifications. 
              Finally, peptides will be synthesized in milligram quantities by solid phase
              peptide synthesis both to confirm their chemical structure and to assay
              quantitatively their activity against standard bacteria and fungi. This POWRE
              award allows the PI to do peptide sequencing and peptide synthesis analyses not
              available at Barnard College and to rebound after disruptive construction in
              the science building during the second through fourth years of the tenure
              track.

Characterization of peptide antibiotics from diverse animal sources
              is important in order to understand their role in host defense and  innate
              immunity.  Classified among the oldest living vertebrates, sea
              lampreys
provide an animal system for examining the defense role of
              antimicrobial peptides at different developmental stages and in terms of
              molecular evolution of primitive vertebrates. 



