Title       : Prefix Caching of Continuous Media Streams in the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1999 
File        : a9973092

Award Number: 9973092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40295              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Towsley towsley@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The dramatic growth in the popularity of the Internet, coupled with the increase
              in user access
speeds, has led to an increased demand for streaming media
              services in IP networks.  However, the
heterogeneous and decentralized nature
              of the Internet, and the lack of end-to-end mechanisms for
quality-of-service
              guarantees, significantly hampers the effort to provide quality delivery and
              low
delay to all clients.  The success of multimedia streaming applications
              hinges on developing new
techniques for providing both low start-up delay and
              high audio/video quality, without requiring
control over the entire path from
              the multimedia source/server to the end users.  We propose an
approach based
              on active proxy services and prefix caching that has the potential of
              satisfying these
requirements.  Proxy prefix caching is a mechanism whereby
              the first several seconds of a continuous
media (CM) object are stored at a
              proxy server close to a client.  The prefix cache allows the proxy
to hide
              latencies introduced by either long end-to-end delays, the need to mask
              unreliable network
services, the need to process the stream arriving from the
              source, or the need to deal with scarce
resources between the proxy and
              clients.
                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                        In this proposal the researchers outline research
              investigating several aspects of this mechanism which in-
clude:

-Design
              and evaluation of preix caching mechanisms,

-Integration of prefix caching
              with bandwidth smoothing,

-Development of effective resource allocation
              schemes at the proxy, and

-Characterization of video sources and Internet
              traffic to feed into the these investigations.
                               
                                                                                             
                                                                            The joint
              participation of AT&T Research and the University of Massachusetts provides a
              unique
synergy that would not otherwise be possible.  AT&T provides access to
              resources in the form of
WorldNet traffic data, which supplies a snapshot of
              current CM workloads in the Internet, and
access to video testbed/prototyping
              platforms that are not readily available in academia.  On the
other hand,
              UMass provides a much more long-term perspective than is possible at an
              industrial
lab, as well as expertise in the area of active services, bandwidth
              smoothing, and reliable transport
protocols.
