Title       : Fast Integral Methods for Adaptive Incompressible Flow Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1999    
File        : a9973290

Award Number: 9973290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Minion minion@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is dedicated to the development and implementation of
              integral equation methods for linear equations based on the Fast Multipole
              Method (FMM) for use with adaptive finite difference methods for incompressible
              flow.  The scientific objective of this course of research is to produce new
              methods for the study of phenomena in incompressible flow systems which are not
              easily approached with existing methods.  For incompressible flow systems, the
              divergence constraint requires the solution of global elliptic equations which
              greatly increases the complexity and computational cost of simulation. Many
              fluid systems also contain a large range of relevant length scales which
              necessitates the use of spatially and temporally adaptive methods.  When
              applicable, integral equation methods offer the possibility of efficient,
              adaptive, high-order methods which are readily applicable to complex
              computational geometries and are also highly parallel.  Three distinct
              applications of FMM will be developed and coupled with adaptive fluid
              solvers:
solution of the Poisson equation, solution of the surface
              Laplacian,
and the fast summation of impulse potentials, each in the context
              of a
specific physical problem.  The numerical study of
              Boussinesq
convection, in which strong localized fronts develop, requires that
              a
standard Poisson equation be solved.  Simulating front formation of
the
              quasigeostrophic thermal scalar and internal waves in two fluid
systems
              requires that a psuedo-differential operator equivalent to a
surface Laplacian
              be inverted.  A new approach to modeling thin
flexible membranes in
              incompressible flows requires that membrane
forces be evaluated at all grid
              points as well as a Poisson equation
be solved to enforce incompressibility. 
              For all of these physical
problems, adaptive methods offer the opportunity to
              study problems
which are unapproachable with uniform mesh methods.

The
              range of important fluid flow applications which the proposed
research could
              impact is quite diverse.  Examples include modeling the
ocean or climate,
              predicting oil recovery or contaminant flows in the
ground, simulating
              combustion or nuclear reactions, and modeling the
flow of blood in organs like
              the heart or kidneys.  For these types of
applications, the solution of linear
              equations represents the most
computationally intensive part of the overall
              computer model.  The use
of integral equation methods to solve the linear
              equations within
these models represents a distinct change from the majority
              of current
computer simulations.  Any increase in the efficiency in which
              these
equations can be solved translates directly into the ability
              for
scientists to run larger and more accurate models.  The 
mathematical and
              computational techniques necessary to make integral
equation methods an
              attractive alternative to more standard approaches
has only been fully
              developed in the last 10 years.  Because of the
complexity and newness of
              these methods, little work has been done to
exploit their power in
              applications involving fluid flow.  The
applications that will be pursued as
              test cases for the new methods
represent problems for which current numerical
              techniques are
inadequate for answering fundamental questions of interest
              to
scientists.  The algorithms developed will also serve as a stepping
stone
              for future methods applicable to more complicated problems.
