Title       : POWRE: The Phonetic Structure of Navajo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9973765

Award Number: 9973765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59837              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce M. McDonough jmmcd@ling.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The grammar and word structure (morphology) of the Navajo language is by far the
              most completely documented of any language indigenous to the Americas and
              indeed one of the most completely documented in the world.  In addition, Navajo
              is a language type that is unusual in the complexity of its morphology. 
              Notwithstanding the advanced state of knowledge of the grammar and morphology
              of Navajo, there is very little discussion in the scientific literature of the
              phonetics of the language's sound system. While many other languages, like
              English, have benefited from decades of research on their sound and speech
              systems, similar work on Navajo and other indigenous languages is virtually
              nonexistent.  This research will be an instrumental study of the baseline
              phonetic properties of the Navajo language's sound system.  It will consist of
              fieldwork, in which recordings will be collected from native speakers of
              Navajo.  Analysis of these data will result in a monograph on the sound system
              of Navajo. This monograph will provide a description of the consonant and vowel
              sounds and the tonal system of Navajo, as it is spoken on the Navajo
              reservation today.  These data and their analysis should prove useful both in
              classroom education (language instruction) and clinical (speech pathology and
              audiology) settings.  They will also broaden our knowledge of language sound
              systems quite different from English.  This POWRE grant will provide support at
              a critical point in the investigator's career.  By allowing her to complete a
              project begun while a Postdoctoral Fellow at UCLA, it will assist her in
              reestablishing herself in the field of linguistics following a three-year
              hiatus running a medical school laboratory in cranio-facial morphology and
              upper respiratory function. 
