Title       : POWRE: Application of Neural Networks to Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9973398

Award Number: 9973398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68443              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne Bell Suzanne.Bell@mail.ewu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Washington Univ
	      
	      Cheney, WA  990042444    509/458-6200

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Neural networks are a class of mathematical pattern recognition techniques that
              have been used for image processing and spectral classification.  Built on a
              biological model, neural networks are claimed to mimic, in a loose sense, human
              thought processes.  Networks learn by example and are extremely flexible. 
              Because of this adaptability, networks are particularly useful for significant
              classes of large and complex problems, many of which cannot be solved using
              traditional statistical methods.  For this reason, neural networks have the
              potential to solve complicated problems often encountered in archaeology. 
              However, to date there have been no concerted efforts to explore this
              potential.  This research is intended to provide a comprehensive
              proof-of-concept study for the application of neural networks to archaeological
              data analysis.  The research will examine issues such as data preparation,
              network design, and failure analysis, in order to determine how best to
              integrate neural networks into the archaeologists' toolbox of data-analysis
              techniques.  The result should be the establishment of practical guidelines
              that archaeologists can use to determine if neural networks are applicable to
              their situation and, if so, how best to utilize them.  These guidelines will be
              most valuable for use with large and intractable problems that are difficult or
              impossible to solve with existing techniques.  An example of such a complex
              problem is spatial analysis, in which large databases of information describing
              artifacts are used to evaluate and reconstruct the history of a site or group
              of sites.  If successful, the general approach may be useful in spatial
              analysis and reconstruction applications in other fields such as environmental
              analysis.  The research will also evaluate neural networks for their utility in
              archaeometry, broadly defined as the application of physical and analytical
              sciences to archaeology.   One example of an archaeometry question is the use
              of chemical compositions of artifacts to answer such questions as where the
              artifact was made or how old it is.  Although deceptively simple, such
              questions often require the analysis of large amounts of chemical information
              coupled to archaeological data such as where the artifact was found.  The
              application of neural networks in this context may even prove applicable to
              chemical problems beyond archaeology.  This POWRE project, in addition to
              exploring a novel area of research, will provide the PI with new skills in
              neural networks and related areas of statistical analysis as well as increase
              her visibility in archaeology and archaeometry.
