Title       : POWRE: Algebraic Properties of Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9973317

Award Number: 9973317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49786              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily Hamilton emh@mathcs.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will visit the University of Texas for the spring semester of
              2000 to work with Professor Alan Reid.   The goal is to study the structure of
              three dimensional hyperbolic manifolds from an algebraic point of view.  In
              particular,  the investigator will study subgroup separability of Kleinian
              groups, and
arithmetic of hyperbolic 3-manifolds.

The determination of
              whether a subgroup H is separable in a group G has applications in
              group
theory and geometric topology.  In group theory, it is linked to the
              solution of generalized word problems.  In geometric topology, it is the
              traditional group-theoretic tool used to decide if a given immersion in a
              manifold M will lift to an embedding in a finite covering of M.  The
              investigator plans to continue her research on
subgroup separability of
              Kleinian groups.  She will consider whether or not two generator subgroups and
              quasi-Fuchsian subgroups are separable in finite covolume Kleinian groups. 
              These are steps towards the
solution of an important unsolved problem in
              3-manifolds, namely the determination of what subgroups of fundamental groups
              of closed hyperbolic 3-manifolds are separable.
  
Algebraic number theory is
              integral to the study of hyperbolic manifolds.  For example, an arithmetic
              hyperbolic 3-manifold is completely determined, up to commensurability, by its
              defining number field k and quaternion algebra A.  Moreover, the volume of an
              arithmetic hyperbolic 3-manifold is a function of arithmetic invariants
              associated to k and A.  The investigator will begin a research program
in this
              area, after studying with Professor Reid.  In particular, she will study the
              precise relationship
between the geometric structure of a hyperbolic
              3-manifold and arithmetic properties of the associated number field and
              quaternion algebra.  This POWRE project is jointly supported by the MPS Office
              of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical
              Sciences (DMS).
