Title       : Collaborative Research: Large-Scale Optimization: Matrix-free Algorithms, Data
               Parallelism, and Applications in Seismic Inversion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a9973308

Award Number: 9973308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82908              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Gockenbach msgocken@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   In this collaborative interdisciplinary project, the
investigators Mark
              Gockenbach, Anthony Kearsley, and William
Symes develop and implement
              algorithms for large-scale
optimization problems that arise in a variety of
              applications,
focusing on techniques particularly suited to
              parallel
architectures, and apply the methods to the seismic
              velocity
estimation problem.  Large-scale optimization problems often
present
              difficulties to standard algorithms and software.  Many
of these difficulties
              arise in the seismic velocity estimation
problem.  First, the sheer data
              volume makes it impractical to
explicitly form and factor matrices, as
              required by many standard
optimization algorithms.  To address this, a new
              matrix-free
Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP) algorithm is
              developed,
based on recent advances in matrix-free algorithms for
              the
so-called trust region subproblem.  Second, the data structures
and
              interfaces required for seismic data processing are not
easily adapted to
              those required by "off-the-shelf" optimization
software.  The Hilbert Class
              Library (HCL), an object-oriented
optimization package, can solve optimization
              problems involving
data structures and interfaces of arbitrary complexity. 
              The SQP
algorithm, along with the necessary seismic data structures
              and
simulators, is implemented in HCL.  Third, large-scale
simulations often
              require the use of parallel computation.  The
use of parallelism in simulation
              and optimization is addressed
through the development of HCL classes that
              automatically
distribute data over a network of distributed workstations. 
              The
above innovations in optimization methods and software are used
to study
              in detail a new formulation of the seismic inverse
problem.  The investigators
              have recently introduced this
formulation in order to overcome certain
              optimization-theoretic
difficulties inherent in standard formulations.
    
              Optimization problems arise in science and engineering,
where one often wishes
              to find the best design, the best
mathematical model, the best strategy, and
              so forth.  Large-scale
optimization problems, which involve many variables,
              present
special challenges, including the choice of algorithm,
              the
representation of data, and the interface between optimization
software
              and programs written by the application scientist.  This
project addresses
              these challenges in the context of an important
application, seismic
              exploration.  The investigator and his
colleagues develop new optimization
              algorithms to identify
geological features of the subsurface of the earth. 
              Included is
a general method for solving large-scale optimization
              problems;
this algorithm is applicable to other science and
              engineering
problems.  Moreover, they also develop an innovative
              software
package, called the Hilbert Class Library (HCL), that
              allows
optimization algorithms to be used with problems of
              arbitrary
complexity; the software adapts to different data structures
              and
software interfaces.  Finally, they extend HCL to automatically
take
              advantage of parallel computers, making it easier to take
advantage of high
              performance hardware.  The seismic exploration
problem is important to the
              petroleum industry; a precise
knowledge of geological structures is essential
              for efficient
utilization of petroleum reserves.  In addition, the HCL
              software
addresses the important issue of technology transfer as it
pertains
              to numerical algorithms; too often algorithmic advances
are unavailable to
              application scientists because optimization
software and application software
              have incompatible interfaces.
