Title       : Investigating the Link Between Growth and Pattern in the Arabidopsis Embryo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2000       
File        : a9973579

Award Number: 9973579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Kathy Barton mkbarton@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Shoot and root apical meristems develop at opposite poles of the globular plant
              embryo.  Despite much effort to obtain them, mutants altered in basic aspects
              of early development, such as the development of polarity along the shoot/root
              axis, have been elusive in angiosperm plants.  This investigator hypothesizes
              that this is because alterations in embryo polarity also result in growth
              arrest and that the relevant mutants are therefore to be found among the much
              larger class of embryonic lethal/arrest mutants.  Mutants in which shoot fates
              are transformed to root fates (double root embryos) or in which root fates are
              transformed into shoot fates (double shoot embryos) could arrest growth during
              embryogenesis.  Support for this idea is found in the analysis of embryos
              homozygous for the topless-1 (tpl-1) mutation.  The temperature sensitive tpl-1
              mutation causes a high rate of shoot to root transformation at restrictive
              temperature.  Among tpl-1 mutant embryos grown at restrictive temperature is a
              small class of arrested embryos that express root specific markers throughout
              the globular stage embryo (i.e., in both presumptive root and shoot
              poles)

	To test this hypothesis, Dr. Barton proposes to screen embryonic
              lethal/arrest mutants for the altered expression of a shoot pole specific
              marker (an STM reporter gene).  Candidate mutants will then be analyzed with
              additional root and shoot specific markers to determine if they truly result in
              a polarity defect.  In addition to this general screen, the PI will perform a
              more targeted screen for strong, non-temperature sensitive alleles of TPL. 
              This screen is designed to test the hypothesis that a stronger allele of TPL
              will result in a more penetrant shoot to root transformation with a concomitant
              increase in the proportion of arrested embryos.

	The research described in
              this POWRE grant will make it possible for the PI to pursue a line of
              exploratory research that, if successful, should result in the isolation and
              characterization of mutants in the development of embryonic polarity, a
              fundamental event in early plant development.


