Title       : POWRE: Nutritional Consequences of Social Hierarchy: Diet, Status, Gender, and
               Health in the Prehistoric Americas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9973736

Award Number: 9973736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74323              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynette Norr norr@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this POWRE research is the reconstruction of prehistoric
              subsistence and health in the tropical Americas.   Specifically, the research
              will investigate the effects of social hierarchy on diet and subsistence among
              individual members of two prehistoric groups, one at Cerro Juan Diaz in central
              Panama (c. CE 600-700) and the other at two sites in the Valle de Samaca,
              Colombia (c. CE 900-1200).  Both groups were ranked societies and had the
              potential for differential subsistence and health patterns within their
              societies.  Artifacts recovered from archaeological excavations have indicated
              that certain chiefly segments of those societies had exclusive access to rare
              and finely made objects.  Did those chiefs also control access to local
              subsistence resources?  If so, did the ruling elite have greater access to
              specific or nutritionally superior food resources?  The research will
              investigate these and several related questions about subsistence, community
              subgroup, and health.  Did males and females within these societies have
              differential access to food resources?  Did the elderly or children consume a
              diet that was different from that of active, middle-aged members of the
              community?  Did women of childbearing age consume a diet different from that of
              other community members?  How did age, gender roles, specialized social and
              domestic activities, and social-economic status of individual members of the
              community affect their health status?  Stable carbon and nitrogen isotope
              ratios in the human skeletal remains will be used to assess intra-population
              variation in human diet as it related to the age, sex, health status, and
              social rank of individuals in those populations.  Skeletal indicators of
              nutritional stress and infection will be used to assess individual and group
              health status as they related to the quality of the diet.  This project will
              contribute to our understanding of ancient, elite control of subsistence
              resources in the American tropics, as well as to our understanding of how those
              resources were distributed among the general populace.  It is well understood
              that an individual's biological sex, which can be determined from examination
              of skeletal remains, is distinct from gender, which is usually considered a
              social construct most often, but not always, correlated with biological sex. 
              Thus, by examining both cultural and biological aspects of individuals
              identified by age and biological sex, we can better understand the more elusive
              characteristics of past societies and the roles of those individuals in their
              societies.  This POWRE grant, in addition to the specific research involved,
              should advance the PI's prominence as a research scientist, mentor and scholar
              in this area of research. 
