Title       : Self-Explaining Learning Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9973157

Award Number: 9973157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $962027             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Lester lester@adm.csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Fitzgerald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9152,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Self-Explaining Learning Environments


Given the centrality of explanation
              in science, one of the most compelling forms of learning environments revolves
              around explanation. Self-explaining learning environments could constitute a
              new frontier of educational software that combined two complementary
              explanation functionalities.  First, animated explanation generators could
              enable students to pose questions to objects and processes in 3D worlds, which
              in response would dynamically generate clear cinematic and narrative
              explanations of their own structure, function, and causality.  Second,
              explanation construction systems could pose problems to students about the
              phenomena they were actively investigating.  To solve the problems, students
              could employ a graphical explanation construction system to build explanation
              structures, which would then be semantically analyzed.  In these 
              mixed-initiative explanatory dialogues, students' misconceptions would be
              quickly identified and corrected, and gaps in reasoning would  be quickly
              filled.

The proposed research on self-explaining learning environments
              therefore has two major thrusts:
 
1. Develop a full suite of self-explaining
              learning environment technologies.  To promote rich constructivist learning
              processes and outcomes, we will develop 3D animated explanation generation and
              explanation construction technologies for self-explaining learning
              environments.  To do so, we will build on the results of previous work on
              foundational intelligent multimedia technologies: 3D animation planners,
              multimedia explanation generators, discourse planning systems, intelligent
              constructivist learning environments, natural language generation systems, and
              intelligent virtual cinematography systems for 3D learning environments.  All
              design and implementation activities will be carried out in a 3D learning
              environment testbed for high school physics, PHYSVIZ, which is being developed
              in collaboration with a local science magnet school.
 
2. Provide a
              comprehensive account of the cognitive processes and results of interacting
              with self-explaining learning environments by conducting extensive empirical
              studies.  Self-explaining learning environments serve as an ideal arena for
              studying constructivist learning.  To understand the cognitive mechanisms by
              which constructivist learning occurs, we will take multiple measures of both
              the process and the outcome of learning.  These studies will investigate the
              central issues in constructivist learning including the roles of multiple
              representations, guidance, visual realism, and multimodal coordination.  To
              assess conceptual change, special emphasis will be given to both near transfer
              and far transfer dependent measures.
 
The net result of this work will be
              two-fold: (1) a suite of intelligent, state-of-the-art learning environment
              technologies whose communication abilities and, hence, whose educational
              effectiveness, significantly surpass current-generation educational software,
              and (2) a comprehensive theory of explanation-based constructivist learning
              that furnishes a data-rich set of principles for guiding the design of
              future-generation learning environments.
 

