Title       : POWRE: Science, Environmental Policy and the Ethics of Commercial Fishing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9973561

Award Number: 9973561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Bratton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitworth College
	      300 W. Hawthorne Rd.
	      Spokane, WA  99251    509/777-3701

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent declines in oceanic fisheries have occurred despite extensive scientific
              investigation of the impacts of commercial harvest on marine ecosystems.  This
              research utilizes interviews to investigate the impact of scientific research
              on the normative ethics of fishers from declining, stable, and healthy or
              recovering fisheries.  The interview protocol allows fishers to determine their
              own ethical priorities, and to report their concepts of right and wrong action
              by utilizing their own language and rationale.  The POWRE grant will fund
              visits to maritime library collections and to the University of California for
              the purpose of discussing sampling design and ethical and social sciences
              professionals.  The investigator will conduct a field test of new methodologies
              for determining why fishers accept or reject scientific findings and for
              evaluating the influence of increasing legislative and external, professional
              control of fisheries on the communal ethos of the fishers.

This research is
              significant for the future of environmental ethics and of social science
              inquiry into environmental issues.  It has clear relevance to wildlife
              preservation policy.  The results of this project will help to improve
              understanding and communication between academic environmental ethics and
              communities economically dependent on maritime resources, as well as developing
              a more accurate view of how scientific information may influence the ethics of
              fishers.

The project is appropriate to the POWRE program because the
              investigator's career has been interrupted by work-related injuries and by a
              job change from a federal agency to an educational institution.  The POWRE
              grant will accelerate the investigator's transition into research in ethics at
              a critical career phase, and will allow her to develop a new line of
              investigation.

