Title       : POWRE: Intrahousehold Aspects of Risk Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9973451

Award Number: 9973451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl R. Doss cheryl.doss@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will focus on examining the intrahousehold issues surrounding
              household risk management decisions.  A large literature has emerged on
              consumption and income smoothing in developing countries which shows how
              informal finance and insurance systems can be remarkably effective in
              minimizing household consumption variability.  The models assume that the
              decision-making unit is the household and implicitly assume that all
              individuals within the household have the same interest in minimizing household
              income variability and will benefit equally from actions to do so.   However,
              recent literature on intrahousehold resource allocation encourages us to be
              much more attentive to the dynamics within households to understand household
              economic decisions.  This literature provides a number of insights into how
              there may be both conflict and cooperation among household members regarding
              risk management strategies.  

The proposed research focuses on understanding
              why individuals may choose not to pool all of their income risk with other
              household members.  An explicit question is whether partial risk sharing leaves
              some household members particularly vulnerable to negative shocks.  A
              theoretical model will be developed, extending the researcher's previous work,
              which asks how household expenditure patterns respond to income shocks received
              by individuals within the household.  The theoretical framework will be tested
              in the context of pastoralist societies in East Africa.  Understanding the risk
              management strategies of these societies is important for development
              assistance programs.  The pastoralists of East Africa are among the world's
              poorest people, and they inhabit fragile ecosystems that are vital for the
              survival of many wildlife species.  Lessons learned from this research will
              also be applicable to understanding the intrahousehold dimensions of risk
              management in other societies. 

This POWRE grant will support the
              investigator to pursue and extend her research as she moves from a liberal arts
              college to a faculty position at Yale.  At Yale, she will be able to interact
              with economists and with scholars from many disciplines in the International
              Relations and Agrarian Studies programs.  This is an important opportunity for
              her career development, especially since she works in a discipline where women
              continue to be underrepresented. 
	



