Title       : POWRE: Accretion to Rotating Magnetized Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9973366

Award Number: 9973366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marina Romanova romanova@astrosun.tn.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,1215,1592,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Romanova  AST  9973366

A full-time research program at Cornell
              University on the theory, simulations, and analysis of observations of plasma
              accretion to rotating magnetized stars will be carried out. Many accreting
              stars, for example, compact stars and protostars, are rotating and are deduced
              to have significant intrinsic magnetic fields. Key observational aspects of
              these systems, for example, whether the star spins-up or spins-down, are
              determined by the interaction of accreting matter with the magnetosphere of the
              star. This problem of accretion to a rotating magnetized star has been of
              interest to -astronomers for more than a quarter of century, but it still has
              only a qualitative, controversial solution. The difficulty of this problem
              arises from the fact that it is a multidimensional magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
              flow problem. Progress on it requires two or three- dimensional simulations
              which are now feasible on computers.  Research on the problem of 2D and 3D
              modeling of accretion to rotating magnetized stars will be carried out in
              collaboration with faculty members at Cornell University. Two main directions
              of research are planned: The first is to perform a systematic simulation study
              and obtain scaling relations for both disk and Bondi-type spherical accretion
              to rotating magnetized stars for different rotation rates of the star,
              different stellar magnetic moments, and different accretion rates. In this
              study an already developed and tested 2D (axisymmetric) MHD code will be used. 
              The code will be used to determine the inflow or outflow of angular momentum to
              the star.  A second direction of the research will be the creation of a
              parallel version of the 2D code for use on the Cornell Supercomputer, and the
              development of 3D code for investigation of 3D aspects of accretion:
              interchange instability and accretion to an inclined rotator. The results of
              the simulations will be applied to different specific objects: protostars,
              cataclysmic variables, X-ray pulsars, QPOs, and transient X-ray sources. . The
              project involves the international collaboration with two professional
              specialists in numerical MHD from Russia, who will visit Cornell. The results
              of the research are expected to have broad general interest for specialists not
              only in astrophysics, but also in geophysics and planetary sciences. The new
              version of the code will be documented and made available to other interested
              scientists.  

This award is supported by funds from the Division of
              International Programs, the Division of Astronomical Sciences, and the Office
              of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences.


