Title       : POWRE: Physiological Genomics and Signal Transduction in the Ovary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9973644

Award Number: 9973644
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen M. Eyster keyster@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9973644
Eyster
Physiological genomics, the linkage of gene sequence
              information to physiological function, is poised to be the next revolution in
              biological science.  As a physiologist with a research focus on signal
              transduction in the ovary, this investigator would like to not only be a part,
              but a leader in that revolution.  In order to achieve that goal, this
              investigator needs to acquire more training and experience in sophisticated
              molecular techniques.  Thus, the objective of this POWRE proposal is to obtain
              training in molecular biology that will allow this investigator to apply the
              concepts and techniques of physiological genomics to her research in signal
              transduction in the ovary.  The POWRE activities will occur in three phases:
              (1) Attendance at the New England Biolabs Molecular Biology and PCR Summer
              Workshop; (2) Application and strengthening of skills in reverse
              transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, gene mutation, and transfection of
              mammalian cells in the laboratory of Dr. Wendy Maury on site at the University
              of South Dakota; and, (3) Further experience in gene expression and regulation
              in the laboratory of Dr. David Olson at the University of Alberta.  The skills
              that this investigator will learn during the POWRE project will form the
              foundation for a regular research proposal which will be submitted during the
              tenure of the POWRE proposal and which will take a physiological genomics
              approach to the problem of understanding signal transduction in the ovary.  For
              example, one aspect of the regular research proposal will examine the temporal
              relationship of expression of signal transduction circuits in the ovary and
              correlate gene expression with the functional status of the ovaries.  This
              project will advance the principal investigator into a leadership role in the
              field of physiological genomics in the ovary.  It is therefore suitable for the
              POWRE program since the objective of the POWRE program is to increase the
              prominence, visibility, and influence of women in all fields of academic
              science and engineering supported by NSF.

