Title       : Multiscale Signal and Image Processing using Singularity Grammars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9973188

Award Number: 9973188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Baraniuk richb@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Many real-world signals and images are naturally processed in a multiscale
              fashion, just as we move away from an object to view its general appearance and
              zoom in to see its fine details. The multiscale data representation of the
              wavelet transform naturally matches important signal and image singularity
              structures such as edges, ridges, bursts, textures, and other transients. This
              project focuses on characterizing these key structures using wavelets. The
              resulting new signal and image processing algorithms will impact a
diverse
              range of important problems, from the management of computer network traffic in
              the next-generation Internet to seamless handling of complicated data such as
              documents containing both text and images.

Since wavelets form a basis, they
              can reproduce arbitrary functions, from highly structured real-world signals
              and images to completely unstructured noise. In linguistic terms, the wavelet
              vocabulary can
be too expressive. To perform useful modeling of real-world
              signals and images, the vocabulary's scope must be narrowed by imposing a set
              of constraints -- a grammar -- that capture the salient structures
              of
singularities. While much research has concentrated on developing new
              wavelet vocabularies, the most important current challenges to wavelet-based
              processing lie in grammatical modeling. This project
studies a new statistical
              approach to multiscale modeling designed to match singularity-rich data.
              Grammars under consideration include efficient and trainable probabilistic
              graphs (hidden Markov tree models) and multiplicative pyramidal cascades. New
              grammar design is being guided by a detailed study of the fine structure of
              singularities using Besov spaces and multifractal analysis. From these new
              models follow new algorithms for signal and image estimation,
              detection/classification, segmentation, fusion, and synthesis.


