Title       : RUI: Fundamental Studies of Zinc Oxide Deposition by Reactive Magnetron
               Sputtering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9973934

Award Number: 9973934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222566             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Doyle doyle@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses zinc oxide (ZnO) thin film deposition by reactive
              magnetron sputtering, with emphasis on the role of energy and momentum flux
              into the surface during growth in determining film properties. The plasma
              density and ion energy at the substrate will be systematically varied using
              magnetron unbalancing and an external magnetic field and radio frequency bias.
              The plasma characteristics will be assessed using standard plasma probes. Monte
              Carlo simulations of sputter atom transport will be used to study the nature,
              energy, and flux of energetic neutral bombardment. These data will be
              correlated with compositional, structural, optical, and electrical properties
              of the resulting ZnO films as determined by Rutherford Back Scattering, x-ray
              diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, conductivity and Hall effect, and
              transmission and reflection spectroscopy. The research is expected to elucidate
              specific chemical and physical effects of energy-/momentum flux on ZnO thin
              film growth and thereby provide a sound scientific basis for further
              optimization of this technologically important material. 
%%%
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science having
              potential technological relevance. Zinc oxide is an important transparent
              conducting material that finds extensive application in photovoltaic cells,
              flat panel displays, and other thin film technologies. The research will
              contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level which will
              be relevant to performance of advanced applications of this type in
              electronics/photonics. An important feature of the program is the integration
              of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
              and technologically significant area. The project will be carried out in
              collaboration with undergraduate research assistants, providing valuable
              research training and experience for future scientists and engineers, as well
              as enhancing the research environment of Macalester College, an
              undergraduate-only institution.  
*** 

