Title       : Numerical Approximation of Liquid Crystal Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9973285

Award Number: 9973285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel J. Walkington noelw@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973285

Technical Description:

This project centers around the
              construction and analysis of algorithms for the simulation of the motion of
              nematic liquid crystals.  Such algorithms will facilitate simulation of the
              manufacture and operation of devices (such as computer displays) built from
              liquid crystals.  Equations characterizing the motion of liquid crystals were
              proposed by Ericksen and Leslie in the 1960's; however, until recently there
              were very few general results concerning the existence, uniqueness, and
              stability of these equations.  Recent discoveries by F. Lin and C. Liu of new
              energy estimates enables many of these fundamental questions to be answered,
              which, in turn, facilitates the development and analysis of algorithms for the
              approximation of these equations.  Preliminary results by the author, in
              collaboration with C. Liu, for a specific instance of the Ericksen--Leslie
              equations have been very promising, and this proposal outlines a program of
              research that will result in robust and reliable codes for the simulation of
              these equations in their full generality.

Non-Technical Description:

Over
              the past half century computers have stimulated a major change in the design
              and manufacture of virtually every industrial product produced in the U.S.
              Computer simulation of product strength, operation, and performance has
              replaced much of the expensive prototyping and testing phase required before
              any product is brought to market.  In order to further reduce design and
              development costs better computer algorithms are required for each step of the
              manufacturing process, ranging from the simulation of advanced materials to the
              operation of complex systems.  This project plans to draw upon recent
              theoretical breakthroughs to predict the behavior of materials like those found
              in modern liquid crystal computer displays.  These materials exhibit many
              complex phenomena, and simulation and prediction of their properties requires
              modern high performance computers.


