Title       : 1999 CSHL Meeting on Mechanisms of Eukaryotic mRNA Processing to be held August
               25-29, 1999, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9973688

Award Number: 9973688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrian R. Krainer krainer@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1114,1132,1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Krainer   
On August 25 - 29, 1999, the second biannual "Conference on
              Eukaryotic mRNA Processing" will be held at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
              in Cold Spring Harbor, New York. The conference focuses on  the mechanisms and
              regulation of splicing and 3'-end processing of mRNA in yeast and higher
              eukaryotes. Major advances have recently been made in these areas, and the
              conference will enable the community to discuss the latest unpublished results
              and exchange ideas, thereby fostering new developments in this rapidly moving
              field. The first meeting was held on August 20 - 24, 1997, and attracted an
              international group of 272 scientists who are actively investigating various
              aspects of mRNA maturation  using genetic, biochemical, molecular, and cellular
              approaches. As in the previous meeting, the major focus will be on nuclear
              events in mRNA maturation, particularly mRNA splicing and polyadenylation; the
              scope, however, will be slightly expanded to encompass nuclear mRNA editing.
              The meeting format will consist of seven plenary sessions and three poster
              sessions. Speakers in the plenary sessions will be selected on the basis of the
              submitted abstracts, a system that accommodates  active participation by more
              junior scientists. The main topics covered will include catalytic mechanisms
              and specificity of mRNA splicing and 3'-end processing; developmental and
              cell-type specific regulation of gene expression by alternative splicing and
              polyadenylation; structure and function of snRNP particles and of hnRNPs, SR
              proteins, PRPs, and other yeast, metazoan, and/or plant protein factors
              involved in splicing or polyadenylation; spliceosome assembly; nuclear mRNA
              editing; mRNA turnover; and localization and dynamics of processing reactions,
              factors, substrates, and products, in relation to nuclear architecture and to
              nuclear-cytoplasmic transport.

Messenger RNA is a class of molecules
              absolutely essential to all living organisms.  The processing of mRNA in
              eukaryotic cells is a highly complex phenomenon involving a multitude of
              molecular players requiring intricate and precise regulation.  Understanding it
              is essential to helping human society through biology. This conference will
              enable the international research community studying the many aspects of this
              phenomenon to exchange their information, insights and ideas. 


