Title       : POWRE: Recursive Partitioning Methods to Predict Workers' Compensation for
               Construction Accidents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9973410

Award Number: 9973410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73585              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mousumi Banerjee mousumi@med.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Considering the size of the United States construction industry and the human
              exposure to injury or illness, relatively little work has been conducted in the
              area of construction safety and very few studies discuss the actual
              relationships among construction trades and injuries or illnesses.  The dollar
              amount or compensation weeks awarded for an injury serves as the most direct
              measure for cost of safety.  Due to inflationary trends in medical expenses and
              legal proceedings, the cost of safety is continually on the rise.  Thus there
              is growing interest from safety professionals, insurance carriers and
              government agencies to analyze the potential impacts of specific accident
              related injuries and illnesses on the burden of cost to the construction
              industry and the society at large.

The proposed research will focus on the
              construction industry, and will develop models to predict the losses in units
              of compensation weeks or dollars for a given source and nature of injury or
              illness, accident and
disability type, part of body involved, occupation, and
              the age of injured.  The New York State Workers' Compensation data containing
              91,953 records closed between 1980 and 1988 will serve as the source for the
              research data.  Predictive models will be developed using Recursive
              Partitioning, a nonparametric statistical tool that produces a binary decision
              tree representation for classification and regression problems.   Apart from
              its conceptual appeal and ready interpretability, the major advantages of
              Recursive Partitioning are its ability to analyze complex interactions and
              nonlinearity among many variables by effectively reducing the dimensionality of
              the data and natural ways to deal with missing data. The proposed research will
              produce tree-structured models for potential use by contractors, insurance
              carriers, safety professionals and government agencies and regulators.
              Insurance providers may utilize these trees to determine the potential impact
              of a reported injury or illness. Contractors may use these to ascertain whether
              the proper amount of reserve is being retained by their insurance provider.
              Such analyses will prove beneficial to the contractor in planning for
              associated costs and replacement of injured workers.

The PI for the proposed
              project is an Assistant Professor at the Center for Healthcare Effectiveness
              Research at Wayne State University (WSU).  During the past three years she held
              a non-tenure-track position which carried with it an enormous service workload
              that impeded her scholarly and creative methods development activities in the
              area of Statistics.  The POWRE award will permit her to pursue a thriving area
              of statistical research that will allow career enhancement, and substantively
              further professional standing with the statistical research community.  The
              award will be critical to her re-entry into statistical research, and delineate
              a long-term research program that will help establish her in a tenure-track
              position and allow
her to be fully competitive for funding through a regular
              research program.  The POWRE funding mechanism will also permit the
              investigator to initiate a methodological approach that is completely new to
              the construction industry literature, thereby fostering collaborations between
              the PI and the construction research community, and demonstrably impacting the
              applied field as well.  This POWRE project is jointly supported by the MPS
              Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical
              Sciences (DMS).
