Title       : Computational and Applied Linear Algebra: Asynchronous Parallel Methods,
               Multiplicative Schwarz and Other Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1999    
File        : a9973219

Award Number: 9973219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jong-Shi Pang                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Szyld szyld@euclid.math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              99732219

Three areas of study in computational and applied mathematics will
              be studied.

The first deals with asynchronous parallel methods. In these
              iterative methods the computational effort is distributed among the
              processors.

The processors proceed with their computation and exchange
              information only when their own computational step is completed. This is done
              without waiting for all processors to complete their tasks, that is, without
              synchronization points. In this way, processor idle time is minimized, and the
              overall computational time can be reduced.

The second topic relates to the
              linear algebra representation of multiplicative Schwarz methods for the
              iterative solution of discretized partial differential equations. A weighted
              max norm will be used to study the convergence of these methods in several
              circumstances, including cases when there is no underlying grid, and the case
              with a "coarse grid" correction.

The third problem to be addressed is the
              comparison of the rate of convergence of two different iterative stationary
              methods for the solution of singular linear systems of algebraic equations.
              Several authors have shown that the usual hypothesis in similar comparisons for
              the nonsingular case do not apply here. A different partial order will be used
              to try to obtain similar comparison theorems.

Under the High Performance
              Computing and Communication initiative, computers with several thousands of
              processors are being designed.  Problems requiring a large computational effort
              could be solved in these machines by distributing the work among the processors
              and exchanging information as the computation proceeds. In order to increase
              the computational efficiency, this exchange of information can be done
              asynchronously, that is, without waiting for all processors to reach a certain
              predetermined point. In this project, several aspects of these asynchronous
              methods will be studied. For example, it is important to know for which kind of
              problems this approach will be advantageous. One needs to know how to formulate
              the problems so they conform to the conditions needed for these methods to
              work.  Asynchronous methods are possibly the kind of methods which will allow
              the next generation of parallel machines to attain their expected potential. 
              Another part of the project relates to singular linear systems.  These systems
              arise in numerous applications, such as queuing models of telecommunication
              networks. Given two methods to solve the equations representing these models,
              one wants to know which is faster. Tools to that effect will be developed.

