Title       : Efficient Description, Modeling, and Recognition of Natural Imagery via a Local
               Basis Library
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9973032

Award Number: 9973032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Naoki Saito saito@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9973032

The investigator develops adaptive, hierarchical, and computationally
              efficient algorithms for description, modeling, and recognition of natural
              imagery by tightly combining computational harmonic analysis techniques and the
              insight derived from the study of biological vision systems.  The specific
              study aims are to: 1) Investigate the elementary image features that
              efficiently characterize a given image class, and develop computationally
              efficient stochastic image models using these features for simulation; 2)
              Develop hierarchical algorithms to extract high-level complex features by
              integrating the elementary features for building better stochastic models; and
              3) Investigate the effectiveness of such stochastic models for recognizing and
              classifying different image classes.  Throughout this study the investigator
              fully utilizes the so-called local basis library as a basic tool to extract
              elementary features that are the expansion coefficients (or nonlinear functions
              of such coefficients) of an image with respect to the bases contained in this
              library.  This local basis library consists of a collection of the local basis
              dictionaries (such as wavelet packets, local cosine, local Fourier, and
              brushlets) whose basis elements are localized in both space and spatial
              frequency.  Each dictionary in turn contains a huge number of orthogonal or
              biorthogonal bases, and is equipped with a fast numerical algorithm to select a
              best basis tailored to a given task and to a given set of images by optimizing
              task-specific criterion.  In Aim 1, the investigator specifically selects the
              local features from the library by explicitly reducing the redundancy and
              statistical dependence among them, and investigate the importance of the
              sparsity and statistical independence for image representation and description.
               Then, he analyzes the effectiveness of such features by constructing simple
              stochastic models by assuming mutual independence or pairwise dependence among
              them.  In Aim 2, the investigator integrates local features studied in Aim 1 to
              extract high-level complex features by applying the localized versions of the
              Karhunen-Loeve transform directly on those local features, and incorporates
              such features into the stochastic models.  In Aim 3, the investigator examines
              the effectiveness of combining the localized versions of the linear
              discriminant analysis and the models obtained by Aims 1 and 2, for extracting
              the key discriminant local features.

Results of the project will be useful
              for those who routinely work on image-based diagnostics such as radiologists
              and geologists.  Radiologists use very subtle features of mammograms to
              determine whether the patients have benign or malignant tumors.  Exploration
              geologists use images of multiple scales ranging from actual rock samples to
              seismic images to determine whether a specific subsurface layer contains oil or
              gas.  Although these experts have highly trained eyes and have accumulated
              large databases of images in their minds through training and experience, their
              diagnostic rules are often of qualitative nature.  The investigator believes
              that the above feature extraction tools will help these experts move their
              diagnostic methods from a qualitative regime to a quantitative one.  In fact,
              given a specific class of images (e.g., a collection of mammograms representing
              malignant tumors), the above algorithms may allow these experts to build
              stochastic models that specify the statistical dependency of critical features
              of the images and to create new sample images from these models.  This ability
              to create new simulated images at will is indispensable for assessing the
              variability of the features and images.  If an expert can give a correct
              diagnosis for these simulated images, then this implies that the implicit
              diagnostic rules in their minds are encoded as an explicit stochastic model
              built on features computed by these feature extraction tools.  This may lead to
              the development of a distributed digital image diagnostic system, where imaging
              devices and the diagnostic engines/knowledge bases are remotely located.  One
              can easily imagine the usefulness of such systems in medicine, geophysical
              exploration, and other fields requiring image diagnostics.


