Title       : Fractionally Spaced Equalization of Nonlinear Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9973133

Award Number: 9973133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Soura Dasgupta dasgupta@engineering.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Fractionally Spaced Equalization (FSE) has become the focus of much research
              attention since the discovery that fractionally sampling the output of a
              channel permits its identification from the second-order statistics of the
              channel output under generically satisfied conditions. Blind schemes in turn
              are desirable in fading multipath environments where frequent changes in the
              channel dynamics, makes training signals very wasteful. Most of the blind
              Fractionally Spaced Equalization literature has been devoted to linear
              channels. Yet many channels such as satellite and microwave channels with
              nonlinear amplifiers, underwater and magnetic recording channels are inherently
              nonlinear. This is particularly so if the amplifiers operate in their most
              power efficient regimes. Further, in fiber optical communications, having an
              abundant bandwidth, the greatest challenge, is posed by dispersive
              nonlinearities in the channel. In many such instances blind equalization is
              natural and it is important to consider blind FSE of nonlinear
              channels.

This study concerns the blind Fractionally Spaced Equalization of
              FIR channels characterized by a baseband channel output that is a polynomial
              function of the current and past values of the input. The equalizers sought
              also belong to this class. Using the concept of coprimeness of nonlinear
              systems, and employing difference algebraic techniques, a fundamental
              investigation into the equalization of this class of channels is being
              conducted. Conditions under which these channels are equalizable, and can be
              identified by the second order statistics of the output are being explored.
              Statistical and deterministic methods are employed. Direct and indirect
              equalizer design methodologies are formulated. Zero Forcing and Minimum Mean
              Squared Error equalizers are designed. Subspace methods are used. Adaptive
              schemes are postulated. Fundamental existence issues as well practical design
              issues are considered.
