Title       : Computational Methods for the Direct Simulation of Particulate Flow of Newtonian
               and Non-Newtonian Incompressible Viscous Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9973318

Award Number: 9973318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland Glowinski roland@math.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Dean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tsorng-Whay Pan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Montgomery Pettitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973318

The main goal of this project is to address the numerical solution of
              the Navier-Stokes equations modeling the flow of incompressible Newtonian and
              non-Newtonian viscous fluids and to combine the resulting methodology with
              appropriate domain embedding methods to investigate the simulation of
              particulate incompressible viscous fluid flows, e.g., flow of mixtures of
              incompressible fluids and solid particles moving, typically, under the effect
              of gravity and hydrodynamical forces.  The numerical methodology will rely on
              the following basic basic ingredients:

(1) Time discretization by operator
              splitting,
(2) Treatment of advection by the method of characteristics or
              reduction to a second order wave-like equation,
(3) Space approximation by
              finite elements,
(4) Use of a distributed Lagrange multiplier/fictitious
              (embedding) domain methodology to localize the solid particles and force their
              rigid body motion.

Typical non-Newtonian fluids to be investigated include
              Maxwell and 
Oldroyd B.

Our goal in this project is to develop efficient
              methods, able to achieve the numerical simulation of three-dimensional flow of
              mixtures of incompressible viscous fluids with several hundreds to thousands of
              solid particles.  Such large scale simulations have the characteristics of a
              Grand Challenge in Scientific Computing and success will rely on advanced
              computational methods implemented on powerful parallel computers.  With these
              simulation tools the scientific community will be able to better understand 
              the complicated mechanisms taking place for example in chemical reactors and in
              fractured oil reservoirs.  Among the consequences of these investigations we
              can expect for example improved manufacturing techniques for rubber materials
              and pharmaceutical drugs, and also improved efficiency for drilling techniques
              used in oil Industry.

