Title       : Structure and Dynamics of Polymer Nanocomposite Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a9973933

Award Number: 9973933
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Vold rlv@nmr.physics.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gina L. Hoatson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9973933
Vold

Nanocomposites are a novel class of materials whose microscopic
              architecture is controlled by design over distance scales from tens to hundreds
              of nanometers.  These spatial dimensions are larger than those
relevant to
              ordinary chemical synthesis, but much smaller than those accessible by
              macroscopic engineering techniques.  Nanocomposite materials often exhibit
              exciting new properties which arise from their special architecture, but their
              synthesis is still largely a matter of trial and error.  In part, this arises
              because techniques for characterizing nanostructures need to be improved.  In
              particular, while many techniques can reveal geometric features of
              nanostructures, there are not many techniques available for studying molecular
              motion in these complex materials.

By focusing attention on specific
              materials which have potentially important technological applications, the
              proposed work will illustrate the practical utility of solid state NMR as a
              tool to aid tailoring the properties of composite materials to achieve specific
              design goals.  Two representative projects are discussed in detail, one dealing
              with polymer/clay nanocomposites and other with dendridic polymers.  One novel
              aspect of the proposed work is it's emphasis on molecular motion.  This is
              important because bulk material properties such as strength, toughness,
              resistance to thermal and chemical degradation, and chemical selectivity are
              all dependent not only on  static structure, morphology and supramolecular
              architecture, but also on the microscopic mobility of the molecular subunits. 
              The work described in this proposal will apply modern techniques of solid state
              nuclear magnetic resonance as a tool for characterizing both structure and
              dynamics in nanocomposites.  This is important because a detailed understanding
              of both static structure and molecular dynamics is needed to guide the rational
              design of new materials with optimized macroscopic properties.

