Title       : US - PRC Researcher Exchange Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9973564

Award Number: 9973564
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea S. Dargush dargush@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A number of federal agencies have developed ongoing cooperative programs with
              the People's Republic of China.  Annex III to the US-PRC Protocol for
              Scientific and Technical Cooperative Research in Earthquake Studies,
              'Earthquake Engineering and Hazards Mitigation' was initiated in 1981 between
              the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Ministry of Construction on the
              Chinese side.  The protocol has as its primary objective the advancement of
              cooperative studies that will further earthquake hazard mitigation in both
              countries.  

Research programs of the Annex III Protocol have added
              substantially to the knowledge base in earthquake engineering and furthered
              protocol objectives of developing safe and cost effective engineering design
              methods, construction practices and other countermeasures for seismic safety. 
              A number of areas have been identified for collaborative study, including:
              hybrid seismic mitigation control of tall buildings, studies of collapse
              mechanisms of structures under seismic loadings, earthquake response of dams,
              dynamic interaction of arch dams; integrated earthquake mitigation studies for
              metropolitan areas, seismo-sociology, and new generation of seismic code for
              the ensuing century.

Exchange researchers between the US and China affords
              participants with opportunities to learn more about regionally specific
              earthquake impacts, approaches to preparedness, response and rebuilding, as
              well as the success of mitigation efforts.  It has been viewed as a critical
              mechanism of exchange on emergent earthquake engineering knowledge.  

This
              project will continue NSF support of the US-PRC Research Exchange Program,
              under the organizational supervision of MCEER.  MCEER's administrative
              infrastructure, its extensive international programs, and its successful
              execution of the past two phases of the project provides a convenient and
              capable basis for coordination of the program on behalf of NSF.  The exchange
              program will be implemented openly through review and selection by an external
              panel based on the merit, qualification, agreement by the host institution and
              potential  follow-up activities, which will be mutully benefical.

This is a
              cooperative earthquake hazard mitigation project under the US-PRC Earthquake
              Protocol, Annex III

