Title       : FRG: Epitaxial Heterostructures of PMN-PT Piezoelectric / SrRuO3 Conductive
               Oxide for Medical Ultrasound Transducer Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a9973801

Award Number: 9973801
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $894487             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chang-Beom Eom   (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoqing Pan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen W. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen K. Streiffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Trolier-McKinstry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1589,1682,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This FRG (Focused Research Group) project is a collaborative effort among
              researchers at Duke University, U. Michigan, Penn State U. and Argonne National
              Laboratory, as well as industry interactions with Boston Scientific,
              Endosonics, and Lucent Technologies. The objective of the project is the
              fabrication and characterization of epitaxial multilayer stacks of single
              crystal piezoelectric/ conductive oxide electrode heterostructures, and
              development of a new generation of high frequency transducer arrays for medical
              ultrasound imaging. Thin layers allow the stacks to be driven at higher fields
              thus taking advantage of the high saturation strain without increasing driving
              voltages. Thus, overall weight and volume of the transducer can be reduced and
              more easily integrated with other devices. A major challenge is in the
              synthesis/processing of materials in single crystal epitaxial films between
              metal electrodes, and to integrate them effectively for utilization in
              piezoelectric devices with advantages of yield, uniformity, low surface
              roughness, and performance associated with microelectronic technology. Specific
              research areas include: (1)synthesis, processing and characterization of single
              crystal films of piezoelectrics on single crystal conductive oxide electrodes;
              (2)examination of the microstructure in PMN-PT [Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)-PbTiO3)] thin
              films and atomic structure and local chemistry at PMN-PT/SrRuO3 interfaces
              using high resolution transmission electron microscopy; (3)fabrication and
              characterization of single crystal thick film transducers such as single
              pistons, 100 element arrays, and 192 element multilayer arrays; and
              (4)application and evaluation of the piezoelectric transducers for medical
              ultrasound imaging. High frequency transducers operate in the range from 10 MHz
              for breast imaging and intra-cardiac scanning to 40 MHz for intravascular
              applications and ophthalmic imaging to 100 MHz for ultrasound microscopy. The
              hypothesis is that more sensitive, broader bandwidth, less expensive
              transducers, including linear and multilayer arrays, can be developed using
              epitaxial films compared with conventional technologies.
%%%
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science and
              engineering having high potential technological/medical relevance. The research
              will contribute new knowledge at a fundamental level to important materials
              synthesis and fabrication aspects of electronic devices, and the basic
              materials science and engineering knowledge and understanding gained from the
              research is expected to contribute to improving the perform-ance capabilities
              of advanced ultrasound imaging devices for biomedical applications.  An
              important feature of the interdisciplinary program is the integration of
              research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area. This FRG project is co-supported by two ENG
              programs(BES/BME; CTS/FPH), an MPS program(DMR/EM), and the MPS OMA(Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities).
***

