Title       : POWRE: Excellent Local Rings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9973069

Award Number: 9973069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48811              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. Loepp sloepp@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI will study the relationship between excellent local rings and their
              completions.  It has long been known that the formal fibers of a ring encode
              important information about the ring.  Because of this, understanding the
              formal fiber over the zero ideal (called the generic formal fiber) of a local
              integral domain is critical.  The PI will work to explore the relationship
              between a ring and its generic formal fiber.  She will study the relationship
              between a ring R and R[X] (where X is an indeterminate) by examining the
              generic formal fiber
of R and R[X].  She will work on the problem of
              characterizing when a ring satisfies the complete homomorphic images property,
              and will also study a question relating to the localization problem for tight
              closure.  In addition, she will explore several rigidity questions.

The
              project will take place at Michigan State University during the 1999-2000
              academic year.  The PI will spend the year collaborating with Christel
              Rotthaus, one of the world's leading experts in excellent rings.  The PI will
              attend commutative algebra seminars and discuss overlapping research interests
              with the resident algebraists and visiting algebraists at Michigan State.  This
              will aid the PI in broadening her research  focus and learning new research
              skills.  In addition, the PI will brainstorm with these algebraists to discover
              new problems in the field that will be suitable for her undergraduate students
              to study.  The ideas coming from
this collaboration will fuel undergraduate
              research projects for years to come.

The PI for this project is currently in
              her third year as an Assistant Professor at Williams College.  She has
              previously advised the research of four undergraduate students and is currently
              advising the research of another.  She is dedicated to contributing to the
              advancement of undergraduate research in mathematics by continuing along and
              broadening her own research path and advising the original research of
              undergraduates.

The PI will devote a major portion of this project to
              broadening the focus of her research and the focus of the problems on which her
              undergraduate students can work.  A one-time input of funds at this critical
              stage will serve to greatly advance her career as a mathematician at a highly
              selective liberal arts college.


