Title       : POWRE: Utilizing New Technology to Investigate Cognitive Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9973399

Award Number: 9973399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laraine L. McDonough LaraineM@brooklyn.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to examine how infants reason about moving
              objects.  Until recently, very little was known about how infants initially
              make sense of the world.  Most of the current research has either examined
              infants' ability to categorize static objects or else has examined their
              ability to detect different kinds of movement patterns.  We still know very
              little about how infants understand the connections among objects and the
              different ways they move. For example, when infants see a bird running on the
              ground and then suddenly spreading its wings and taking flight, do they
              consider this one and the same kind of animal (i.e., a bird)?  Or do they think
              that one kind of animal magically transformed itself into another?  After all,
              a bird moving on the ground looks, and moves in ways, quite different from one
              that is flying.  Alternatively, it is possible that infants may not consider
              the changes in the form of the bird (e.g., wings closed and then wings open),
              but instead attend only to its changes in movement patterns.  Although this may
              seem intuitively odd, recent research by neuroscientists have shown that form
              and motion are processed using different areas of the brain, areas that may not
              be linked during early infancy.  Thus, it is possible that infants may focus on
              the form of an object (but not its motion) or on the motion of an object (but
              not its form).  However, if infants can attend to both the object form and its
              movement, the question arises as to how detailed their memory is of the object
              (e.g., birds have wings and a tail) and the motion patterns of each (gross
              movements such as wings flapping and/or subtle movements such as the tail
              arching and dipping).  From these movement patterns, do infants then decide
              that all things with wings belong to one category whereas those without wings
              belong to another?  Or do they initially engage in a more gross analysis of
              things that move in biological/animate ways versus those that move in
              mechanical/inanimate ways?  These alternatives would lead to different
              expectations about how cognitive development progresses in early infancy.
              

This research will use films made using the newest technology in film
              editing and computer animation in order to test how infants perceive the form
              and movement of objects.  The first studies will explore the parameters of
              animate and inanimate motion and how each such parameter is associated with
              various animate and inanimate objects.  This will be done by "morphing" one
              object into the identity of another while holding motion parameters constant or
              by changing the motion parameters while holding the object identity constant. 
              For example, infants will be shown films of moving objects in which an object
              is moving in either an expected manner (e.g., a bird running and flying) or an
              unexpected manner (e.g., a bird galloping like a horse).  If infants understand
              the manner in which objects move (e.g., birds run and fly but do not gallop),
              then their looking preferences should reflect their understanding.  Previous
              research leads to the prediction that infants will look longer at the atypical
              than at the typical motions, because that which is unexpected is naturally more
              interesting. 

The principal investigator's academic career began later than
              most academics and was constrained to non-independent positions in Southern
              California for an extended time due to family obligations.  This POWRE grant
              will enable her to refine techniques to explore new issues in the field of
              cognitive development in order to build an independent research program.

