Title       : The Whitney Reduction Network: Theory, Algorithms and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9973303

Award Number: 9973303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Kirby Kirby@Math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Kirby
9973303

     The investigator exploits the Whitney Reduction Network,
              a new tool for processing and analyzing data sets of high ambient dimension. 
              Whitney's theorem motivates the architecture of the network, which consists of
              a "good projection,"  designed to be bilipschitz and retain the differential
              structure of the data, followed by a nonlinear inverse with good interpolation
              properties inherited from the choice of projection.  The approach provides a
              natural representation of the data as the graph of a function that is
              approximated using radial basis functions (RBFs).  The basic technique may be
              implemented in a variety of ways, hence the development and evaluation of a
              broad class algorithms is a primary focus of the research.  Problems and
              algorithms examined include adaptive basis methods, RBF center selection,
              (spatio-temporal) clustering methods, direct and iterative methods for solving
              for RBF weights, RBF approximation with constraints and a local implementation
              of the basic algorithm.

     Scientific research has to a certain degree
              become a problem in data processing.  High-speed numerical simulations of
              intractable model equations of natural phenomena produce enormous quantities of
              data.  Understanding the phenomena means extracting and interpretting
              information in the data.  The main goal of the project is to develop
              mathematical tools to produce efficient representations of data so as to expose
              the information it contains in a manner that the orignal data does not. 
              Potential applications of this methodology are widespread and
              multi-disciplinary.  In particular, the basic research undertaken here has
              direct applications through collaboration with Honeywell Corporation and the
              Air Force materials research program at Wright Patterson Air Force Base.

