Title       : Photon Pathlength Distributions from High Resolution Measurements of the Oxygen
               A-band
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9973701

Award Number: 9973701
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qilong Min min@asrc.cestm.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Solar radiation penetrating a cloudy atmosphere undergoes many scattering
              events.  The total pathlength of photons reaching the ground may therefore be
              longer than the line-of-sight path.  Of the photons received at a given
              instant, some will usually have experienced more scattering events than others.
               One of the ways to describe the effects of the propagation medium is by the
              probability distribution of photon pathlength.  From radiative transfer theory,
              it is possible in principle to infer the pathlength distribution from
              measurements of the solar spectrum in the vicinity of strong oxygen absorption
              lines.  In effect, the process is one of inverting the spectroscopic
              measurements to determine (or "retrieve") the unknown pathlength distribution. 
              The accuracy of the computed distribution depends on the accuracy and
              resolution of the spectroscopy and on the particular inversion procedure.  This
              grant supports the development of a high-resolution, sensitive spectrometer to
              measure the solar spectrum near the oxygen A-band (760 nm wavelength) and the
              water vapor band near 820 nm.  Preliminary experiments have shown that the
              instrument is sensitive enough to require only a few seconds of signal
              integration.  Hence the pathlength distributions can be measured with high time
              resolution, enabling the observation of rapidly varying pathlength
              distributions as clouds move overhead.  Monte Carlo simulations have shown that
              a parametric inversion procedure is able to recover pathlength distributions
              with acceptable accuracy.  Results will be analyzed to determine if multiple
              scattering can account for anomalous cloud absorption, which refers to the
              observation that the solar irradiance emerging from cloud base is less than
              predicted from scattering calculations.  The longer the pathlength, the greater
              the extinction of the radiation by scattering and absorption.  If the
              pathlengths are longer than assumed, then the calculations will underestimate
              the actual absorption.  Another objective of the project is to develop ways of
              introducing pathlength distributions into climate and general circulation
              models as a more accurate way of characterizing the effects of clouds on
              radiative transfer. 
