Title       : Statistics of Electromagnetic Propagation and Localization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a9973959

Award Number: 9973959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258324             (Estimated)
Investigator: Azriel Z. Genack genack@qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9973959
Genack

This project will provide a detailed examination of the
              statistics of electromagnetic propagation in random media. Because of the
              strong analogy between quantum mechanical and classical transport, these
              studies will address fundamental issues of electronic transport in the context
              of photonics. Microwave measurements made with high spectral and spatial
              resolution in ensembles of statistically equivalent samples will be used to
              chart both the static and dynamic aspects of transport in the transition from
              diffusive propagation to localization. Samples will include low-density
              mixtures of dielectric spheres with various degrees of translational order, and
              metallic and dielectric periodic structures with various concentrations of
              scatterers floated in the sample. Only a statistical description is adequate to
              capture the essence of wave propagation in the presence of disorder. This
              research will provide a universal description of wave propagation in terms of
              the closeness to the localization transition. In the absence of inelastic
              processes, this can be specified by a single parameter - the ensemble average
              of the dimensionless conductance. Measurements of the probability distribution
              of microwave intensity, total transmission, and conductance will bridge the gap
              between the statistics of classical waves and electronic mesoscopic physics.
              The relationship between the moments of these distributions and the connection
              between the statistics of local and averaged quantities will be examined. The
              dynamics of diffusing waves will be extended to localized waves and their
              connection to intensity statistics will be explored together with the
              correlation between delay time and transmitted intensity for localized states.
              Transport will be studied in samples that display sharp line spectra associated
              with resonances with localized states to unify mesoscopic physics and
              statistical optics, which will enlarge the range of phenomena studied in these
              disciplines.
%%%
Electronic, electromagnetic and acoustic propagation in the
              presence of disorder are related fundamental problems with wide ranging
              applications in electronics, imaging, communication and photonics. The
              statistical analysis of electromagnetic propagation using diagnostic tools that
              are not available in the study of electronic insulators and conductors will be
              used. This project will thereby shed light on the connection between
              microscopic and global aspects of conductance and wave propagation. The
              distributions of static transmission quantities, such as intensity, total
              transmission and conductance, as well as dynamic quantities, such as the dwell
              time of energy in the sample will be obtained for diffusing and for localized
              waves. The nature of waves, which are strongly trapped inside nearly periodic
              samples, will be studies and their use in photonic devices will be elucidated.
              The high school, undergraduate, and graduate students as well as the
              postdoctoral fellows who will be involved in this research will receive
              training in fundamental problems, which are of importance in photonics,
              microwave cellular phone communication, and imaging. 



