Title       : Theory of Multiferroic Manganites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a9973076

Award Number: 9973076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicola A. Hill nahill@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9973076
Hill
This award supports theoretical research on multiferroic
              materials, which exhibit simultaneous magnetic, electric, and elastic ordering.
               This project will use a combination of first-principles local-density
              functional and many-body electronic structure methods to investigate the
              properties of perovskite-structure manganites as prototypes for this class of
              materials.  The overall goals of the project are to construct a theory of
              multiferroism, and elucidate the differences between multiferroics and
              chemically related non-multiferroic materials.  Specific problems of interest
              that will be considered include the origin of the unusual ferromagnetic and
              ferroelectric behavior of bismuth manganite, the origin of ferroelectricity in
              antiferromagnetic hexagonal manganites, the coupling between magnetic and
              ferroelectric order parameters in the manganites, the role of the manganese d
              electrons in multiferroic behavior, and the effects of the electronic structure
              on linear and nonlinear optical properties of the multiferroic manganites.  The
              detailed understanding of the fundamental physics underlying multiferroism will
              assist in the search for new multiferroic materials and in the design of new
              devices which use them.

Perovskite structure oxides exhibit a broad range of
              magnetic and electrical properties such as ferroelectric, ferromagnetic, and
              piezoelectric behavior.  This award will support theoretical modeling of a
              class of such materials denoted as multiferroic, which show simultaneous
              ferroelectric and ferromagnetic, or ferroelectric and antiferromagnetic
              ordering.  These materials have potential technological application as
              multiple-state memory elements, electric-field controlled ferromagnetic
              resonance devices, and transducers with magnetically modulated
              piezoelectricity.  Most multiferroic materials have very complex crystal
              structures, and as a result both  multiferroism and the interrelation of the
              magnetic, electric polarization, and structural order parameters are note well
              understood.  This project will focus on perovskite-structure manganites
              exhibiting multiferroism, and investigate these materials using
              first-principles techniques.  The theoretical work supported under this award
              will also be coordinated with ongoing and new experimental efforts studying
              multiferroic materials.


