Title       : POWRE: Electron Microscopy Studies of the Microstructure and Chemistry of
               Interfaces in Thermal Barrier Coating Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9973446

Award Number: 9973446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean L. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the microstructural, compositional, and bonding
              aspects of the topcoat/thermally grown oxide(TGO)/bondcoat interfaces to
              understand and control the spallation problem of thermal barrier coatings. The
              goal is to develop a set of materials and processing recommendations which will
              produce a TBC(thermal barrier coating) system with improved reliability and a
              reduced propensity for spallation. A secondary goal is to tailor this improved
              TBC system to withstand higher operating temperatures in aircraft turbine
              applications. Electron microscopy(TEM) will be used to examine the phases
              present in alumina as a function of processing conditions and thermal cycling.
              The objective is to correlate any phase transitions that occur in the alumina
              layer during TBC processing to spallation. Trace additions of reactive elements
              can lead to the formation of different oxides, and this will be investigated as
              a function of bondcoat chemistry by probing grain boundaries in the bondcoat
              layer and the TGO/ bondcoat interface for the segregation of reactive elements.
              A combination of high resolution imaging and electron energy loss spectroscopy
              (EELS) provided by an ultrasmall probe in a UHV STEM will be used to study this
              segregation issue. The goal is to use bonding information obtained from EELS to
              determine the effect of the presence of other oxides on the strength of the
              TGO/bondcoat interface.
%%% 
This is a research enhancement grant made under
              the Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and Education (POWRE)
              program. The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge
              relevant to thermal barrier coatings used in aircraft turbines. The project
              encourages the integration of research and education through direct graduate
              student participation in research related to classroom activities. The project
              is co-supported by the Division of Materials Research, and the MPS OMA(Office
              of Multidisciplinary Activities). 
***

