Title       : Regional Implementation of Transferable Integrated Design Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9973034

Award Number: 9973034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273129             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denny C. Davis davis@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David I. McLean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Trevisan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973034
Davis

The goal of this project is to synthesize and institutionalize
              an outcomes-based engineering design education model across a region to achieve
              desired educational responsiveness, student transfer, and resource sharing. 
              Five universities and community colleges in Washington will lead efforts of
              educators and industry throughout the Pacific Northwest to establish effective
              processes for improving engineering design education.  Through regional
              workshops, they will define educational objectives and achievement standards
              suitable for the region, refine and facilitate implementation of assessments
              for engineering design, and prepare others to implement effective design
              education practices.  Resulting improvements to teaching of design will
              increase student, learning of competencies important to the region and will
              increase retention and success of qualified students, especially women and
              minorities.

This project includes research to evaluate and improve design
              assessments and training to support institutionalization of effective practices
              and materials.  Proposed design assessments will be tested in two ways: (a)
              through comparative analysis of design team actions, their design products, and
              their design perceptions and (b) through comparisons of assessment results to
              responses on alumni/employer surveys.  A web-based survey will be developed to
              obtain alumni/employer feedback for assessment of program achievement on a
              regional scale.  Faculty trainers will be prepared and assisted to lead local
              workshops patterned after regional workshops.  These workshops will empower
              faculty to implement and continue improvement of design education materials,
              methods, and assessments for their local needs.

The regional design
              education model will be synthesized from resources developed in Washington
              through the NSF-funded Transferable Integrated Design Engineering Education
              (TTDEE) project:
- Proven TTIDEE collaborative learning models for teaching
              and learning of engineering design
- Definitions of learning outcomes for
              engineering design at mid-program and end-of-program points
- Pilot-tested and
              proposed instruments for mid-program and end-of-program design assessments
-
              Workshop facilitation expertise for team-based engineering design education and
              assessment
- Extensive collaborative efforts across the state on engineering
              design education
- Affiliations with institutions and organizations across the
              region and nation for extended impact

