Title       : Developing an Environmental Literacy Program at Mount Holyoke
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1999  
File        : a9973686

Award Number: 9973686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily Monosson emonosso@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is facilitating the development of the environmental literacy
              program at Mount Holyoke College, which recently created the Center for
              Environmental Literacy.  The Center's mission is to create and maintain an
              environmentally sustainable campus community.  

One of the approaches to
              accomplishing this mission is to increase the environmental content of all
              departmental and interdisciplinary majors.  One of the greatest obstacles to
              accomplishing that goal is the lack of time and resources available to
              interested faculty, as well as less than complete awareness of opportunities
              and methods for pursuing this objective in their disciplines.   This project
              will work with faculty to increase the environmental content of current Mount
              Holyoke curricula be developing teaching modules that faculty can incorporate
              into existing courses.  

The modules will be designed to develop
              environmental awareness in students within their own discipline or major, and
              provide opportunities to explore links among different disciplines.  This work
              will not only be incorporated into courses at Mount Holyoke College, but are
              also intended for use by other colleges and universities interested in
              increasing the environmental literacy of their students.  

This grant is
              supporting the PI for 18 months as a visiting faculty member dedicated to the
              development of course modules.  The experience gained in this project is
              expected to prepare the PI for continued work with both Mount Holyoke and other
              academic institutions.  
