Title       : Understanding the Educational Implications of Component Software and the World
               Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9973156

Award Number: 9973156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408506             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea A. diSessa disessa@soe.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary
The World Wide Web is undergoing a revolutionary transformation
              from static text-and-pictures hypertext to a more dynamic and interactive
              medium. A central part of this revolution is the development of component-style
              software, where many simpler units are created rather than fewer, more complex,
              and isolated applications. Mathematics, science and technology education
              researchers and developers around the world have flocked to "Web/component"
              software. However, the revolution is flying blind. Without adequate
              understanding of the educational implications of different models within this
              paradigm: (1) Too much work is being devoted to educationally suboptimal models
              of development and use. (2) Promising alternative models are not being
              developed or are being ignored. The proposed work will define and investigate a
              range of models of Web/component software.

We will empirically investigate
              existing models in the field. Empirical study will be at two levels. We will
              conduct a survey of existing models of Web/component software available on the
              Web (Level one). Teachers will be co-analysts of this available software. At
              Level two, we will conduct case studies of a number of different models by
              talking to and observing teachers (and, to a lesser extent, developers) in
              action while they attempt to use component software. 

In this work, we will
              identify underlying educational issues as related to properties of
              Web/component models. For example, in terms of technology, we will investigate
              how the ease and flexibility of interconnection and the availability of rich
              resources in the container application affect the quality and educational
              productivity of Web/component software. In terms of development, we will
              investigate the effect of the development community (e.g., whether it includes
              teachers as first-class members) and pattern of development (e.g., many or few
              revision cycles). In terms of educational use, we will investigate different
              modes of teachers' learning about components, the pragmatics of setup and use,
              and the level of engagement of students.

The project aims to provide
              critical guidance concerning more or less productive models of development and
              use of Web/component software to future researchers, developers, practitioners
              and policy specialists in mathematics, science and technology education. In
              addition to science and mathematics, a small proportion of the project effort
              will be devoted to exploratory study of Web/components for much younger
              children, in reading and writing.

