Title       : POWRE: Gender-Based Considerations for Modeling Cognition and Color Appearance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9973903

Award Number: 9973903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly A. Jameson kjameson@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Investigators studying the neural basis of cognition search for robust and
              meaningful relations between important neural stages and mental states defining
              complex psychological sensations.   This approach has characterized the study
              of human color vision.  The early stages of neural processing involved in the
              perception of color from environmental light have been mapped from retinal
              input structures to neural processing structures in the brain.  This earlier
              research has adopted the Trichromatic model of color vision, which assumes
              three different retinal light detectors, each of which codes a different part
              of the visual spectrum and uses a different neural processing channel.  This
              model has been widely used for modeling both early visual processing and
              higher-order color sensations.  However, recent studies in the molecular
              genetics of color vision have demonstrated that a large number of individuals
              in the general female population can express more than the standard three
              retinal visual photopigments.  Thus, it is possible that the trichromatic
              assumption of a strictly three-channel color vision system may not be
              appropriate for those individuals. These individuals may have retinas composed
              of more than three types of cone photoreceptor visual pigments and may
              experience color sensations which differ from those experienced by individuals
              expressing only three "normal" pigments.  This research will assess the color
              perception of individuals grouped according to classes of color-vision genes as
              identified through genetic assays.  Individuals identified as Dichromats (two
              color-vision channels) and Trichromats (the usual three color-vision channels),
              as well as individuals genetically determined to have non-standard photopigment
              genetic variations will be examined.  In these experiments, individuals' color
              perception capabilities will be assessed using two methods, a standard method
              long used and found in the literature and another newly developed method. 
              Additionally, the research will conduct a parallel line of investigations
              exploring the perceptual consequences of various mutations in an important
              color-vision gene.  This research will clarify the extent to which gender
              differences in color appearance behaviors are mediated by variations in
              color-vision gene expression.  The results will also provide evidence about the
              adequacy of the three-channel processing assumption and the Trichromatic model
              of color perception.  In addition, these experiments will help us understand a
              number of technical issues related to the influence of genetic mechanisms on
              color vision.  This research, because of its implications for people who may
              have more than three photopigment classes, may impact a variety of industrial
              applications for coding color appearances (e.g., three-phosphor primaries used
              in color television technologies, environmental lighting applications, and many
              others.) which rely on the Trichromatic model.  This POWRE grant, in addition
              to the specific research involved, should advance the PI's prominence as a
              research scientist, mentor and scholar in this area of research. 
