Title       : Primitive Pathology in Division Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9973129

Award Number: 9973129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86132              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Brussel brussel@mathcs.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973129

Broadly, PI seeks to investigate division algebra pathologies in
              concrete, elemental settings.  The Brauer group of the function field F of a
              rational p-adic curve can be fruitfully studied by examining its restriction to
              the completion F_p at the arithmetic prime p.  PI has in this way proved the
              existence of F-noncrossed products using lifting techniques tailored to this
              situation, and in part I of this project plans to determine more fine structure
              over F such as the theory of decomposability, index reduction, and noncrossed
              products.  In part II, PI plans to study the influence of ramification on the
              Brauer group over a general field by examining its effects on index, splitting,
              and decomposability, in the special setting of rank two henselian fields over
              fields of cohomological dimension two, such as number fields and generalized
              local fields.  One example of such a field is the generalized local field of
              dimension four.  The combination of a limited measure of totally ramified
              division algebras and a nontrivial index theory (index not equal to exponent)
              first occurs in these settings, and an analysis appears to be both interesting
              and tractible.

A division algebra is number system that has
              multiplication/division, like the complex numbers C, only these operations are
              noncommutative. W. R. Hamilton discovered the first example, the ``real
              quaternions'', in 1843 while searching for a way to define
              multiplication/division on real 3-space extending the one possessed by 2-space
              (given by C).  His discovery, which he considered to be the greatest of his
              career, showed that it could be done (only) in real 4-space.  Since Hamilton,
              division algebras extending many interesting number systems (fields) other than
              the real numbers have been found, and it has been realized that apart from
              being an interesting and beautiful subject in its own right, the theory of the
              division algebras extending a given field provides important information about
              the field itself.  This project seeks to understand the ``pathologies''
              (obstructions to a general theory) that occur in division algebras by examining
              them in their most elemental forms.  Part one investigates fine structure over
              the function field of a curve defined over the p-adic field.  This field is of
              interest as perhaps the most elemental function field with a theory that
              includes standard pathologies such as noncrossed products and unequal index and
              exponent.  Part two investigates division algebras with a strictly controlled
              pathology known as total ramification, a notorious obstruction to general
              theory.  The PI has partial results to support the tractibility of these
              projects, in addition to examples illustrating their general interest.

