Title       : A Computational Framework for Multi-Rigid-Body Dynamics with Contact and
               Friction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9973071

Award Number: 9973071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mihai Anitescu anitescu@math.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates fundamental challenges in creating
multi-rigid-body
              simulation environments that have a robust and
realistic behavior for a large
              class of configurations and
interactions. The problem specifically targeted by
              this proposal is
the difficulty, due to the apparent lack of solutions of the
              resulting
model, in consistently formulating and efficiently solving
              the
constrained Newton laws of mechanics when Coulomb friction is
involved. 
              Recent results, partly developed by the author have shown
that a well-defined
              numerical approach is possible in an
impulse-velocity complementarity
              formulation. The proposed research
addresses the need to integrate recent
              developments in the study of
models of friction with advanced numerical
              integration and
optimization techniques.  The complementarity formulation will
              play a
central part in this project but alternative methods will also
              be
explored. The algorithms developed will accommodate numerical
              issues
rarely approached in a complementarity setting such as stiffness
              and
constraint drift control. Several specialized optimization methods
will
              be designed to address distinguished problems that appear in a
constrained
              simulation, such as constraint stabilization in presence
of contact
              degeneracy.

This research will overcome essential difficulties in all areas
              of
investigation that depend on the correct simulation of the motion
              of
objects in contact with friction such as robotics, virtual
              reality,
biomechanics, manufacturing design.  In all these areas, contact
              with
friction is a fundamental component, whether it is related to the
              user
pushing or pulling a stack of virtual objects in frictional contact
with
              one another in virtual reality, to a robot grasping and
manipulating a load,
              or to the correct simulation of human walking
where friction is necessary to
              prevent slipping.  Yet in spite of the
omni presence of contact and friction
              in everyday life its simulation
has proved to be very difficult, partly
              because of the lack of a
consistent and efficient theoretical and
              computational framework. It
is the aim of this proposal to extend the recent
              results in frictional
contact modeling in directions that will answer the
              requirements of
high-quality, high-performance multi-rigid-body dynamics
              simulation for use 
in robotics, virtual reality, manufacturing design and
              other fields.
This will enable the development of software that will become
              
an important component of the manufacturing infrastructure of the future.
