Title       : Atomic-Scale Structure and Surface Kinetics of Semiconductor Heteroepitaxy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9973436

Award Number: 9973436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Bedzyk bedzyk@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project explores several key issues related to growth of group IV epitaxial
              materials by surfactant mediated processes. In situ studies will center on
              adsorption of elements from groups IV-VI on the (001) surface of Si and Ge
              single crystals to explore issues of general importance for heteroepitaxy. The
              approach is to first determine the structure of equilibrium and metastable
              surface phases of relevant monoelemental adsorbates. Next, adsorption on
              pseudomorphic layers will be studied to gain an understanding of factors such
              as lattice strain, steric effects, and relative chemical bond strength that
              determine the structure of a particular surface heterophase. The modification
              of the kinetics of surface processes by surfactants will then be explored, and
              exploited to facilitate growth of metastable epitaxial alloy structures. The
              structural perfection and lattice strain of the heteroepitaxial thin films
              produced will be examined as a sensitive monitor of the efficacy of the
              investigated growth technique. The study features x-ray standing waves, surface
              x-ray diffraction, and surface extended x-ray absorption fine structure
              spectroscopy, and focuses on the initial and secondary phases of strained-layer
              heteroepitaxy, as well as the kinetics of epitaxial growth. Specific aspects of
              heteroepitaxial growth to be examined are: (1)surface structure resulting from
              the deposition of a monolayer (or less) of a heterolayer, (2)surface structure
              of growth-related adsorbates (e.g., surfactants or dopants) on the surface of
              the substrate, (3)structure found on the surface of a thin strained
              heterolayer, and (4)alteration of surface kinetics by the presence of a
              surfactant species.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a
              topical area of materials science having technological relevance. An important
              feature of the project is the integration of research and education through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. 
              
***

