Title       : Adaptive Methods for Systems of Reaction-Diffusion Equations in Three Space
               Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9973048

Award Number: 9973048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jong-Shi Pang                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73914              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973048

Systems of reaction-diffusion equations occur frequently in
              scientific and engineering applications.  Some important examples include the
              bidomain model with the Beeler-Reuter ionic membrane kinetics in cardiac
              electrophysiology, the Brusselator model of the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction
              and Turing models of pattern formation Adaptive finite element methods are
              particularly well-suited to these problems and indeed have proved effective in
              solving a wide variety of partial differential equations without requiring user
              intervention.  This proposal aims to develop software for solving
              reaction-diffusion systems in three dimensions efficiently and accurately. 
              Adaptive codes depend on two building blocks, a posteriori error estimates and
              adaptive grid strategies.  The finite element method will employ hp-adaptivity
              where h and p will be allowed to vary in different directions (anisotropic
              refinement).  A new data structure for storing anisotropic grids will be
              implemented.  The adaptive strategy will be coupled with new a posteriori error
              indicators based on successful indicators developed by the proposer for linear
              elements.  The large system of linear equations arising from the temporal and
              spatial discretization process will be solved using preconditioned GMRES.  An
              adaptive preconditioning selection strategy will be used to choose the
              appropriate preconditioner during program execution.

Many physical and
              biological processes can be modeled by reaction-diffusion equations.  Some
              important examples include pattern formation in biological systems and voltage
              propagation in the heart.  Specifically models for voltage propagation in the
              heart aid in understanding the onset of cardiac arrhythmias and may lead to
              better therapies.  These models involve a large number of equations over both
              simple and complex geometries.  The goal of this proposal is to provide
              researchers, such as biomedical engineers, with the accurate and efficient
              computational tools necessary in order to analyze their models in the case of
              simple geometries.  These tools can then be used in solving problems on more
              complex geometries.  This work is being carried out in conjunction with the
              work of a biomedical engineer at Tulane University.

