Title       : POWRE: Over Spilt Milk: Regret for Decisions Gone Awry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9973618

Award Number: 9973618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69636              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa D. Ordonez lordonez@bpa.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People often make decisions in which they regret their actions, because another
              choice would have led to a better outcome.  Students might regret not studying
              harder for a class if their final grade is low and that of a close classmate
              who did study hard is high, or managers might regret investments in a business
              strategy that fails to produce forecasted results if a competitor's strategy
              produces superior results.  From the first time a child touches a hot pan on
              the stove with her bare hands, she begins experiencing regret.  The feelings
              from these experiences affect future decisions that people make.  The study of
              the effects regret has on decision-making is in its infancy and offers promise
              as a significant area of research within the general field of decision-making. 
              Research on regret has vast implications in other related fields, such as
              organizational learning, knowledge management/knowledge creation, and business
              strategy. 

This research will investigate the frequently observed phenomenon
              that people regret decisions to act more than decisions not to act that produce
              the same negative outcome.  For example, parents face a dilemma when deciding
              whether or not to vaccinate their child, because there is a small risk that the
              child will contract the disease due to the vaccination and a somewhat higher
              risk of contracting the disease if they do not vaccinate.  The majority of
              parents surveyed stated that they would regret a decision to vaccinate more
              than a decision not to vaccinate if their child contracted the disease.  This
              research will investigate whether this result is affected by the perceived
              responsibility of the decision-maker; perhaps parents feel more responsible
              when deciding to vaccinate than they do when deciding not to vaccinate.  The
              research will also examine the impact of social norms on regret; it may be the
              case that a strong norm to vaccinate children may reverse this result and cause
              parents to regret a decision not to vaccinate more than a decision to vaccinate
              when their child contracts the disease.  

In addition, this research will
              examine how regret affects group decision-making.  Previous research on
              individual decision-making indicates that people will choose options that
              minimize potential regret (e.g., not to sell a failing stock for fear that it
              will increase in value soon after it would be sold).  However, no research has
              examined if this same result applies to groups.  Since groups, not individuals,
              make most major business-related decisions, it is important to address this
              issue.  

This POWRE Grant will assist the investigator, one of very few
              female ethnic minority professors in management, in her effort to become a
              leader in the field.  It will also assist her in serving as a mentor and role
              model to other women and minorities.

