Title       : POWRE: Decomposition of Superimposed Action Potential Waveforms Using
               Cross-Time-Frequency Transforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9973680

Award Number: 9973680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zeynep Erim erim@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973680
Erim
The purpose of the proposed work is to apply recent advances in
              Time/Frequency transforms to a specific problem in electrophysiology.  The
              problem in question is that of observing the firing patterns of individual
              motor units (muscle fibers activated as a group) for the purposes of basic
              research, and for diagnosis and outcome assessment in rehabilitation in the
              clinical environment.  The project aims to further and complete previous
              NSF-funded work that enabled the identification of the activities of motor
              units when their discharges did not overlap in time.  The goal of this project
              is to develop a technique to decompose action potentials when they do overlap
              in time, using the cross-time-frequency transform.

In assessing muscle
              function by studying the firing activity of the individual motor units that
              make up the muscle, electromyographic (EMG) signals are typically detected via
              needle electrodes inserted into the muscle.  Using the fact that each motor
              unit generates a distinct action potential waveform when it fires, it is
              possible to determine, from the needle EMG signal, the instances of firing for
              each motor unit within the pick-up area of the probe.  This information is
              relevant in determining the strategies employed by the central nervous system
              in controlling the production of muscle force.  This assessment is important
              both for basic research to understand the normal production of force, and for
              the clinical diagnosis of neuromuscular deficiencies.  The accurate
              identification of motor unit firings is also important in ensuring a reliable
              representation of action potential shapes, which is useful in the diagnosis of
              dysfunctional muscles.

The decomposition of the needle EMG signal into the
              activities of single motor units becomes complicated when the action potentials
              of different motor units are similar, change shape with time or superimpose on
              each other.  The problem becomes especially complicated when the action
              potentials that superimpose have an overlap in frequency content as well as
              overlapping in time.  This project will apply cross-time-frequency
              distributions to the decomposition of superimposed waveforms.  It is hoped that
              the availability of the representation of the time and frequency distribution
              of the signals will provide a better separation than is possible using just the
              time or frequency domain representation of the signal.  The basic procedure
              will be based on pairing the superimposed waveform to be resolved with each of
              the identified action potential templates and computing the
              cross-time-frequency transform.  The resultant cross-time-frequency transform
              will be compared to the auto-time-frequency representation of the action
              potential template in question to determine if the template is included in the
              superposition.  The technique will be based on the notion that after proper
              alignment and filtering in the ambiguity domain, the cross-time-frequency
              transform will be similar to the time-frequency transform for the action
              potentials that were indeed included in the superposition, while considerably
              different than the time-frequency transform of the action potential when
              considering action potentials that were not involved in making up the
              superimposed waveform.  Hence by comparing the cross-time frequency to the
              time-frequency representation, it will be possible to determine which action
              potentials were included in the superposition.

The ultimate goal is to
              develop a decomposition procedure that can correctly identify all motor unit
              firings, including those that are superimposed, from the raw needle EMG signal
              with minimal input from the operator, in order to greatly facilitate
              intramuscular EMG studies both for research and clinical purposes. 

