Title       : POWRE: Understanding the Electronic and Optical Properties of Conducting
               Polymers through Quantum Monte Carlo Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9973458

Award Number: 9973458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandralekha Singh singh@bondi.phyast.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the electronic and optical properties of conducting
              polymers using quantum Monte Carlo simulation techniques. The large nonlinear
              optical response and ultrafast response at the sub-picosecond level make
              certain polymer structures excellent candidates for fast switching and memory
              devices. The approach is to study the influence of Coulomb interactions,
              quantum lattice fluctuations, and disorder on and localization properties. The
              results are expected to resolve discrepancies in the measured values of
              nonlinear optical susceptibility by various experimental groups, particularly
              the puzzling presence of a two photon peak in the susceptibility spectrum. In
              addition, polyaniline derivatives, which exhibit large conductivities
              comparable to the native form, despite the broken structural symmetry will be
              modeled. Simulations will be carried out as a function of the strength of
              Coulomb interaction, disorder, ionic mass and dopant concentration.
%%% 
This
              is a research enhancement grant made under the Professional Opportunities for
              Women in Research and Education (POWRE) program. The research will contribute
              basic materials science knowledge relevant to the understanding and utilization
              of polymers in electronic/photonic applications. The interdisciplinary project
              involves collaborations among theory and experiment across physics and
              chemistry, and also places emphasis on the integration of research and
              education by incorporating graduate student participation into research related
              to classroom activities. The project is co-supported by the Division of
              Materials Research, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities).
              
***

