Title       : POWRE: Aquatic Education Learning Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a9973243

Award Number: 9973243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet H. Vail vailj@gvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/331-7105

NSF Program : 1592      PROF OPPOR FOR WOMEN IN RSCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The focal point of the Aquatic Education Learning Community project is to
              bring hands-on science to thousands of students and the general public through
              development of a Lake Michigan Center to be located on the shore of Muskegon
              Lake in Michigan.  The project will build on the success of the Grand Valley
              State University - Water Resources Institute (GVSU-WRI) Outreach and Education
              Program, a Michigan Department of Education grant to the Institute for teacher
              professional development, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Lake
              Michigan Forum Making Lake Michigan Great tour.  It will also allow the PI, who
              was recently awarded a doctoral degree, to increase her prominence in science
              and enhance her professional capabilities at GVSU-WRI.
     The goals for the
              Aquatic Education Learning Community project and the GVSU-WRI Outreach and
              Education Program include the following:
     o  continue to develop the K-12,
              teacher enhancement, public education, and university
        programs aboard
              the D. J. Angus and W. G. Jackson vessels;
     o  pursue the development of
              shoreline facilities which support the vessels and permit 
         expansion
              of environmental education programming and research;
     o  foster
              connections throughout the Lake Michigan Basin through the Making Lake Michigan
              Great 	           Tour of the W. G. Jackson vessel; and
     o  become a
              regional center for environmental outreach to K-12 education, business,
              industry, 	  	           government, agriculture, and communities.
    
              Creation of a Lake Michigan Center and the Making Lake Michigan Great tour will
              serve as catalysts for aquatic education throughout the entire Lake Michigan
              Basin.  Using the schoolship experience and stream/lake monitoring as a
              crucible for creative partnerships, the Center and the tour will pull together
              in-service and prospective teachers, students, scientific researchers, business
              and industry, government agencies, and communities to create a community of
              learners.

