Title       : POWRE: New Materials Science Program at Cooper Union
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9973841

Award Number: 9973841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jie Li   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cooper Union
	      Albert Nerken School of Engrg
	      New York, NY  100037120    212/353-4177

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1592,9161,AMPP,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The project involves componenets in both research and engineering education. 
              First, the PI will broaden her previous work on the study of the visco-elastic
              behavior of polymer-matrix composites.  Specifically, she will initiate
              research on the time-and temperature-dependent behavior and physical aging
              effect on polymers and plymer-matrix composites at Cooper Union's Materials
              Characterization Laboratory.  The project will enable the PI to continue her
              contributions in the field of composite materils and to allow Cooper Union
              faculty and students to gain first-hand  access to the PI's work and
              experience.
Second, the PI will use her research to establish a formal
              materials science program at the Cooper Union.  Due to the recent development
              of advanced composite materials, it is vital to update the curriculum.  The PI
              is porposing the devleopment and implementation of an undergraduate course,
              Introduction to Composite Materials, to encourge students' interest in compost
              materials research and in new advanced materials and technology.  This course
              will integrate mini-projects in the Materilas Characterization Laboratory. 
              Students will be exposed to a larger range of professional choices as they
              contemplate academic and technical careers.
The POWRE awards is made in view
              of the fact that the PI's career had been interrupted and that she is changing
              her focus from mechancial engineering to materials science and engineering.  As
              a new faculty memeber - and the Cooper Union's only instructer in materials
              science and engineering - the POWRE grant will be instrumental in providing the
              PI with recognition, resources, and opportunity at an early stage in her
              career, which had been interrupted.  The project will contribute to a
              significant, identifiable advanced in the PI's career path.
