Title       : Electronic Properties of Strained Narrow-Gap Quantum Wells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9973167

Award Number: 9973167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Santos msantos@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ryan E. Doezema  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheena Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses materials science and physics of 2DES(two dimensional
              electronic systems) based on InSb/AlInSb heterostructures. InSb is
              characterized by extreme values compared to other III-V materials, having the
              smallest energy gap, the smallest electron effective mass, the largest electron
              g-factor, and the most non-parabolic conduction band of all III-V
              semiconductors. These dramatically different parameters make two-dimensional
              electronic systems (2DESs) in InSb intriguing alternatives to GaAs-based 2DESs.
              Although the host material can influence the physics of the imbedded 2DES,
              there has been little motivation to study 2DESs in alternative materials since
              most are of considerably worse crystalline quality. Now that InSb/AlxIn1-xSb
              structures have been produced with mobilities comparable to those of
              GaAs/AlxGa1-xAs structures in which the fractional quantum Hall effect was
              first observed. These high mobilities, coupled with the vastly different
              parameter space of InSb 2DESs, provide the impetus for this project. The
              objectives are to advance the materials science of InSb/AlxIn1-xSb
              heteroepitaxy and to explore the properties of InSb 2DESs via low-temperature
              magneto-transport and magneto-optics.
Several  approaches will be used to
              improve materials quality. A scanning probe microscope, connected to the same
              vacuum as the MBE chamber, will be used to assess doping efficiency and buffer
              layer effectiveness on lattice-mismatched substrates. An atomic hydrogen source
              will be used to passivate the growth surface and facilitate oxide desorption
              from InSb substrates. Improvement of the materials quality will increase the
              relative importance of electron-electron interactions in 2DESs studied at low
              temperature. Magneto-transport experiments will explore the quantum Hall state
              to insulator transition and behavior in the fractional quantum Hall regime.
              Magneto-optical studies will be used characterize the energy band structure of
              InSb to determine the confinement potential through measurement of interband
              excitonic transitions in undoped wells; establish the two-dimensional band
              structure through analysis of excitonic transitions, intersubband resonance,
              and cyclotron resonance; and probe electron dynamics at low Landau-level
              fillings. The wide scope of the project requires collaboration between three
              co-investigators with collective expertise in molecular beam epitaxy,
              magneto-transport experiments, and optical measurements. 
%%%
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science having
              high potential technological relevance. The research will contribute basic
              materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to new aspects of electronic
              devices. A variety of fundamental issues are to be addressed in these
              investigations, and the proposed experiments may also develop technologically
              important material combinations.  An important feature of the program is the
              integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area.  
***

