Title       : POWRE: Compartmentalization of Protein Kinase A (PKA) in Epithelia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2000     
File        : a9973746

Award Number: 9973746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherell K. Byrd   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fort Lewis College
	      
	      Durango, CO  81301    303/247-7661

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

In this POWRE grant, the principal investigator, who is at a small college,
              will spend a sabbatical year of research at the University of North Carolina at
              Chapel Hill in the laboratory of Dr. Sharon L.Milgram, where she will learn
              techniques of cell and molecular biology that can be applied to problems in
              cell signaling in a variety of model systems. The research will specifically
              test the hypothesis that protein kinase A (PKA) is anchored at the apical cell
              surface by A-kinase anchoring proteins (AKAPs) and that this anchoring is
              required for PKA-mediated regulation of apical ion transport.  In Aim 1, the PI
              will learn cell culture techniques and establish stable epithelial cell lines
              expressing the soluble HT31 peptide fused with the greeen fluorescent protein
              (GFP). HT31 is known to bind PKA with high affinity, and removes PKA from
              membranes when overexpressed in cells. The PI will test the hypothesis that
              efficient modulation
of apical ion channels requires membrane-associate PKA.
              In Aim 2 the PI will learn a variety of molecular biology techniques to clone
              and characterize AKAPs expressed in airway epithelial cells. Site-directed
              mutagenesis and expression in cell lines will be done to identify PKA binding
              sites in the cloned AKAPs, and to determine whether novel AKAPs target the cell
              surface in epithelia. In addition the PI will explore the function
              of
epithelial AKAPs using cell culture model systems, and will determine
              whether
particular AKAPs are required for efficient modulation of apical ion
              transport. 
A secondary goal of this POWRE application is to develop
              research
projects that can be performed by undergraduates at Fort Lewis
              College, and to establish a long-term relationship between students at Fort
              Lewis College and faculty at the University of North Carolina.  Since Fort
              Lewis College has an enrollment of ~12 % Native Americans, the proposal also
              impacts on the education of minority students 


