Title       : POWRE: Structural Specializations of Protea Flowers and their Role in the
               Biology of African Sugarbirds: A Solution to Dilution?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9973921

Award Number: 9973921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183208             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Beuchat cbeuchat@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1066,1592,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              There are many examples of plant-pollinator relationships in which one or both
              of the participants exhibit some degree of specialization.  Many species of
              plants, for example, have flowers with long corollas that are suited to
              visitation by hummingbirds, but which exclude other animals such as bees. 
              Little is known about pollination systems in the Cape Floral Kingdom of
              southern-most Africa.  The African Cape is one of the richest areas in the
              world botanically, and although many of its species rely primarily on birds for
              pollination, its avian diversity is exceptionally low.  There are only nine
              species of birds on which over 400 species of plants depend for pollination. 
              Most conspicuous among these is the Cape sugarbird (Promerops cafer), which is
              found only in South Africa.  It is a medium-sized (35 g), nectar-feeding bird
              that has a close relationship with plants in the family Proteaceae, and
              especially with species in the genus Protea, of which at least 33 are
              bird-pollinated.  The Cape proteas produce large, compound inflorescences with
              copious nectar that is the major food resource of Cape sugarbirds during their
              winter breeding season.  Winter is the rainy season in the African Cape, so a
              problem faced by sugarbirds is dilution of Protea nectar by rain, but not all
              species of Protea are equally vulnerable.  Nectar of proteas with large bowl-
              or saucer-shaped inflorescences is most readily diluted by rain.  Some species
              of proteas, however, produce flowers that have densely furred outer bracts that
              never open fully (the so-called "bearded" proteas).  In these, the
              concentration of the nectar remains virtually unchanged by even heavy
              rain.
Anecdotal accounts in the literature and personal observations suggest
              that areas most favored by Cape sugarbirds for breeding also tend to have
              significant stands of at least one species of bearded Protea.  From the
              perspective of the bird, this would ensure a reliable, high quality food source
              at a time when its energy requirements are very high due to reproduction and
              low temperature, and its foraging is constrained by short days and the need to
              remain near the nest.  For the proteas, the investment in floral structures to
              protect the nectar should pay off in enhanced pollinator fidelity after rains,
              which would facilitate pollination and high seed set.
Together, the PIs are 
              investigating the importance of the floral specializations that protect the
              nectar of proteas to the biology of Cape sugarbirds.  Using comprehensive
              locality databases for both the proteas and the birds, the PI is  identifying
              sugarbird breeding areas as well as habitats supporting the Protea species of
              interest.  The PI is  surveying these habitats to determine the number of
              breeding birds and the species of proteas present, as well as to estimate the
              quantity and quality of nectar available before and after rain.  Behavioral
              observations document potential shifts in feeding behavior that might be
              associated with changes in nectar quality.  Laboratory studies are determining
              the minimum nectar concentration on which sugarbirds are able to maintain body
              mass while energetically stressed, which will provide an indication of the
              degree of nectar dilution that can be tolerated by birds in the field.
The
              results of this study will provide information about sugarbirds and proteas
              that might be crucial to the protection of these species in the face of
              increasing habitat degradation in South Africa's Western Cape, a region with
              one of the highest levels of biodiversity in the world.
The opportunity to
              work in Africa arose after the PI resigned from her tenured faculty position
              because of inadequate infrastructural support that had crippled her research
              program.  This project has grown out of ideas generated during a visit to South
              Africa that the PI took in spring 1998 to take advantage of the relative
              freedom of unemployment.  The project is an exceptional opportunity for the PI
              because it blends her expertise in the biology of avian nectarivores with a
              chance to substantially broaden her ecological expertise.  Most important, it
              offers the PI a way of maintaining a high level of productivity while she
              rebuilds her resume and searches for a suitable permanent faculty position.

