Title       : POWRE: Analysis of Space-clamp Errors in Voltage-clamp Experiments on an
               Extended Neuron
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9973306

Award Number: 9973306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Castelfranco castelf@pbrc.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to better understand a serious type of
              error that can arise when an important measurement procedure (the "voltage
              clamp") is used in experimental neurophysiology and biophysics. Voltage-clamp
              methods are widely used to characterize quantitatively properties of ionic
              channels in neurons. An intrinsic defect in the procedure gives rise to what
              are termed "space-clamp errors" when the voltage clamp is applied to certain
              cells. In order for the voltage clamp to yield an accurate measurement of ionic
              conductance across a cell membrane, the current must be measured across a patch
              of membrane with no spatial variation in the voltage. However, in many research
              applications there is no practical way of achieving spatial uniformity of
              potential. In neurophysiology, for example, axons and dendrites attached to a
              nerve-cell body (i.e., long or "extended" neurons) are a common source of
              spatial voltage variation.
 
It is sometimes possible to modify the
              experimental procedure in order to reduce space-clamp errors; however, the
              results are not always satisfactory, and the scope of such modification is
              limited. An alternative is post-experimental analysis and correction based on
              mathematical models and computer simulation. This project will carry out such
              an analysis. In particular: (1) computer simulations will be carried out for
              space-clamp errors arising from voltage clamp of a simplified model of an
              extended neuron; and (2) mathematical models of a neuron with active ionic
              channels will be developed based on modifications of the "cable equations,"
              which were originally developed for membranes with no active channels. The
              results of the simulations, and the fitted mathematical models, will then be
              subjected to analysis in order that the nature and magnitude of space-clamp
              errors can be assessed, and that criteria for recognition of, and correction
              for, these errors can be developed.

This POWRE project will enable Dr.
              Castelfranco to return to a research program in mathematical neurophysiology
              consistent with her training and scientific interests, following an involuntary
              hiatus of several years. Moreover, it will transform her official status within
              her home institution to one that will increase her access to resources and
              raise the visibility of her research.
