Title       : Conference: 1999 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Meeting on the Neurobiology of
               Drosophila Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Laboratory: Cold Harbor, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9973923

Award Number: 9973923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15010              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              L   This conference on neurobiology of the fruitfly, Drosophila, brings together
              junior and senior workers in the field to discuss the latest advances in the
              neurosciences which are being made in this highly successful model system.
              Drosophila has been a classical model system for genetic studies because of its
              fast reproduction cycle, easy handling and breeding, and ease of inducing
              heritable mutations.  It now also serves as a model system for developmental
              neuroscience and for aspects of sensory and behavioral neuroscience. This is
              the only meeting in the U.S. concentrating on Drosophila neurobiology, and has
              been roughly biennial since 1986.  This year it focuses on the advances made as
              the combined power of genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry, cell biology
              and behavioral analysis are brought to bear on fundamental problems in
              neurobiology.  Topics covered range from development to circadian rhythms, and
              this year include expanded discussion of synaptic plasticity, adult central
              nervous system function, and complex behaviors.  The meeting is small enough to
              avoid concurrent sessions, and poster sessions provide additional time for
              discussion. Results presented at the meeting will be disseminated by an
              abstract volume that has a wide readership beyond the Drosophila community,
              into all areas of neuroscience.
   The impact on neuroscience will come from
              the close interactions across different approaches presented at this
              conference, and from attendance by young investigators and those from
              underrepresented groups, to have an impact on their careers.


