Title       : POWRE: Femtosecond Far-infrared Studies of Carrier Dynamics in Disordered
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9973615

Award Number: 9973615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Dexheimer dexheimer@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to achieve greater understanding of carrier dynamics in
              disordered electronic materials. The research will apply new techniques
              involving recently developed methods for the generation and detection of
              femtosecond pulses in the far-infrared (terahertz frequency range) to probe
              carrier processes in amorphous and microcrystalline silicon, and in related
              materials. Experiments are designed to address unresolved issues in the
              transport properties of these materials by probing the carrier dynamics on a
              previously unexplored energy scale corresponding to localized states near the
              mobility edge. Experiments are also planned to investigate the fundamental
              nature of two-level tunneling states in amorphous materials. The role of
              disorder in the electronic properties will be addressed in measurements on a
              series of well-characterized samples, including films with controlled degrees
              of order produced by the hot-wire-assisted chemical vapor deposition technique.
              
%%% 
This is a research enhancement grant made under the Professional
              Opportunities for Women in Research and Education (POWRE) program. The research
              will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level of
              special relevance to the behavior of electronic materials. The project also
              places emphasis on the integration of research and education through graduate
              and undergraduate student participation in research, and involves a special
              summer Research Assistantship to encourage participation of underrepresented
              minorities and women students in research. The project is co-supported by the
              Division of Materials Research, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities). 
***

