Title       : Improving the Cost Effectiveness of WDM Optical Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2000     
File        : a9973098

Award Number: 9973098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suresh Subramaniam suresh@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hyeong-Ah Choi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is a joint proposal submitted by investigators at the George
              Washington University and the College of William and Mary.  

In spite of
              lower error rates and far higher capacities, WDM (Wavelength Division
              Multiplexing) optical networks have yet to compete with their electronic
              counterparts in the marketplace.  The main reason is the prohibitive cost of
              the hardware, which puts optical networks out of reach for all but a few
              users.
The research proposed here takes aim at some of these prohibitive costs
              and is intended to help network designers answer some questions related to
              dimensioning and component-sizing that can help reduce hardware costs.

The
              proposed research takes as a starting point an all-optical circuit-switched
              multifiber  avelength-routing ring, a tested technology, and asks the question
              ``Can high performance be obtained with less hardware?'' While many aspects of
              a network (ranging from manufacturability to higher-level software design) make
              up the overall cost, this project focuses on reducing costs by limiting the
              complexity (crosspoints) of optical switches and from more effectively using
              available bandwidth by time-slotting.

Three types of resource allocation
              problems that arise from these cost considerations will be investigated and
              algorithms that perform resource allocation will be designed and
              evaluated.

The first type of problem involves limiting the flexibility of
              fiber-to-fiber switches in an effort to reduce the cost of manufacturing
              switches. Preliminary results indicate that near-optimal throughput can be
              obtained even with significant reduction in the connectivity of the switch.
              Some research questions that will be addressed in this case are: how does
              performance vary quantitatively with limitations in switching to fibers? does
              wavelength allocation differ fundamentally with these restrictions?

The
              second type of problem involves constructing larger networks from smaller
              rings. Research questions for this problem include:  how should all-optical
              multiple rings be connected in a cost-effective manner, especially by using
              fiber-switching limitations? how should wavelengths be partitioned (if at all)
              for inter-ring and intra-ring sessions?

The third type of problem involves
              efficiently scheduling multi-rate sessions in an optical network with slots
              (time-division multiplexing). The practical feasibility of this technology has
              already been demonstrated. The focus here is on resource allocation problems
              that, by more effectively using bandwidth with fiber-switching limitations,
              reduce overall network cost.

Finally, an integrative approach will be taken
              to study network performance when all three types of design features are
              present. The research results are intended to be applicable in the near future,
              and therefore the initial approach will use a combination of simulation and
              modeling, whereas later the PIs will aim for a deeper theoretical understanding
              of the problem.


