Title       : POWRE: A Sunwheel for the 21st Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1999    
File        : a9973527

Award Number: 9973527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith S. Young young@astro.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  - Young    AST 9973527

A Sunwheel, like Stonehenge, is a calendar
              an outdoor astronomy exhibit whose standing stones line up with the locations
              on the horizon of the rising and setting Sun at the times of the solstices and
              equinoxes. A Sunwheel at the University of Massachusetts campus will be
              constructed.  This Sunwheel will provide an experiential basis for school
              children, for University students, and for the general public to learn about,
              observe, and understand the basic cycles exhibited by the Sun and Moon
              throughout the calendar year. In October of 1995, permission was given to
              construct a Sunwheel at an excellent site on campus at the University of
              Massachusetts. The observations necessary for the data for construction of this
              Sunwheel were completed between June 1996 and March 1997. A preliminary stone
              circle was built in May 1997 with stones 2 feet high.  This Sunwheel project
              will involve the construction of 8-foot tall granite standing
              stones.

Through the Sunwheel, which concretely illustrates the variations in
              the Sun's position on the horizon throughout the year, a greater awareness and
              understanding of astronomy will be available to school children, to the
              University community, and to the general public, thereby enhancing science
              literacy, encouraging curiosity, and improving the quality of life.  A series
              of presentations specifically designed for fourth through sixth graders, and to
              be given at the Sunwheel, will be developed.   It is planned to use these
              presentations to instill an understanding of the seasons, which is one of the
              most misunderstood fundamental concepts involving astronomical knowledge.
              Additionally, through the presence as a scientist and a teacher of science at
              the Sunwheel site, a role model for young girls will be active and present at a
              crucial time in the development of their ideas about their future interests and
              careers.  In this time of increased awareness of the importance of involving
              research scientists in creative teaching activities, and providing role models
              for underrepresented groups, the Sunwheel project helps to produce a highly
              visible educational structure with great power to enhance science literacy and
              excite youngsters in learning about astronomy.

This award is supported by
              funds from the Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences.


