Title       : POWRE: Infrared and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies of the Manganese
               Stabilizing Protein in Photosystem II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9973324

Award Number: 9973324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74922              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roseann Sachs rsachs@ColoradoCollege.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado College
	      
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80903    303/473-2233

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1164,1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9973324
Roseann Sachs
POWRE: Infrared and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
              Studies of the Manganese Stabilizing Protein in Photosystem II. 

1.
              Technical Abstract

Photosynthetic oxygen evolution is the process by which
              light energy is
used to convert water to molecular oxygen.  Photosystem II is
              the
multisubunit enzyme directly responsible for this oxidation in plants,
              green
algae and cyanobacteria.  The core of the oxygen-evolving complex is
              a
cluster of four manganese atoms, which accumulate the four
              oxidizing
equivalents necessary for the oxidation of water.  Current efforts
              are
underway to understand the nature of ligation to the manganese cluster,
              the
structures of the Mn cluster in the various oxidation states and the
              exact
mechanism of water oxidation.  Three extrinsic proteins, having
              molecular
weights of 18,24, and 33 kilodaltons are directly involved in
              enzymatic
activity and stability.  The largest of these is also called the
              manganese
stabilizing protein (MSP) and plays an important role in stabilizing
              the
active site.  However, the exact nature of its role is unknown. 
              One
currently held theory is that MSP may sequentially deprotonate and
              protonate
during photosynthetic water oxidation.  Such deprotonation reactions
              could
play a role in the stabilization of charge separated transition states
              in
the manganese cluster, thus lowering the activation energy for
              water
oxidation.  In order to shed further light on the role of this protein
              in
oxygen evolution, an isotopically edited version of MSP will be
              prepared.
Light minus dark difference infrared spectroscopy of photosystem
              II
complexes containing either isotope-edited or native MSP will be used
              to
probe for the changes that occur in this specific protein as the
              light
induced reactions take place.  Finally, solid state nuclear
              magnetic
resonance spectroscopy of these labeled complexes will be used to
              shed
further light on the changes that occur in the manganese stabilizing
              protein
as photooxidation occurs. Under the POWRE program, the PI will spend
              a
sabbatial leave to undertake this study in the laboratory of Bridgette Barry
              
at the Unversity of Minnesota.  The experience so gained will be integrated
              
into both research  and teaching by the PI at the Colorado College.

2.
              Non-technical abstract 
 


     Photosynthesis is the means by which a
              plant converts solar energy into
chemical energy.  Although the process has
              been studied extensively, the
molecular details are still far from being
              completely understood.
Determination of the mechanism of photosynthesis is
              very important due to
our global dependence on solar energy for both energy
              and food.  It is also
the ultimate hope that a better understanding of the
              natural system will
inspire the construction of devices that can mimic the
              biologicial system
and efficiently use solar energy for human use.  The plant
              uses light to
convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen in two
              distinct
phases.  The first phase is often referred to as the "light
              reactions."  In
these reactions, the plant converts light energy into chemical
              energy stored
in the plant, and water into oxygen.  In the second phase, the
              chemical
energy stored in the plant is used to convert carbon dioxide to
              glucose annd
other carbohydrates.  These reactions can occur in the absence of
              light and
are referred to as the dark reactions.  A large protein complex
              called
Photosystem II is primarily reponsible for the "light reactions" in
              plants.
It contains chlorophyll, a cluster of four manganese atoms, and a
              number of
large proteins and other important molecules.  The purpose of my
              work will
be to gain more insight into the environment and structure of the
              manganese
cluster and the surrounding proteins as it undergoes these
              "light
reactions", and to integrate the knowledge so obtained into the
              teaching activities 
of the PI.

