Title       : POWRE: Determination and Modelling of Synergistic Effects of Carbon Based
               Conductive Fillers for Electrically and Thermally Conductive Resins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9973278

Award Number: 9973278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia A. King jaking@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1592,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and Education (POWRE)
              project is to investigate the synergistic effects of combining several forms of
              carbon based conductive fillers to enhance the thermal and electrical
              conductivity of polymer composites. Electrically and thermally conductive
              resins are commercially produced today in limited quantities. However, demand
              for thermally and electrically conductive resins is rapidly growing due to more
              stringent regulation on electronic noise, as well as the increased need for
              smaller, more densely packed electronic components.  The vast majority of the
              conductive resins available today or studied in the past utilize only one type
              of conductive filler.  In prior work, the principal investigator has noted a
              positive synergistic effect when three different carbon-based conductive
              fillers are combined in nylon 6,6 matrix material.  Hence, in this study, a
              factorial design approach will be used to determine the effect of four
              different commercially available and cost effective carbon-based conductive
              fillers on the thermal and electrical conductivity of a polycarbonate and a
              nylon 6,6 based conductive resin.  These conductive resins will be further
              studied to determine the variables (conductivity of the constituents, %
              crystallinity of the matrix, length of conductive filler in the composite,
              distance between conductive fillers, etc.) that affect thermal and electrical
              conductivity.  
     This information will be used to develop thermal and
              electrical conductivity models that accurately predict the thermal and
              electrical conductivity of conductive resins containing combinations of
              different conductive fillers. The project is expected to provide networking
              opportunities for the principal investigator in her academic pursuits, as well
              as to expand upon the industrial links from her earlier professional
              activities.

