Title       : Algorithms for Nonsmooth Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9973321

Award Number: 9973321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Billups sbillups@carbon.cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop algorithms for solving nonsmooth systems
              of
equations, addressing areas where methods for nonsmooth equations
              lag
behind those for smooth equations.  The first of these areas
              involves
solving highly nonlinear problems where an associated merit
              function
may have local minima that are not solutions.  Such problems
              cause
difficulties for descent-based methods, which may converge only to
              a
local minimum of this merit function.  The second area focuses on
solving
              ill-posed problems (that is, those with singular, or
ill-conditioned Jacobian
              matrices at a solution).  The third area
addresses developing limited memory
              methods for solving very
large-scale problems.  In the smooth domain, a number
              of tools are
available for solving such very large-scale problems.  These
              include
preconditioned conjugate gradient methods, limited-memory
              quasi-Newton
methods, Chebyshev methods, and truncated Newton methods. 
              Possible
extensions of these methods to solving nonsmooth systems of
              equations
will be explored.  In addition to the pursuit of these
              natural
extensions of smooth methods to the nonsmooth problem
              domain,
practical algorithms for solving generalized equations will
              be
developed.  The ultimate goal of these four research areas is
              the
development of high quality computer software for solving
              nonsmooth
equations, which will be made publicly available.

In less
              technical terms, this project is aimed at developing high
quality computer
              software for solving certain types of nonsmooth
equations for which current
              computational tools are inadequate.
Nonsmooth equations provide a unifying
              framework for many important
mathematical problems and have applications in a
              wide variety of
fields.  Some examples include international trade,
              development
planning, financial options pricing, robotics, contact
              mechanics,
traffic equilibria, and economic equilibria.  Because of this
              wide
array of applications, the development of software that improves
our
              ability to solve nonsmooth equations will provide a valuable 
tool for solving
              many problems of national interest.
