Title       : POWRE: An Experimental Study of Cost Sharing and Rationing Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9973731

Award Number: 9973731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71368              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Razzolini laura@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to test experimentally mechanisms designed to share
              common resources and costs. This project is a natural extension of theoretical
              research by the PI on pricing mechanisms.  In this previous work supported by
              NSF, a framework for a particular mechanism, the "Serial Cost Sharing Rule,"
              was developed to be implemented as an auction.  Because of its powerful
              incentive properties, the serial cost-sharing rule can be used to price and
              allocate scarce resources in a way that accurately reflects the underlying
              needs.  When resources are limited and there is contention among agents,
              however, rationing needs to be employed in conjunction with cost sharing. 
              Theoretically developed cost sharing and rationing mechanisms are not typically
              tested experimentally. Contributions to the theory will be to generalize
              probabilistic rationing mechanisms. The PI will bring subjects into the
              laboratory to observe and study their responses to realistic incentives and
              institutions when sharing and paying for a common resource. The subjects will
              decide about the quantities when confronted with a specific cost sharing or
              rationing rule. The subjects' choices and decisions will be compared with
              predictions from the theoretical models. 

Large and complex organizations
              face a continual challenge of allocating common shared resources efficiently
              and effectively.  The allocation problem is complicated for the planners when
              these shared resources are scarce.  This can be further aggravated if demanders
              overstate their case for desired resources in order to ensure access.  As a
              result, the decision-makers charged with the task of allocating the resources
              may not have an accurate representation of actual needs.  A great deal of
              attention has been devoted to developing mechanisms for cost sharing and
              rationing.  However, this body of work has virtually ignored the crucial
              question of to what extent can these mathematical mechanisms be implemented and
              tested in an actual decision environment.  Thus, this research has potential to
              make a significant contribution in the interface between theory and
              experimental research.

The PI is an assistant professor who is working on
              combining theoretical and experimental research in mechanism design. To
              accomplish this, she will use the newly created facilities at the Mississippi
              Experimental Research Laboratory (MERL). Access to this facility will allow the
              PI to conduct research that will complement and advance her previous
              theoretical work.  With this POWRE award the PI will acquire new skills in
              experimental economics.  



