Title       : POWRE: Semantic and Executive Functions of Prefrontal Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9973391

Award Number: 9973391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73578              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon L. Thompson-Schill sschill@psych.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will examine the cortical systems that support semantic memory, the
              human ability to retrieve long-term knowledge in a selective manner.  Recent
              advances in brain imaging have provided a noninvasive method for studying
              cognitive processes, including semantic memory, in healthy volunteers.  These
              advanced methods, known collectively as functional neuroimaging, have
              identified prefrontal cortex as the region of the brain that may be specialized
              for the retrieval of knowledge from semantic memory.  This project is based on
              the hypothesis that prefrontal cortex is involved in the selection of
              information among competing alternatives and not in retrieval of information
              from semantic memory, per se.  According to this selection hypothesis, which
              was based on an analysis of the literature and on some preliminary findings,
              prefrontal cortex acts as a dynamic filter that biases the retrieval of
              relevant information, when needed, from other parts of the brain.  Some of the
              experiments will test this hypothesis in patients with focal brain damage, in
              order to allow inferences to be drawn about the necessity of prefrontal cortex
              for normal retrieval of semantic information.  The first goal of this project
              will be to establish a database of patients who have been identified on the
              basis of neuroanatomical criteria, in order to characterize brain-behavior
              relations by studying patients with relatively focal lesions. The database will
              contain both a precise anatomical description of the lesion, based on an MRI
              scan, and the results of a comprehensive behavioral neurological mental-status
              exam designed to assess a variety of cognitive capacities. This important
              database of focal brain lesions may prove extremely useful in the current and
              in future neuropsychological studies.  The second goal of this project will be
              to test hypotheses concerning the role of prefrontal cortex in semantic memory.
               These experiments will examine the effects of competition on the ability of
              patients with prefrontal damage to retrieve information from semantic memory. 
              In addition, these studies will extend the selection hypothesis to a different
              kind of memory, short-term, or working memory, in order to examine the
              homogeneity of prefrontal function (or alternatively, its functional-anatomical
              specialization) across a wider range of domains.  These studies will challenge
              newly developed claims about the role of prefrontal cortex in semantic memory
              and will exemplify the way in which functional neuroimaging and more
              traditional neuropsychological methods can be integrated to provide converging
              evidence about brain-behavior relationships. This POWRE award will
              significantly enhance the career development of this promising young
              investigator at a pivotal career junction, as she makes the transition to a
              tenure-track faculty member and independent scientist and will contribute to
              her increased visibility in the research community and to her subsequent
              academic advancement in her field.
