Title       : Minimization of Piecewise Quadratic Functions and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9973218

Award Number: 9973218
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71806              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wu Li wuli@math.odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973218

The proposer's main objective is to resolve some theoretical and
              computational issues in developing innovative and efficient numerical methods
              for solving constrained minimization problems that can be reformulated as
              unconstrained minimization of piecewise quadratic functions.  More
              specifically, the proposer's objectives are the following: (i) identifying
              constrained minimization problems that can be converted to the unconstrained
              minimization of convex piecewise quadratic functions; (ii) designing numerical
              algorithms for solving the unconstrained reformulation problem that take
              advantage of the structure of the original problem; (iii) developing matrix
              factorization and matrix updating techniques for solving symmetric (but
              possibly singular) systems of linear equations; and (iv) establishing error
              bounds that are useful for convergence analysis of numerical algorithms for
              solving certain minimax problems for convex quadratic functions.  The potential
              impact of the project is an innovation on how quadratic programming problems
              should be solved in sequential quadratic programming methods as well as in
              trust region methods for solving constrained minimization problems.  The theory
              on new merit functions will provide a completely new perspective on how
              constraints should be handled in solving constrained minimization problems. 
              The new penalty function theory also serves as a theoretical basis for
              developing new methods for solving constrained minimization problems.  New
              techniques for finding a descent Newton direction when the Hessian of an
              objective function is only positive semidefinite will significantly advance the
              theory on Newton methods and allow people to use Newton methods to find a
              minimizer of a convex piecewise quadratic function in finitely many iterations,
              even though the set of all minimizers might be unbounded.  New error bounds
              will provide new ways to establish convergence results for some numerical
              algorithms.

Quadratic programming is the key for solving constrained
              minimization problems that have significant applications in many areas such as
              bio-engineering, chemical engineering, aircraft design, etc.  For example, a
              faster and more accurate way of solving certain constrained minimization
              problems means a shorter and more efficient design cycle in developing new
              aircraft for Boeing.  This project aims at using an innovative approach for
              solving large-scale quadratic programming problems that can be used to obtain
              accurate solutions of constrained minimization problems efficiently. This will
              lead to better software tools for solving many engineering application
              problems.

