Title       : POWRE: Mechanics of Biological Cell and Cell-Cell Interactions: Microstructural
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9973608

Award Number: 9973608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tess J. Moon tmoon@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973608
Moon
In vivo monitoring of biological cell elasticity offers
              potentially powerful techniques for non-invasive, early cancer detection.  It
              is currently believed that cells which undergo a malignant transformation
              (normal to cancerous) simultaneously undergo subtle changes in their
              cytoskeleton, resulting in loss of mobility and stiffness. 

The internal
              structure and organization of eukaryotic (human) cells is largely governed by a
              structure known as the actin cytoskeleton (AC).  The AC can be roughly divided
              into two superimposing elastic elements: a homogeneous filamentous protein
              network, the actin cortex, which underlies the plasma membrane, and stress
              fibers which span the entire cell interior.  The AC is suspected of being
              chiefly responsible for a cell's elastic strength, so its disruption is thought
              to destabilize a cell's shape and diminish its mobility. 

Eukaryotic
              cytoskeletal models and experiments will be developed to determine whether the
              cell's AC is chiefly responsible for its strength. The AC will be represented
              by a series of analytical and numerical models with increasingly-detailed,
              internal "architectural" features mimicking the actin cortex and stress fibers.
              Key factors to be considered are: AC architecture and AC-constituent behavior.
              Model predictions will be compared with cell elasticity estimates from an
              optical stretcher, which uses radiation pressure of two counter-propagating
              laser beams to trap and non-destructively stretch individual biological cells.
              

At the conclusion of this project, the following will be better understood:
              1) the molecular origins of the actin cortex strength; 2) the effect of
              molecular motors and actin filament stiffness on the mechanical strength of
              actin networks; and 3) the contribution of the actin network to the overall
              mechanical strength of eukaryotic cells. 

This POWRE award will allow the PI
              to: 1) conduct exploratory work and publish in the area of cell and tissue
              modeling;  2) learn the relevant language and literature of cell mechanics and
              molecular biology; 3) pursue a mutually beneficial research collaboration with
              a biophysicist on the molecular origins of cell elasticity and mobility;  4)
              become a full-fledged, active participant in the successful Cellular and
              Biomedical Engineering (CBME) program at The University of Texas at Austin.
              

The POWRE Award comes at an opportune time for the PI, due to the many new
              opportunities available within UT Austin's Cellular, Molecular Biology and
              Biomedical Engineering Programs.  In 1994, bioengineering was identified as a
              strategic thrust area.  In order to enable the PI's full participation in
              existing and to-be-developed CBME research projects, she will obtain the
              necessary, "remedial" cell and molecular biology background; these activities
              are most appropriate for a POWRE proposal because they would be considered
              inappropriate for a regular NSF proposal.

