Title       : POWRE: The Role of Polymer Architecture in the Phase Behavior of
               Polymer/Silicate Nanocomposites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9973740

Award Number: 9973740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74217              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Galvin megalvin@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses synthesis, processing and structure/property
              relationships in polymer-silicate nanocomposites, a class of materials where
              nano-scale clay particles are molecularly dispersed within a polymer matrix.
              These nanocomposites are ideal for studying polymers in confined geometries and
              for investigating the influence of surface/polymer interactions on polymer
              dynamics. Issues such as elucidation of what drives the polymers to penetrate
              closely packed clay layers or what the dominate variables are for controlling
              morphology will be investigated. The approach is to determine how variables
              such as chain architecture and polarity affect miscibility. Block and random
              copolymers of styrene and 4-vinyl pyridine will be synthesized. Then
              nanocomposites produced with the copolymers, polystyrene and organically
              modified silicates will be prepared and characterized. Electron microscopy(TEM)
              and x-ray diffraction will be used to determine the composite morphology; DSC
              and solid state NMR will be used to study polymer chain dynamics. The results
              will be compared to predictions made by current theories. A primary goal is to
              establish guidelines for synthesizing polymer/inorganic hybrids and thus,
              facilitate the fabrication of cost-effective nanocomposites.
 %%% 
This is a
              research enhancement grant made under the Professional Opportunities for Women
              in Research and Education (POWRE) program. The research will contribute basic
              materials science knowledge at a fundamental level of special relevance to the
              properties and performance of polymer-based nanocomposite materials. The
              project is co-supported by the Division of Materials Research, and the MPS
              OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities). 
***

