Title       : POWRE: The Association of Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor with Biological and
               Non-biological Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9973638

Award Number: 9973638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sohi Rastegar                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73598              (Estimated)
Investigator: Connie L. Hall clhall@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973638
Hall
A delicate balance between maintaining blood flow and the
              formation of blood clots.  This balance is mediated by the cells (endothelial
              cells) which line our blood vessels.  The endothelial cell surface can exhibit
              both pro- and anti- coagulant features depending on the proteins  present on
              its surface.  Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) is one such protein that
              is produced by endothelial cells and is also presumed to associate with the
              cell surface in vivo as a means of regulating coagulation.  
	
TFPI has been
              shown in vitro to  associate/interact with lipids (phospholipids and
              lipoproteins), glycosaminoglycans and specific cellular receptors, although it
              is not clear which of these interactions, or all of them is responsible for
              maintaining TFPI on the endothelial cell surface.  Purified TFPI also  appears
              to have a strong affinity for artificial surfaces (laboratory plastics) even in
              the presence of excess amounts of blocking agents such as albumin.  This
              "stickiness" to biological and non-biological surfaces may make TFPI an
              appropriate candidate for coating biomaterials or for incorporation into
              engineered tissue replacements. The goal of this proposal is characterize the
              interaction of this protein with selected biological and non-biological
              surfaces of known composition in order to ultimately contribute to an
              understanding of its interactions with cellular surfaces and to exploit its
              associative properties in novel biomaterials.

This proposal is submitted
              under the POWRE program because it provides the opportunity to pursue two
              subject areas (biomaterials and biochemistry of TFPI) that are new to the PI
              and to perform exploratory research in biomaterials to determine the
              feasibility of using TFPI as an anti-coagulant coating or additive.  In
              addition, the opportunity to work at a different institution is critical to the
              PI's career advancement at this point in time and allows the establishment of
              independent collaborations.

