Title       : TCP-Unaware Approaches to Improve Performance of TCP Over Wireless Links
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9973153

Award Number: 9973153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103183             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nitin H. Vaidya   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Wireless communication technology has gained widespread acceptance in recent
              years.  Therefore, issues
related to performance of transport protocols (such
              as TCP) over wireless links are of interest. The focus
of this proposal is on
              TCP-unware techniques to improve TCP performance over paths that include
              wireless
links.  The path from a TCP sender to a TCP receiver usually includes
              several intermediate nodes which may
drop TCP packets if congestion occurs. 
              TCP makes the implicit assumption that all packet losses are due
to
              congestion.  Since wireless links are prone to transmission errors, this
              assumption is not accurate for TCP
over wireless links.  Nevertheless, TCP
              reduces its congestion window when packet losses due to transmission
errors
              occur.  This phenomenon is known to result in poor throughput for TCP over
              wireless links.
Existing approaches for improving TCP performance over
              wireless links require intermediate nodes to
take TCP-speciffic actions {
              these approaches are said to be TCP-aware.  For instance, one such
              protocol
requires that an intermediate node interpret TCP packets and drop
              some duplicate TCP acknowledgements
when appropriate.  Such protocols are
              often not useful in practice.  For instance, when encryption is used
              for
security, intermediate nodes may not be able to decipher contents of TCP
              packets.  Therefore, TCP-aware
protocols cannot be used.
                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
              The objective of this project is to investigate TCP-unaware mechanisms that do
              not require any inter-
mediate node to take TCP-speciffic actions. The
              following issues will be investigated:

-  Design of TCP-unaware link layers
              that help improve TCP performance. The researchers will also consider other
              issues related to link layer design, including interaction of link layer with
              Random Early Detection (RED), providing diffierent reliability levels for TCP
              data and acknowledgements, and scheduling policies for link level
              retransmissions.

-  Sender-based heuristics for distinguishing between
              congestion losses and wireless losses:  Using such a
heuristic, the sender can
              determine whether a packet was lost due to congestion or due to
              wireless
transmission errors.  Knowing the cause of a packet loss, the sender
              can take appropriate action for each
type of packet loss. The impact of such
              heuristics on TCP performance will be evaluated.

-  Receiver-based
              heuristics for distinguishing between congestion losses and wireless losses: 
              When the
receiver is closer to a wireless link, it may be in a better position
              to diagnose whether a packet is lost
due to wireless transmission errors or
              not.

-  Evaluation of a TCP-unaware approach that attempts to imitate a
              TCP-aware link layer mechanism.
                                              
                                                                                             
                                                             The proposed techniques will be
              evaluated using simulations as well as experimentation on a wireless
testbed
              built with AT&T WaveLan technology.
                                          
                                                                                             
                                                          Educational Impact: Results from
              the research proposed here will be published in technical conferences
and
              journals.  The results will also be incorporated into graduate courses on
              networking and mobile computing.  The software developed for the project will
              be used to design experiments for these courses, and disseminated for use by
              instructors in other universities.  Students working on this project will gain
              expertise in an important technology area.

