Title       : Scheduling Algorithms for High Speed Switches with QoS Guarantee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a9973015

Award Number: 9973015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kai-Yeung Siu Siu@list.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Next generation networks will support transmission rates that are orders of
              magnitute higher
than current rates.  Moreover, they will support a large
              variety of applications with different band-
width and quality of service
              (QoS) requirements.  In particular, they must have the capability
              of
simultaneously supporting highly bursty delay-insensitive data traffic
              (e.g. file transfer), high-rate
delay-sensitive sessions (e.g. high quality
              video), and a large variety of heterogeneous services and
applications in
              between.  To meet these requirements, next generation networks would need
              to
be implemented using packet switches that can scale to very high speed
              (e.g. aggregate speed of
multi-terabit per second) and can simultaneously
              support heterogeneous QoS for a large number
(hundreds of thousands) of ows.

                  While traditional packet switches based on shared-memory or output-queued
              architectures can
handle today's bandwidth (multi-gigabit/sec) requirement,
              they cannot scale to a large number of
flows and to very high speed (e.g.
              multi-terabit/sec).  On the other hand, input-queued architectures
have much
              better scalability properties and perhaps are the only feasible design option
              to implement
switches at very high speed.  However, supporting heterogeneous
              QoS to a large number of fl ows
with input-queued switches requires more
              complex scheduling algorithms, which can become the
performance bottleneck.
 
                 The proposed research project aims to design and analyze scalable scheduling
              algorithms for
packet switches that can support heterogeneous QoS to a large
              number of flows at very high
speed.  In particular, the project will focus on
              fundamental scheduling issues involved in input-
queued switches with the
              switch fabric being a crossbar or multiple crossbars.  In addition to
              the
study of QoS (e.g. delay, bandwidth guarantee, fairness) to individual
              flows, the project will also
address issues in scheduling multicast flows, the
              interaction between scheduling and queue over flow
management, and packet
              discarding algorithms.  Theoretical and simulation studies will be
              involved.
The proposed research will yield a new understanding of the
              performance limits in packet switching
and the fundamental tradeoff between
              the scheduling complexity and the achievable QoS.
