Title       : POWRE: H-Ras C-Terminus and Its Role in Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9973378

Award Number: 9973378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice E. Buss jbuss@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This is a POWRE grant looking at H-Ras, a  small GTPase, which activates several
              signal transduction cascades that control cell growth and shape, through
              alterations of the cell cycle machinery, changes in gene expression and
              reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. HRas proteins interact with multiple
              target proteins, but at present it is unclear how the particular responses to
              HRas activation can arise.  HRas proteins must be attached  (tethered ) to the
              cell's plasma membrane in order to productively interact with whatever proteins
              are their partners in signaling.  Tethering results from attachment of lipids
              to the C-terminus of HRas proteins HRas has 2 lipids attached to cysteine
              residues - the isoprenoid farnesyl and palmitate fatty acids.  Recent evidence
              suggests that these lipids may also affect the function of HRas.  This
              investigator has replaced the farnesylation site at the C terminus with 6
              lysine residues.  This protein, Ext61L, has an enhanced ability to cause
              differentiation in PC 12 cells and increases phosphatidylinositol (PI) -3
              kinase. This research is aimed at determining the molecular basis for this
              activation of Ras function by C-terminal mutation.  The first aim is to
              determine if the particular C-terminal changes in ExtRas have physically or
              functionally altered its interaction between ExtRas and PI3K, by directly
              measuring the activity of PI3-K, and by using inhibitors of the PI3-K pathway
              in intact PC12 cells. The second aim is to to define the minimal C-terminal
              structure that can support palmitoylation and membrane binding; and identify
              the positions and types of residues that can potentiate the differentiative
              function of cellular HRas.  New C-terminal mutants of ExtRas, with reduced
              numbers of sites for palmitoylation and an altered distribution of charged
              residues will be constructed, expressed, and monitored for loss of the ability
              to cause neuronal differentiation of PC12 cells.  The long-term goal of this
              project is to understand how HRas proteins select their partners, and the
              impact of those choices on HRas function. 







