Title       : Morphology and Chemistry of Lateral Composition Modulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9973352

Award Number: 9973352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295259             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanna Mirecki Millunchick joannamm@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradford G. Orr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is directed toward achieving greater understanding of the
              mechanism(s) of spontaneous lateral composition modulation during epitaxy of
              compound semiconductors. The approach is to examine interactions between the
              morphology and chemistry of structures exhibiting lateral composition
              modulation grown by Molecular Beam Epitaxy and studied with in situ Scanning
              Tunneling Microscopy. Details of adatom interactions with surface features,
              adatom incorporation into the lattice, and morphological evolution will be
              studied. It is anticipated that these studies will provide the basis for
              greater understanding, and the development of new models of strained-layer
              alloy growth including morphological and chemical evolution, and assist in the
              application of these structures to novel low dimensional devices. 
%%%
The
              project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
              having high potential technological relevance.  The research will contribute
              basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to new aspects of
              electronic/photonic devices.  The basic knowledge and understanding gained from
              the research is expected to contribute to improving the perform-ance of
              advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a
              basis for designing and producing improved materials, and materials
              combinations. An important feature of the program is the integration of
              research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area.  
***

