Title       : POWRE: Structural Equation Model of Executive Functions in Young Adults
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9973402

Award Number: 9973402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn C. Welsh mcwelsh@bentley.unco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Northern Colorado
	      SPARC
	      Greeley, CO  80639    970/351-1910

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will examine the underlying structure of a domain of cognitive
              skills referred to as executive function (EF) in normal, young adults.  EF
              skills are presumed to be necessary for the goal-directed, future-oriented
              behavior that is frequently elicited in novel, non-routine problem-solving
              situations.  Research in neuroscience has suggested that EF skills are mediated
              by a region of the brain known as the prefrontal cortex (PFC).  Based on
              neuropsychological investigations of individuals with PFC damage or
              dysfunction, EF has become an "umbrella term" for a wide range of cognitive
              processes, including: initiation, set maintenance, planning, working memory,
              inhibition, mental flexibility, and self-monitoring.  However, currently there
              is no universal agreement regarding how to characterize the construct of EF,
              i.e., the specific cognitive components and the associations among them.  This
              research is based on a theoretical model of the structure of EF.  The model
              includes two basic, "lower level" processes, working memory and inhibition,
              that make possible the operation of three "higher level" EF components,
              planning, mental flexibility, and rule induction.  The research will test
              whether this theoretical model of EF is a good "fit" for the actual EF
              performance of young, adult participants; this model will be tested against two
              other theoretical models of EF that are prominent in the neuropsychological
              literature.  A total of 300 neurologically normal participants will be
              recruited from two sites, 150 from the University of Northern Colorado and 150
              from the University of Amsterdam.  Participants will be asked to perform a set
              of tasks that represent the five components of EF in the proposed theoretical
              model.  Data from these tasks will be analyzed using structural equation
              modeling, a statistical technique that can help determine whether the proposed
              model is a good "fit" or characterization of the pattern of test performance
              scores.  If the experimental tasks are tapping basic neural functions, then the
              model of EF underlying this research should fit the data from both test sites
              (Colorado and The Netherlands). If two different models of EF are suggested by
              the data from the two sites, then the contributions to EF of variables such as
              intelligence, motivation, etc., need to be explored.  The potential impact of
              this study is to provide a window on the composition of the EF domain and,
              indirectly, the functioning of the highly interconnected PFC in normal, young
              adults.  This POWRE grant will provide access to special facilities
              (participants at the University of Amsterdam) and special methodologies
              (training in structural equation modeling), it will foster an existing
              international collaboration, and it will provide focused support at a critical
              stage of a 15-year research program investigating the nature of EF.
