Title       : POWRE: Genetic Regulatory Shifts in Insect Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9973647

Award Number: 9973647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74248              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Brown sjbrown@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              +Studies of insect embryogenesis have defined two major development types.  Most
              insects display a short germ type of development in which a germ rudiment forms
              and additional segments are added sequentially.  In contrast, long germ type
              insects form segments along the entire anterior-posterior axis virtually
              simultaneously.  This behavior, thought to be derived, is due in part to an
              increased maternal contribution of materials and patterning information, and
              presumably offers the selective advantage of rapid early development.  It has
              been suggested that regulatory changes occurred via a shift of some embryonic
              patterning mechanisms from zygotic to maternal regulation.   In Drosophila, a
              long germ insect, several gene products are provided maternally and stored
              until required for specific functions.  However, the extent to which these
              genes may be zygotically controlled in other insects is not known.  The
              Drosophila gene  ftz transcription factor 1 (ftz-f1) is maternally transcribed.
               The encoded protein is translated in the embryo and required for normal
              segmentation .  In the short germ beetle, Tribolium castaneum,  the ftz-f1
              ortholog is expressed in embryonic pair-rule stripes.  This apparent shift of
              ftz-f1 control from zygotic to maternal may provide a general paradigm for the
              regulatory changes which accompanied the evolution of long germ development.  
              Alternatively, the regulatory change observed for ftz-f1 may be unique to this
              gene.  Analysis of the Tribolium homologs of several other Drosophila zygotic
              lethal genes with maternal effects will provide the  information necessary to
              distinguish between these possibilities. 
	The research described in this
              POWRE proposal represents a new line of inquiry for   
Dr. Brown and will
              provide the opportunity to achieve a level of recognizable independence
              required for advancement to full Research Professor.

