Title       : POWRE: A Comprehensive Library of Observational Near-Infrared Stellar Spectra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9973812

Award Number: 9973812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30875              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela M. Marcum p.marcum@tcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Christian Univ
	      University Boulevard
	      Fort Worth, TX  76129    817/921-7000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,1215,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  - Marcum  AST 9973812

The main aim of this project is the
              construction of an observational, near-infrared wavelength (0.9-1.8 microns)
              stellar spectral library of moderate (~1-5 Angstroms) resolution.  This
              spectral library will be used for exploratory investigations in combining these
              data with existing optical data, for possible future applications in stellar
              population studies of galaxies.  The project has a well-defined goal and thus
              will produce a tangible "end product" (e.g., the spectral atlas) which has
              potential for use in crossdisciplinary applications, such as comparison of
              theoretical stellar model atmospheres and the identification of currently
              unknown near-infrared (near-IR) opacity sources in cool stellar
              atmospheres.

An advantage of this project is that the feasibility of
              obtaining high-quality near-IR spectra for a large number (~200) of stars has
              already been demonstrated. However, as this is one of the first attempts to
              produce "template" spectra characterizing the "average" near IR features in a
              particular stellar type, the project will involve the creation of innovative
              techniques to accomplish this necessary task.  While this is common practice
              for optical spectra, problems in "averaging" a set of spectra to produce a
              "template" near-IR spectrum are related to the large number of absorption
              features in that part of the spectrum, and the lack of a true "continuum in
              cool stars which could be used to normalize the spectra. It is further
              anticipated that techniques will have to be developed to "splice" the near-IR
              data with existing optical data, since no standardized method of accomplishing
              this task exists.  The fact is that some of the necessary data already exists. 
              This means that undergraduate student assistants can begin learning how to
              reduce the data immediately (software has already been created to facilitate
              data reductions).   The development of solutions to these potential problems
              can begin even before any additional data is collected.

This award is
              supported by funds from the Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences.


