Title       : POWRE: Statistical Modeling of Language Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9973772

Award Number: 9973772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52216              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine Demuth Katherine_Demuth@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              It has long been thought that the process of learning one's native language is
              biologically predetermined, leaving little room for the role of "learning." 
              However, recent research in infant speech perception shows that very young
              language learners are extremely sensitive to statistically prominent aspects of
              the sound structure of the language to which they are exposed.  Furthermore,
              some preliminary research on children's language production indicates
              interesting crosslinguistic differences in the timing of acquisition of
              syllable and word structures:  Language structures of low frequency in a
              particular language are acquired late.  This points to the need for more
              sophisticated statistical analysis of both the language input that children
              hear and how this shapes the course of children's language development. 
              However, researchers of language acquisition are generally trained as linguists
              or experimental psychologists and lack knowledge of the basic mathematical and
              computational methods needed to address these issues.  Thus, training in
              statistics and mathematical modeling techniques is becoming a necessity,
              especially for researchers like the principal investigator who work on large
              corpora of children's longitudinal language development over time.  This POWRE
              grant will provide her with a full year in which to learn more about basic
              statistical and mathematical modeling techniques.  This program of study will
              feed directly into the goals of Brown University's new NSF IGERT (Integrated
              Graduate Education Research and Training) grant, designed to provide graduate
              students with multidisciplinary training in applying statistical methods to
              problems of cognitive science.   Her short-term goal is to identify a set of
              statistical methods appropriate for investigating how language learning takes
              place, focusing specifically on how much of what types of information children
              need for language learning to succeed.  In particular, she will focus on
              children's acquisition of higher-level phonological units such as syllable and
              word structure, as well as on interactions at the syntax/semantics interface,
              such as learning the argument structure of verbs.  A long-term practical goal
              is to use results of this research to address the problems of children with
              various types of language learning delay, including those with Specific
              Language Impairment and partial hearing loss.
