Title       : POWRE: The Transition to Elementary School: An Attachment Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9973396

Award Number: 9973396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zeynep C. Biringen biringen@cahs.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A child's adjustment to school and school life is set early in the educational
              process.  Those children who adjust well in the early years appear to have more
              promising school lives through time than those who have difficulties in
              adjusting during the early years.  For both theoretical and policy reasons,
              then, it makes great sense for scientists as well as policy makers to
              understand the early schooling process.  Preliminary indicates the importance
              of the family in the child's early adjustment to school.  Although these
              initial studies indicate a connection between family experiences and school
              experiences, there is still much to understand about this important linkage,
              with significant social policy and intervention implications for society at
              large.  This research will be the first comprehensive study on how the family,
              and particularly parent-child attachment relationships and the emotional
              climate in the family, affect the child's adjustment to school.   Families will
              first be seen when the children are in preschool and followed for one year as
              the children make the transition to elementary school.  During the preschool
              period, numerous in-depth assessments will be conducted, including the observed
              emotional availability in the parent-child relationship, maternal accounts of
              their own early child-rearing experiences, and children's narratives about
              affective relationships.  After children begin kindergarten, the research will
              feature in-depth assessments of children's peer relationships, including
              children's popularity/lack of popularity, children's style of interactions with
              peers, teacher's estimation of children's peer relationships in the classroom,
              and just as importantly, the children's own views of the school experience. 
              Because of its emphasis on multiple sources of information (teachers,
              classmates, and the children), this investigation has the great potential to
              enhance our understanding of the relational processes involved in a child's
              successful versus less successful adjustment to kindergarten.  Results from
              this basic research will enable investigators to plan for intervention projects
              and to inform social policy decisions on the early schooling process.  This
              POWRE grant will enable the principal investigator to reestablish herself in a
              research milieu and to pursue a new direction in her research, thus enhancing
              her visibility and viability 
