Title       : Testing Systematic and Evolutionary Hypotheses in a Primitive Neotropical Group
               of Violets (Viola sect. Leptidium)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a9973958

Award Number: 9973958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74689              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey E. Ballard ballardh@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The "true" violets, belonging to the genus Viola, comprise a large and
              very
diverse group of plants that is found worldwide but is especially rich
              in
the mountain regions of the Latin American tropics.  Like many
              other
tropical plant groups, Latin American representatives have received
              little
serious scientific attention.  Studies are desperately needed to
              understand
species diversity there, clarify distinctions of species and figure
              out
relationships among them, and eventually to illuminate
              evolutionary
processes of diversification.  Recent molecular studies of Latin
              American
and other violet groups worldwide by the Principal Investigator
              demonstrate
that Latin American violets are the oldest and most primitive of
              all.
Thus, investigations on these violets will reveal important clues
              regarding
the origins of violets around the world, their evolution, global
              migration
and remarkable success.  One of the two largest violet groups in
              Latin
America, section Leptidium, is the focus of the funded
              research.

Field expeditions to Colombia and Venezuela, Peru and Bolivia,
              and
southeastern Brazil, will be made to study populations of all species
              of
sect. Leptidium in the field and to bring back flowering and
              fruiting
materials for intensive laboratory studies.  Details of flowers,
              leaves,
capsules and seeds will be compared among field-sampled populations,
              and
against thousands of museum collections on loan from other
              botanical
institutions, to determine recognizable species.  A
              composite
representative from each of several populations of each species will
              be
brought back from the field expeditions for molecular investigations. 
              Two
types of molecular data, DNA sequences from the nuclear
              Internal
Transcribed Spacer region, and highly variable Inter-Simple Sequence
              Repeat
markers, will be generated from the population samples to
              interpret
relationships between populations and species in section
              Leptidium.
Chromosome numbers taken from flowers of species in the group, and
              physical
characteristics of species, will be compared with other groups of
              violets
around the world, in order to interpret evolutionary patterns in the
              "true"
violets as a whole.  A traditional taxonomic treatment will be
              completed
for species in section Leptidium, to serve botanists and naturalists
              who
encounter these violets in Latin America.


