Title       : Inverse Problems in Mathematical Finance: Exploring Bayesian Model Selection
               Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a9973226

Award Number: 9973226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marco Avellaneda avellane@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Technical Description


This project explores information-theoretic ideas for
              solving model
selection problems in Mathematical Finance.  Typically, these
              problems
consist in the specification of a diffusion measure, or more
              generally, a
measure on path-space, which describes the future states of the
              market.
The data used in the inversion consists of expected values of
              functionals,
which correspond to observed prices of "benchmark" securities. 
              This
problem is studied from the point of view of partial
              differential
equations and Monte-Carlo simulation.  We focus on model
              selection
criteria based on minimizing the Kullback-Leibler entropy distance
              between
the unknown probability and a Bayesian prior.  In the special case
              of
diffusion processes, this leads to a constrained stochastic
              control
problem that can be solved via Lagrange multipliers.  In the case of
              Monte
Carlo simulation, one must construct appropriate weighted measures, in
              a
technique which is reminiscent of "importance sampling."  These
              problems
and their generalizations to non-linear constraints will be studied
              in a
unified way using methods of Applied Mathematics and Numerical
              Analysis.
The goal is to achieve a better understanding of the question of
              model
selection in Financial Economics, which is crucial for the management
              of
financial risk by quantitative methods.


Non-Technical
              Description

This research proposal deals with the pricing and hedging of
              complex
financial instruments called derivative securities. The technology
              derived
here, which is based on the mathematical fields of probability,
              statistics
and numerical analysis, is used to develop accurate tools for
              pricing and
managing complex financial instruments.  The motivation for this
              research
comes from the fact that quantitative finance offers many
              challenging
mathematical and computer-related problems. This is a consequence
              of the
so-called "globalization'' phenomenon that links different
              financial
markets and economies throughout the world.  The current proposal
              deals
with new mathematical methods for fine-tuning these models. Our aim is
              to
better understand how they work and how they represent financial risk.
              By
bringing to bear robust statistical methods and powerful
              mathematical
techniques, we expect to shed light on pricing and
              risk-management systems
and to develop better models that can be shared with
              the financial
industry.  This is an important application of Mathematics to a
              new area
of research: quantitative finance. The proposal is part of a
              greater
effort at New York University's Courant Institute in the field of
              finance
and markets. So far, we have been successful in training young
              scientists
that enter the business arena with a unique set of professional
              skills.
This suggests that such research is both directly and indirectly
              suitable
in terms of the larger picture of the national economy.




 

