Title       : POWRE: Phylogeny of Heterocystous Cyanobacteria and Evolution of nitrogen
               Fixation Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1999      
File        : a9973340

Award Number: 9973340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. Barnum barnumsr@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Barnum 
9973340

Cyanobacteria are a diverse group of oxygen-producing,
              photosynthetic bacteria that inhabit virtually every major aquatic and
              terrestrial biome - desert, freshwater and marine, including hot springs and
              sub-Arctic and Antarctic regions. Cyanobacteria are particularly important in
              poor soils and nutrient-depleted regions and are the major suppliers of fixed
              nitrogen through the process of nitrogen fixation. Some species form symbiotic
              relationships with various plant species and directly provide nitrogen for
              uptake by plants.  Cyanobacteria have an ancient history dating back almost 3.5
              billion years.  They diversified extensively to become some of the most
              successful and ecologically significant organisms on Earth, with respect to
              longevity of the lineage and impact on the Earth's early environment.  It is
              widely believed that cyanobacteria were responsible for the conversion of the
              Earth's anaerobic atmosphere to an aerobic one via oxygenic photosynthesis - a
              pivotal event that led to the evolution of diverse life on Earth.  While carbon
              dioxide fixation, through photosynthesis, arose early in the evolution of
              organisms, it is not known when nitrogen fixation first occurred. Since
              nitrogen fixation enzymes are irreversibly inactivated by oxygen, it has been
              proposed that nitrogen fixation is an ancient process that existed before the
              Earth's atmosphere became aerobic.  However, this hypothesis is inconsistent
              with the random pattern of occurrence of nitrogen fixation among various
              lineages of living bacteria (including the cyanobacteria), rather than a
              pattern of universal occurrence that is expected on the basis of an ancient
              origin.  Within the Cyanobacteria, there are approximately nine evolutionary
              lineages.  One of these, the heterocystous nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria
              possesses heterocyst cells - a unique adaptation for spatially excluding
              oxygen. The heterocystous lineage of cyanobacteria is well suited for a pilot
              study on the evolution of nitrogen fixation (nif) genes. Ribosomal DNA
              sequences (23S ribosomal RNA genes) will be used to determine the evolutionary
              history of the heterocystous lineage, as an independent framework to evaluate
              the DNA sequence evolution of one of the three nitrogen fixation genes, nifD.
              Ultimately, additional nitrogen fixation genes and other cyanobacterial
              lineages will be examined.

