Title       : Collaborative Research: Exploring Architectures and Algorithms for Optical
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a9973111

Award Number: 9973111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166590             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suresh Subramaniam suresh@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Future networks are expected to offer solutions for the communication needs of a
              wide variety of applications.  The goals of the proposed research are to
              address the issues related to the design of future optical networks.  In
              particular, the design of scalable architectures and algorithms to manage,
              control, and deliver the required level of service efficiently is the primary
              goal.  The proposal is based on the use of optical fiber technology, wavelength
              division multiplexing, wavelength conversion, and wavelength sharing.          
                                                  The objective is to develop solutions that
              will support a contract between source, destination, and network, and allow the
              use of gigabit bandwidths for user applications.  The proposal is based on the
              sharing of a limited number of wavelengths among multiple users, the
              utilization of limited wavelength conversion capability in the network, and the
              use of multi-fiber links to support loss- and conflict-free communication for
              individual users by allocating dedicated resources to each connection.         
                                                                                          
              Specifically, the following research issues will be addressed.  The balance
              between the minimum granularity of allocatable resources that can be supported
              by the available technology of WDM, wavelength sharing, wavelength conversion,
              multi-fiber links, and user needs will be indentified.  Using this information
              base, new architectures and corresponding algorithms for resource allocation
              policies that efficiently utilize network resources will be developed. The
              architectural solutions will include spare capacity to tolerate single-fiber
              failures.                                                                      
                                                        When wavelength sharing is employed,
              different sources may transmit in a controlled manner such that they achieve
              their average rates.  However, depending on the sharing mechanism, delay may be
              an important factor.  Minimizing session blocking probabilities and delays in
              data delivery are the main issues in setting up session requests.  An aim of
              this proposal is to develop effective solutions for this problem.  Distributed
              routing algorithms that minimize both of these metrics in setting up an
              end-to-end request will be developed and evaluated.                            
                                                                                             
                                                               The results of the proposed
              research are expected to make significant advances towards the use of WDM-based
              all-optical technology.  The initial approach to solve the proposed problems is
              to evaluate the proposed architectures using analytical models and simulations.
               The results of the initial studies will be used in developing alternative
              architectures and sophisticated routing algorithms.                            
                                        
