Title       : POWRE: Research and Career Enhancement Activities to Support Studies in
               Eukaryotic Ribosomal RNA Maturation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a9973870

Award Number: 9973870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vassie C. Ware vcw0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hall NSF project: Chromatin potentiation and ABA activation of phaseolin
              transcription A rotationally and translationally-positioned nucleosome over the
              TATA region of the phaseolin (phas) promoter in leaf tissue confers a
              transcriptionally inactive chromatin structure. Transition to a
              transcriptionally competent status requires two major steps: chromatin
              potentiation and ABA-mediated activation. In this project, the processes
              involved in these steps will be examined in greater detail through the
              following specific objectives: (1) An investigation of the mechanisms involved
              in PvALF-mediated chromatin potentiation of the phas promoter; (2) A
              determination of the role of PvALF domains in transcriptional activation; (3)
              An examination of combinatorial cis-element interactions and their role in
              ABA-mediated activation of the phas promoter. In objective (1), the effect of
              DNA replication on phas activation will be investigated using dividing and
              non-dividing tissues, in the presence and absence of DNA replication
              inhibitors. An inducible promoter will be used to evaluate the effect of DNA
              replication on PvALF's ability to potentiate transcription in cells of young or
              old leaves which have, respectively, active or no DNA replication. Other
              systems to be used for exploration of phas promoter potentiation and activation
              include artificial nuclei made from Xenopus extracts in the presence and
              absence of plant nuclear factors (including native and modified PvALF). In
              objective (2), the role of the A and B2 domains of PvALF in transcriptional
              activation will be evaluated using both in vitro and in vivo approaches. The
              interaction of PvALF with specific RY elements will be evaluated in vegetative
              tissues and in seed tissues using isogenic lines bearing phas promoter RY
              element mutations and containing (or lacking) PvALF.  DNase I and DMS
              footprinting will be undertaken in vivo to determine phas promoter chromatin
              structure and factor occupancy in tissues of these lines. Experiments in
              objective (3) will permit evaluation of the ability of RY elements to interact
              with adjacent elements to yield functional transcription factor combinations.
              Additional phas promoter constructs will be used to explore the participation
              of specific sequence elements in ABA-mediated transcriptional
              activation.

The phas promoter, which drives strong and rigorously tissue-
              (seed) specific gene expression, is proving to be widely used in plant
              biotechnology. Therefore, findings from this project will have practical
              application as well as providing a plant system for studying the fundamental
              biological process of transcription. Confirmation of the participation of
              replication in transcriptional activation would represent a major scientific
              advance since no one has thus far illustrated convincingly that replication is
              directly involved in the transcription of a higher eukaryote gene.

