Title       : POWRE - The Magnetization Catastrophe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1999       
File        : a9973859

Award Number: 9973859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicola A. Hill nahill@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is the development and implementation of a new
              computational method for determining the lowest energy magnetic configurations
              of materials. Current methods for determining magnetic ground states are
              inefficient, requiring calculations for a range of trial spin arrangements
              (ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic, etc.) and subsequent selection of the state
              with the lowest energy. The method under study is expected to obtain the
              magnetic ground state from calculations for a single, non-magnetic structure,
              using a spin-polarized extension of density functional perturbation theory. The
              approach is based on existing techniques for determining the structural ground
              states of materials within the density functional framework. Preliminary
              analytical work has indicated feasibility. A primary goal is the development of
              a spin-polarized extension to density functional perturbation theory, which
              will enable first-principles study of the response functions of magnetic
              materials. 
%%% 
This is a research enhancement grant made under the
              Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and Education (POWRE) program.
              The materials theory research project will contribute materials science
              knowledge at a fundamental level applicable to a variety of materials; new
              methodology and computer code is expected to be broadly applicable to a variety
              of materials research issues. The project is co-supported by the Division of
              Materials Research, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities).
              
***

