Title       : Interference Avoidance In Wireless Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a9973012

Award Number: 9973012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Rose crose@winlab.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy D. Yates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The need for wireless access to data is widely cited.  However, unlike the
              geometric growth of cellular (voice) wireless, wireless data has languished. 
              There are many possible reasons, but the most striking is one of high cost.  It
              therefore makes sense to reconsider some of the basic assumptions about
              wireless systems such as fixed proprietary infrastructure and licensed
              bandwidth which tend to raise the costs.  Specifically, there is a need to
              understand at a fundamental level how systems can peacefully coexist when they
              mutually interfere in unlicensed bands (such as the recently allocated 5GHz
              U-NII bands) and may even co-inhabit the same areas.  Thus, the proposed work
              will carefully explore an extremely simple design precept for use in such
              seemingly chaotic multi-system environments -- adjust transmitted waveforms and
              reception techniques to avoid interference -- "interference avoidance" for
              short.

Specifically, the emergence of programmable digital radios prompts
              the consideration of wireless systems comprised of elements which can vary both
              their output waveforms and received-signal processing.  It has already been
              shown that ensembles of adaptive transmitters communicating synchronously with
              a single receiver can OPTIMIZE their use of the wireless medium by practicing
              interference avoidance.  The proposed work will deepen and extend the
              theoretical understanding of interference avoidance by considering asynchronous
              systems, dispersive channels, multi-element antenna arrays and probably most
              important, systems with multiple receivers.  At each juncture, information
              theoretic bounds will be sought since these provide clear bounds on
              performance.  In addition, practicalities such as convergence speed,
              quantization effects, channel measurements and systems level issues will be
              also considered.  
 
