Title       : The Action of a CAT(0) Group on the Boundary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9973119

Award Number: 9973119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64314              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim E. Ruane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS-9973119

PI: Kium Ruane

Title: The Action of a CAT(0) Group
              on the Boundary

Abstract: The basic idea of Geometric Group Theory is to
              study the structure of an infinite group G by viewing G as a certain set of
              rigid motions of a geometry.  In this way, group-theoretic problems are
              translated into geometric problems and all the techniques of geometry can then
              be utilized.  A standard technique in geometry is to study the asymptotics of a
              space by compactifying it - i.e.  putting a boundary on the space.  Word
              hyperbolic groups are a class of groups for which this idea has proven to be
              incredibly useful.  This is a class of groups obtained by assuming a negative
              curvature condition on the geometry.  It is currently of interest to extend
              this well-developed theory of word hyperbolic groups to the ``nonpositively
              curved'' setting.  There have been several proposed classes of nonpositively
              curved groups.  One such class consists of groups that arise as a set of rigid
              motions of a CAT(0) space, groups referred to here as ``CAT(0) groups".  The
              boundary of a CAT(0) space on which group G acts as well as the action of G on
              this boundary will be the main objects of interest in this proposal.  For word
              hyperbolic groups, studying the boundary and the action of the group on the
              boundary has yielded many theorems about the group.  Many of the theorems that
              hold in that setting should have generalizations to the nonpositively curved
              setting and that is the point of view taken here.  It is already known that
              replacing the phrase "word hyperbolic" with CAT(0) in many of these theorems is
              not going to work, but finding the correct theorems is an important step in
              unifying the theory of nonpositively curved groups much like the theory of
              nonpositively curved manifolds.  The dynamics of the action of a CAT(0)group on
              the boundary of the space has hardly been used to answer any questions from the
              geometric group theory point of view.  Questions about the group and subgroups
              of the group should translate into questions about this action, much like in
              the word hyperbolic setting.

A group is one of the most fundamental objects
              in mathematics.  The set of whole numbers under addition is an example of a
              group that everyone is familiar with.  Also, the set of rigid motions of a
              geometric object forms a group and in fact, the mathematical properties of this
              group often characterize the geometric object.  For example, knots are
              geometric objects which have recently seen beautiful applications in the study
              of DNA since the strands of DNA in our body are often knotted.  Being able to
              tell the difference between two different knots is an important idea in these
              applications.  There is a natural group associated to a knot which completely
              determines the knot.  These knot groups are groups of the type we are
              interested in here.

