Title       : POWRE: Reactive RF Sputtered Garnet Films for Integrated Magneto-Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9973329

Award Number: 9973329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bethanie J. Stadler stadler@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973329
Stadler

The main educational goals of this project are to enhance
              undergraduate, graduate and underrepresented student research and to develop
              undergraduate and graduate courses in the area of thin film processing and
              optoelectronics.  This includes: 1) providing opportunities for student
              research through programs such as our Undergraduate Research Opportunities
              Program (UROP), our NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program,
              and supervision of graduate students; 2) improving a senior/graduate level
              elective in thin film processing by adding laboratories on processing and
              magneto-optics; and 3) developing a university-wide freshman seminar on the
              physics and chemistry of color which will encompass design of materials and
              applications.

The main research goal of this project is to use reactive rf
              sputtering to enable integration of magneto-optical garnets, namely doped
              yttrium iron garnet (Y3Fe5Ol2 or YIG), onto semiconductor platforms.  The
              current fabrication technique, liquid phase epitaxy, cannot be used with
              semiconductor substrates, which are important platforms for many other
              electro-optical devices.  In addition, sputtering can also be used to deposit
              buffer layers and magnetic thin films, device costs can be greatly reduced.  To
              achieve integration of magneto-optical (MO) materials, several major hurtles
              must be overcome, including development of a low-temperature, low-cost
              fabrication technique, identification of suitable buffer layers, optimization
              of the film microstructure, and optimization of the MO and magnetic properties.
               Full integration of magneto-optical components will be achieved during this
              effort.  A prototype waveguide isolator will be tested which will contain a
              buffer layer and a magneto-optical garnet film together on a semiconductor
              substrate.

Preliminary studies performed by the PI indicate that smooth,
              polycrystalline garnet films can be grown on-MgO by annealing amorphous films
              at 800'C.  An MgO buffer layer was also shown to protect semiconductor
              substrates during subsequent depositions performed at over 8500C.  This
              indicates that it will be feasible to grow garnet films on MgO-buffered
              semiconductors.  In addition, preliminary garnet films were fabricated on
              garnet substrates in situ without a substrate heater.  This technique will be
              studied further in order to stabilize as-grown garnet films on other
              substrates.

The broader significance of this project stems from the variety
              of advanced scientific fields that will benefit from the proposed integration
              of garnets, including photonic integrated circuits (PICs), magneto-optical data
              storage and spatial light modulators that could be applied to flat panel
              displays.  In addition, this project will contribute to undergraduate and
              graduate research and education through national and local programs and
              courses.
***



