Title       : POWRE: Sub-mm Studies of Massive Star Forming Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9973922

Award Number: 9973922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69376              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. Hanson hanson@physics.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,1215,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Hanson   AST 9973922

Recent advances in millimeter telescope and
              sub-millimeter receiver technology provide unique opportunities to investigate
              early stages of massive star formation in giant molecular cloud. Massive stars
              play a prominent role in the chemical evolution of our galaxy, as ionizing
              sources to the interstellar medium, and as important distance standards. Yet
              little is known about how these stars form because formation occurs hidden
              within dense molecular clouds.

A large-scale radio survey at millimeter
              wavelengths to map out the giant molecular cloud associated with the massive
              star forming region, M17, will be completed.  The mapping at millimeter
              wavelengths will unveil approximately a thousand or so dense cores, which
              represent the early collapse stage of star formation. Sub-millimeter wavelength
              observations will be obtained on these dense cores to determine the
              characteristics of this early formation stage.

The young massive stars in
              M17 have been isolated and characterized through previous near-infrared
              wavelength spectroscopic studies. The previous work revealed an extraordinarily
              young cluster of very massive stars; many too heavily shrouded to be directly
              detected, even at 2-micron wavelength.  In order to investigate the physical
              conditions existing within the cloud, which lead to the very recent formation
              of the massive stars detected in the near-infrared, and to look toward earlier
              stages of massive star formation, observations at sub-millimeter and millimeter
              wavelengths are now required. The millimeter and sub-millimeter investigations
              are an integral piece of a larger scientific endeavor to delineate the
              evolutionary steps in the formation of massive stars. Such a holistic
              investigation, which includes observations of young massive stars, massive
              young stellar objects, and dense molecular core properties, has never been
              previously applied to a massive star-forming region.

A vital collaboration
              with the University of Arizona will allow guaranteed access to the Heinrich
              Hertz Sub-millimeter Telescope (HHT) to carry out observations, as well as
              visitor access to apply for observing time on all telescopes operated by
              Steward Observatory of the University of Arizona. 

This award is supported
              by funds from the Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences.


