Title       : Genetic Models of Speciation by Reinforcement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9973221

Award Number: 9973221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Kirkpatrick kirkp@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:  Genetic models of speciation by reinforcement
Principal
              investigator:  Mark Kirkpatrick

	Most species remain distinct from one
              another simply because they avoid interbreeding.  A major theory for the
              evolution of this reproductive isolation is the "reinforcement" hypothesis,
              which holds that mating preferences evolve to decrease the chance of producing
              unfit hybrid offspring.  As a result, reproductive isolation evolves and
              speciation occurs.  This hypothesis is controversial because it is unclear
              whether isolation can evolve in the face of the genetic introgression that
              accompanies hybridization.
	This project will develop a comprehensive picture
              of how, when, and why speciation by reinforcement can operate.  The approach is
              to develop mathematical models that describe the evolution of genes for mating
              preferences and other isolating mechanisms.  The research will investigate how
              three key factors influence the process:  the mechanism that prevents
              interbreeding (e.g. mating preferences, habitat preferences, flowering time
              differences, etc.), the genetic factors that make hybrids less fit, and the
              geography of parental populations (e.g. whether they are contiguous or
              completely overlapping).  Results will make qualitative predictions about where
              we can expect to find speciation by reinforcement, and offer quantitative
              predictions that can be tested directly against data from natural populations. 
              Novel mathematical methods will be developed that hold promise for use in a
              wide variety of other problems in evolutionary genetics.
	Modern evolutionary
              biology has a quite comprehensive understanding of how genes evolve within
              populations, but a relatively poor understanding of how one population splits
              into two.  This research will illuminate the mechanisms of speciation,
              providing insights into the fundamental processes that regulate biodiversity on
              earth.


