Title       : POWRE: Polygamy and the Adaptive Significance of Genetic Variation in the
               Termite, Nasutitermes acajutlae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9973712

Award Number: 9973712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71890              (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire A. Fuller claire.fuller@murraystate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Murray State University
	      328 Wells Hall
	      Murray, KY  42071    270/762-3537

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Fuller 
9973712
 
Members of both the eusocial Hymenoptera (bees, ants and
              wasps) and Isoptera (termites) benefit by increasing genetic relatedness
              because non-reproductive individuals can achieve greater reproductive success
              by helping to rear siblings than by rearing their own offspring. The
              Hymenoptera achieve increased genetic relatedness by haplodiploidy; the diploid
              Isoptera may achieve similar levels of relatedness by inbreeding. In the
              Hymenoptera, multiple mating by queens (polyandry) and multiple queens within
              nests (polygyny) are common. Both decrease genetic relatedness among nestmates.
              At least 3 hypotheses have been proposed to explain the adaptive significance
              of genetic diversity in the Hymenoptera: 1) genetic variation enables colonies
              to allocate tasks such as foraging or guarding more precisely, 2) genetic
              variation enables colonies to withstand a wider range of abiotic conditions and
              3) genetic variation allows colonies to resist a greater variety of pathogens.
              

Less is known about the mating systems and level of genetic diversity among
              the termites. However, Fuller's observations indicate that workers within nests
              of the eusocial termite Nasutitermes acajutlae are genetically diverse. The
              goals of this POWRE project are first, to determine the source of genetic
              diversity in N. acajutlae, and second, to determine the adaptive significance
              of the genetic diversity. 
The PI will collect N. acajutlae kings, queens and
              workers from nests on the island of St. Thomas, US Virgin Islands. The
              relatedness of kings and queens within nests will be assessed using
              mitochondrial DNA haplotypes. The relative contribution of reproductives to the
              worker population will be assessed using Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA
              (RAPD). In addition, the 3 genetic diversity hypotheses will be tested using
              RAPDs.
While many empirical studies have examined hypotheses 1) and 3), very
              few studies have examined these questions in the only other group in which
              eusociality is common - the termites. Because their genetic system differs so
              fundamentally the study of genetic variability in N. acajutlae, coupled with an
              examination of their mating system, will provide an important comparison to the
              Hymenoptera.







