Title       : POWRE: Biological Role of Motility in Bacterial Wilt of Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9973372

Award Number: 9973372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74944              (Estimated)
Investigator: Caitilyn Allen cza@plantpath.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Many bacteria are able to move, using propeller-like structures called
              flagella. Although the ability to move towards or within a host confers a
              significant selective advantage on some animal pathogens, the role of bacterial
              motility in plant-associated microbes is not known. One motile plant pathogen,
              Ralstonia solanacearum, causes bacterial wilt disease of many diverse plant
              species. When R. solanacearum grows in laboratory culture, its cells are motile
              only at low cell densities, possibly corresponding to conditions the bacterium
              encounters in nature during the early stages of host plant invasion and
              colonization. The PI will test the hypothesis that motility contributes to the
              success of bacterial plant pathogens by creating a nonmotile mutant of R.
              solanacearum. Invasiveness of this nomnotile mutant will be quantified using a
              combination of realistic soil virulence assays, timed root dip assays, and
              microscopic analysis with marked mutant and wildtype strains. The hypothesis
              that this species is motile only during host plant invasion and early stages of
              colonization will be tested directly by assaying bacterial motility during
              growth in the plant xylem vessel and indirectly by measuring expression of
              motility genes during growth in the plant xylem vessel. This will determine
              whether R. solanacearum gene expression in culture reflects the behavior of the
              pathogen in its host. Measuring motility gene expression in two regulatory
              mutant backgrounds will determine how bacterial motility fits into R.
              solanacearum's complex gene expression network. This research will elucidate a
              critical stage in the life cycle of a cosmopolitan and flexible model
              pathogen.

This proposal fits the POWRE Program guidelines in the following
              ways: a) it opens an entirely new line of research inquiry for the P.I.; b) the
              P.I. has substantial administrative responsibilities in the area of women and
              science (she is jointly appointed in the Plant Pathology and Women's Studies
              departments, and also serves as Faculty Director of the campus Women in Science
              and Engineering Program); and, c) the P.I. recently resumed her career after an
              interruption for family leave.


