Title       : The Effects of Light Quality and Quantity on the Developmental Ecology of
               Malaysian Rainforest Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1994     
File        : a9020137

Award Number: 9020137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121700             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   The earth's remaining tropical rainforests are threatened                 
              with  destruction in the next 10 years.  The mechanisms are                    
              shifting agriculture, conversion to pasture, global climate                    
              changes, industrial agriculture and logging, and the reasons are               
              over-population and short-sightedness.  Knowledge which would                  
              assist in the regeneration and restoration of these forests is                 
              mostly lacking.  In particular detailed knowledge of the                       
              environmental factors that determine the growth of the individual              
              tree species in these forests is needed.  Different trees vary in              
              their tolerance to shade conditions in the forest, controlling                 
              the patterns of regeneration of these trees.  Trees growing in                 
              the natural shade of forests are subjected to a reduction in                   
              light intensity and a change in the spectral quality of the                    
              light.  Virtually all of the shade responses of tree  have been                
              studied at varying light levels without regard to these shifts in              
              light quality.  Thus, previous studies on shade responses of                   
              trees probably underestimate responses of trees to shade                       
              conditions.                                                                    
                   The purpose of this proposal is to study the effects of                   
              shifts in light quality independently of the reduced light                     
              intensity to which plants are exposed in the forest shade.  The                
              responses of seedlings of ten Malaysian rainforest trees to                    
              light quantity and quality will be studied in specially                        
              constructed shadehouses at the Forestry Research Institute in                  
              Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.  These trees will include pioneer                      
              species, shade-tolerant emergent and shade-intolerant emergent.                
              The seedlings will be grown for twelve months and then be                      
              analysed for their architecture, leaf morphology and anatomy,                  
              and photosynthetic properties.  The results will be compared to                
              those from seedlings grown under natural canopy shade, and will                
              help in understanding how these trees respond to natural light                 
              climates in the forest.  Such information can also be used to                  
              help grow them in nurseries for later transplanting into                       
              regenerating forests.
