Title       : Nitrogen Storage in Alpine Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1991       
File        : a9020044

Award Number: 9020044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell K. Monson monsonr@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This study tests the hypothesis that storing nitrogen over                
              winter is an important adaptation in alpine plants.  The alpine                
              environment is characterized by: 1) a short growing season, (2)                
              low soil temperatures, and 3) low nitrogen (N) availability.  By               
              using N that is stored during one growing season plants can begin              
              growth in the following spring, even though soils are too cold                 
              for them to acquire N from the soil.  This may allow them to take              
              maximum advantage of the short alpine growth season and to                     
              quickly flower and set seed before the danger of frost becomes                 
              great.  The investigators will determine when plants are using                 
              nitrogen for growth, and when plants are able to take nitrogen                 
              from the soil.  If they find that plants start growing before                  
              they can acquire N in the spring, the hypothesis will be                       
              supported.  However, determining when N is actually available to               
              plants is a complicated task.  Nitrogen availability is                        
              determined by the amount of mineral N in the soil, the rate at                 
              which this N is added (from rain or snow, or from decomposition                
              of old plant matter) and the relative ability of plants versus                 
              soil microbes to acquire this N.  Therefore, the annual pattern                
              of N ion concentration in the soil, the rate of production of                  
              these ions from decomposition, and the relative ability of plants              
              and soil microbes to assimilate this nitrogen must be determined.              
                   The study is significant for several reasons.  First, it                  
              will advance basic understanding of plant N allocation and plant-              
              nutrient relations in the alpine environment.  The manner in                   
              which a plant allocates its resources can be as important as the               
              quantity of resources it garners from the environment in                       
              determining a plant's ultimate ability to survive.  Second, the                
              study will address the important general question "to what extent              
              do microorganisms compete for nitrogen with higher plants?"                    
              Awareness is growing that such competition can have a potent                   
              affect on plant nutrient status.                                               
                   These questions have practical implications.  For example,                
              an understanding of N storage in alpine plants may provide                     
              insight into what happens when fruit trees overwinter in                       
              temperate areas.  By learning how soil temperature affects N                   
              cycling in the alpine, scientists may be able to provide insight               
              into the fate of N fertilizer in cold agricultural systems with a              
              goal of more efficient use of fertilizer and reduced ground water              
              pollution by nitrogen fertilizers.  Finally, denitrification of                
              nitrate into nitrous oxide (a greenhouse gas) is affected by many              
              of the soil parameters tested in this study.  These results could              
              be useful in predicting the effect of polar warming on greenhouse              
              gas emissions from the arctic.
