Title       : SGER: Systems Dynamics Applications in Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1990       
File        : a9020357

Award Number: 9020357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Metzger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will apply the theory of nonlinear dynamical                     
              systems and chaos to generate models of psychological processes.               
              The new mathematical and graphical methods of chaos will address               
              features of dynamic aspects of new and existing data streams that              
              have not previously been treated using formal techniques.  The                 
              results will make the temporal structure of cognitive and                      
              behavioral patterns accessible to psychologists in a language                  
              common to physical, biological, and social sciences.                           
                                                                                             
              Two examples of this approach are as follows:  (1) The attractors              
              of coordinated hand and mouth movements by newborn babies change               
              in an interesting way after babies are given a taste of sucrose.               
              This result is plain from inspection of the dynamic graph (phase-              
              space trajectory), and could not be obtained by standard methods,              
              except by piecewise spectrum analyses of coordinated time series,              
              requiring substantial interpretation.  The research will further               
              apply nonlinear theory to the full data stream for movement in                 
              babies.  (2) Dynamic maps show that, when people attempt to make               
              a series of consecutive short-term forecasts for an unfamiliar,                
              chaotic, but not completely random process, the anchoring                      
              strategy produces an accurate behavioral analogue of the process               
              but inaccurate forecasts (one-step out of phase).  People who                  
              have had more exposure to the process make very accurate short-                
              term forecasts.  The research will gather new forecasting data                 
              and use dynamical maps to show graphically and mathematically how              
              the behavioral analogue of the chaotic process moves from out-of-              
              phase to in-phase.   The dynamic maps of strategies may well                   
              become a standard method for tracing the formation of concepts                 
              and expectations.                                                              
                                                                                             
              In the future, this research may be useful in an educational                   
              context, contributing to understanding of cognitive processes                  
              that are sometimes problematic and are defined in terms of                     
              dynamic properties, such as distractibility and attentiveness; it              
              may also contribute new techniques for assessment and instruction              
              of individuals, based on the principles of optimization of                     
              dynamic processes.
