Title       : A Theory and Methodology of Multistrategy Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9020266

Award Number: 9020266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ryszard S. Michalski michalski@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gheorghe D. Tecuci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The last several years have seen a great expansion and                         
              diversification of research directions and approaches in machine               
              learning, and a simultaneous interest in developing systems that               
              integrate various learning strategies.  Such a situation creates               
              a need for analyzing and clarifying the relationships among                    
              different strategies and approaches, and building a theoretical                
              basis for the implementation of multistrategy learning systems.                
              This research attempts to develop a theoretical framework for                  
              describing diverse learning processes, based on a general notion               
              of inference (hence, inference-based theory).  According to this               
              theory, a system learns from input information by trying to                    
              understand it i.e., to relate it to its background knowledge                   
              (BK).  Based on this theory the researcher plans to develop a                  
              multistrategy task-adaptive learning (MTL) system, that                        
              synergistically integrates different learning strategies.  Given               
              an input and a goal of learning, an MTL learner applies the                    
              strategies) that are most appropriate according to the                         
              relationship between the input and learner's BK in the context of              
              the learner's goal.  The MTL methodology is intended to integrate              
              ultimately such learning strategies as empirical learning,                     
              constructive induction, explanation-based learning, abduction,                 
              learning by analogy and abstraction.
