Title       : Anthropogenic Environmental Change, Agricultural Intensification, and
               Socio-Political Evolution in Polynesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1992      
File        : a9020750

Award Number: 9020750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick V. Kirch kirch@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kirch and his                    
              colleagues will conduct archaeological, ecological and                         
              paleoecological research on the island of Mangaia which is part                
              of the Cook Islands chain. They will extract several soil cores                
              to obtain pollen to reconstruct changing vegetation over the last              
              several thousand years.  These data will be supplemented by the                
              analysis of faunal remains which document the periods both before              
              and after first human occupation.  Geomorphological studies will               
              show how landforms changed in response to both changing sea level              
              and intensive human exploitation.  Finally, archaeological survey              
              and excavation will serve to elucidate the estimated 2000 year                 
              span since the first occupation of the island by humans.  Dr.                  
              Kirch wishes to trace changes in population density, land use and              
              political organization.  These data will then provide a context                
              within which to study the social organization and economy of the               
              present day descendants.  A wealth of ethnographic data exists.                
                                                                                             
              The islands of Polynesia provide a unique anthropological                      
              laboratory because they were all colonized in the last several                 
              thousand years by basically a single cultural group.  The islands              
              vary in size and environment and degree of isolation. The                      
              inhabitants also exhibit a number of different forms of social                 
              organization.  Anthropologists have attempted to relate variation              
              in social behavior to variation in island type and through this                
              exercise understand the mechanisms which govern human response to              
              environmental variation.  Mangaia exhibits an unusual form of                  
              organization in which chiefly inherited rights are balanced by                 
              individually achieved status.  Kirch believes that this can only               
              be understood in terms of changing human - environment relations               
              over time and this project is designed to investigate that                     
              interaction.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons.  It will increase               
              our understanding of the organizational principles of tribal-                  
              based societies (which continue to exist in many parts of the                  
              world.).  It will also show how groups act in the face of                      
              increasingly limited resources and the strategies of adaptation                
              they develop.  The work will provide data of interest to a large               
              group of archaeologists and help to train young scientists.
