Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Comparative Role of Pheromone
               Biosynthesis Activating Neuropeptide (PBAN) in Moth Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1991  
File        : a9020580

Award Number: 9020580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8269               (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendell L. Roelofs wlr1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5941      NEW ZEALAND
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1141,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Wendell L. Roelofs of Cornell University and Dr. Stephen                       
              Foster of the New Zealand Department of Scientific and                         
              Industrial Research (DSIRO).  Over the last two decades,                       
              researchers have built a knowledge-base of the biosynthetic                    
              enzyme pathways through which production of pheromone                          
              located in glands and other organs, is activated by the                        
              brain-hormone, biosynthesis activating neuropeptide (PBAN).                    
              Critical unanswered questions,however, have pervaded  these                    
              studies: How did these hormonal systems and their unique                       
              biosynthetic enzymes and brain-hormonal control of pheromone                   
              production, which are species-specific, evolve?  This                          
              cooperative project will focus on this research question,                      
              that is, the evolution of how PBAN effects pheromone production                
              in several moth species.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The project represents excellent collaboration between New                     
              Zealand and U.S. researchers.  The New Zealand group has                       
              extensive experience and knowledge of the only moth species                    
              known in the world to exhibit the pattern of primitive to                      
              more advanced pheromone biosynthetic pathways within the same                  
              genus.  The U.S. group will apply the series of techniques,                    
              which they developed, for studying the action of PBAN, and                     
              provide synthetic PBAN for the study.  The research is                         
              important fundamental work in advancing basic understanding                    
              of evolution of the brain-hormone, PBAN.  Also, since                          
              hormones cause chemically-based radical changes in behavior,                   
              the study has the potential for results relevant to regulating                 
              insect behavior in areas such as cardiac activity and blood                    
              sugar.
