Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Regional Development Theory and Practice: A
               Korean/American Comparison
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1991    
File        : a9020899

Award Number: 9020899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29536              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann R. Markusen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5942      KOREA
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1352,5942,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Ann R. Markusen,                    
              Center for Urban Policy Research Planning and Policy                           
              Development, Rutgers University, to pursue with Dr. Sam Ock                    
              Park, Department of Geography, Seoul National University,                      
              Korea, for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative                     
              research on regional development theory and practice in the                    
              United States and Korea.  These collaborators will examine                     
              the following five approaches to regional development theory                   
              as practiced in the U.S. and Korea: product/profit cycle                       
              theories; seedbeds of innovation; new districts; trade-                        
              induced development; and state-induced development.                            
                                                                                             
              Most empirical tests of regional development theories have                     
              been confined to analysis within a particular country.  In                     
              the present project, however, theoretical framework will be                    
              compared and tested against the postwar experience of Korean                   
              and American regions.  The validity of previous research                       
              results on a single national experience will be reviewed in                    
              an attempt to improve the various theories via comparative                     
              results.  The two collaborators are highly regarded scientists                 
              who have made significant contributions to the literature                      
              i/n the field of this project.  This project is relevant to                    
              the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program                   
              which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between                       
              U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the                           
              exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and                         
              techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual                     
              benefits.
