Title       : RNA Processing Meeting Cold Spring Harbor 1991-1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1991   
File        : a9020809

Award Number: 9020809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrian R. Krainer krainer@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The RNA Processing Meeting provides an annual forum for                        
              researchers to share recent findings about RNA splicing and other              
              RNA processing reactions, RNA catalysis, structure-function                    
              relationships in RNA and RNA-protein complexes, regulation at the              
              level of alternative RNA processing and RNA editing and                        
              modification.  The meetings have attracted and extraordinarily                 
              broad spectrum of scientists totalling approximately 400 from the              
              U.S. and abroad.  This total includes biochemists, molecular                   
              biologists, chemists, geneticists and cell biologists.  A                      
              continuations of these meetings is proposed for 1991-1993.  The                
              organizer will select session chairmen and organize the meeting                
              into 7 to 8 scientific session plus 3 poster sessions.  Speakers               
              will be chosen from the abstracts submitted.  Poster sessions                  
              will provide all conferees with an opportunity to present their                
              work, and will not be limited.  Past meetings have shown that                  
              face-to-face contact engendered by this format enhances the                    
              quality and rate of progress in this field, promotes                           
              collabroative interactions, and ensures that the most up-to-date               
              methods for analysis of RNA are communicated properly.  This is                
              the only meeting dedicated to this rapidly moving area of                      
              research that is held on an annual basis.                                      
                                                                                             
              The problems to be clarified by the Cold Spring Harbor RNA                     
              Processing Meeting include the pathway of assembly of the large                
              complexes in which nuclear mRNA splicing takes place; the role of              
              individual small nuclear mRNPs and proteins in splicing and other              
              processing reactions; the mechanisms of trans-splicing; the role               
              of RNA catalysis in a variety of steps in the maturation of tRNA,              
              rRNA, and mRNA; and the mechanisms of RNA editing and                          
              modification.
