Title       : ALVIN Diving on the East Pacific Rise, 9-10 Degrees North: Hydrothermal,
               Volcanological, and Geochemical Studies in Support of ODP Bare Rock Drilling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9020111

Award Number: 9020111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194157             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel M. Haymon haymon@geol.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A new view of sea-floor spreading center processes is emerging                 
              from integration of detailed bathymetric, geophysical, and                     
              petrological data sets. Variations in the supply of magma along                
              the ridge axis appears to play a fundamental role in controlling               
              morphologic, tectonic, seismic and geochemical "segmentation" of               
              spreading centers. Such magmatic segmentation has profound                     
              implications for hydrothermal processes which are controlled by                
              the thermal and permeability characteristics of the newly formed               
              crust.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              The present project will support a detailed examination of                     
              hydrothermal processes along the East Pacific Rise south of the                
              Clipperton Transform Fault. This section of ridge has been                     
              extensively studied using standard geologic and geophysical                    
              techniques. Only data on the chemistry and nature of vent fluids               
              to be gathered by this project is lacking for this ridge segment.              
              Additionally, future drilling is planned which will provide a                  
              depth perspective on volcanic and hydrothermal processes. These                
              additional data will provide the first  complete three                         
              dimensional characterization of a ridge crest spreading segment.               
              Additional work to be accomplished during Alvin dives in this                  
              study includes: structural mapping, basalt sampling, and                       
              evaluation of specific sites for future drilling.
