Title       : Electric Field Response of Polymer-Dispersed Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1993 
File        : a9020420

Award Number: 9020420
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack R. Kelly jkelly@scorpio.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal combines experimental and                                        
              theoretical investigations of the response of PDLC                             
              films to applied fields.  The primary objective of                             
              this work is to obtain a comprehensive                                         
              understanding of the major contributions to the                                
              switching mechanisms in these materials.  This will                            
              enable systematic modification and control of the                              
              film characteristics to achieve optimum film                                   
              performance for specific device applications.                                  
              Experimental studies will include dielectric and                               
              transmission measurements of PDLC films in                                     
              response to fields of sufficient strength to reorient                          
              the liquid crystal director.  Electron microscopy will                         
              provide information on droplet geometry.  These                                
              measurements will be used to correlate the                                     
              response with important film properties:  the                                  
              electrical characteristics, liquid crystal elastic                             
              constants, droplet size and droplet shape.  To                                 
              achieve a comprehensive picture, the experimental                              
              investigations will be supplemented by theoretical                             
              studies of the response.  In particular, the electric                          
              field in a birefringent (bipolar) ellipsoidal droplet                          
              will be examined in detail numerically.  This will be                          
              coupled with calculations of the director                                      
              configuration in the droplets to understand the role                           
              of the field strength, elastic constants and droplet                           
              geometry on the director realignment in a droplet.                             
              These calculations will be applied to recently                                 
              developed models of the dielectric response and                                
              optical transmission for comparison with                                       
              experimental response curves.
