Title       : Regulation of Skeletal Myofiber-Type Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1993      
File        : a9020998

Award Number: 9020998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Wade   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The study of vertebrate muscle development presents exceptional                
              opportunities for the investigation of gene regulation during                  
              complex ontogenetic processes.  During myogenesis both tissue-                 
              specific and developmental stage-specific gene switching occur,                
              culminating in the formation of the two major types of skeletal                
              muscle: fast-twitch and slow-twitch myofibers.  Each of the                    
              muscle fiber types is characterized by the expression of unique                
              combinations is contractile protein isoforms.  The establishment               
              of muscle fiber type arises from the interplay of factors such as              
              cell lineage, type of innervation the myofiber receives, and the               
              level of circulating hormones.  Whereas much progress has been                 
              made in understanding the molecular mechanisms responsible for                 
              muscle-specific gene expression, almost nothing is known about                 
              differential myofiber-type-specific gene expression.  Dr Wade                  
              proposes to investigate the mechanisms regulating myofiber-type                
              specific gene expression through the study of the human troponin               
              I gene family.  The adult slow-fiber TnI gene is differentially                
              expressed during embryonic muscle fiber formation, and can serve               
              as a model for the developmental regulation of fiber-type-                     
              specific gene expression.  He has cloned the human skeletal                    
              muscle TnI slow gene, and has identified multiple cis-acting                   
              sequences required for its muscle-specific expression by the use               
              of in vitro transient expression assays.  These studies have                   
              identified a muscle specific enhancer which is not trans-                      
              activated by the myogenic regulatory factor MyoD1.  He will                    
              further characterize the muscle-specific regulatory elements and               
              extend these studies to examine muscle fiber-type-specific gene                
              activity.  The mechanisms underlying fiber-type-specific gene                  
              expression will be investigated in vivo by the novel approach of               
              directly introducing TnI gene constructs into specific fast and                
              slow twitch muscles in mice and rats, and by the development of                
              transgenic mice carrying hybrid TnI gene constructs.  The in vivo              
              expression of these TnI gene constructs will be monitored by CAT               
              activity assays, RNase protection assay,and by in situ                         
              hybridization of gene specific probes to cross sections of muscle              
              tissue.  These in vitro and in vivo expression studies will                    
              assess whether specific cis-acting sequences can confer muscle                 
              fiber-type-specific gene expression  and evaluate the role of                  
              trans-acting factors in the process.  The putative trans-acting                
              factors regulating fiber-type-specific gene expression will be                 
              characterized by gel mobility shift assays, and DNA footprinting               
              techniques.  If such factors are found, he will clone                          
              representative cDNAs from expression libraries.  These studies                 
              will be among the first to examine the molecular mechanisms                    
              regulating muscle fiber type development and maintenance.
