Title       : Phylogenetic and Molecular Evolutionary Studies of Chloroplast DNA Variation in
               the Asteraceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1991     
File        : a9020171

Award Number: 9020171
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81229              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Jansen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Previous studies of chloroplast DNA variation in the                      
              Asteraceae have resolved many systematic issues at higher taxonomic            
              levels.  However, major problems persist in resolving tribal                   
              relationships and the monophyly of the subfamily Lactucoideae.  An             
              expanded examination of chloroplast DNA variation in the Asteraceae            
              is proposed using comparative restriction site mapping of 10                   
              enzymes and DNA sequencing of two genes (rpoC2 and ndhF) from                  
              representative species in all currently recognized tribes in the               
              family.  These new data will be combined with those from previous              
              chloroplast DNA studies to address both phylogenetic and molecular             
              evolutionary questions.  Integration of molecular and morphological            
              data will produce a comprehensive phylogeny and classification of              
              the Asteraceae.  Fine scale restriction site and gene mapping will             
              enable the first direct comparisons of the phylogenetic utility of             
              restriction site mutations in coding and noncoding regions of the              
              chloroplast genome.  Similarly, the availability of DNA sequences              
              of three genes (rbcL, rpoC2, ndhF) will provide much needed                    
              comparisons of the usefulness of different chloroplast genes for               
              phylogenetic studies in angiosperms.  Statistical analyses of                  
              restriction site and sequence data will be used to examine the                 
              patterns and rates of sequence evolution in the chloroplast genome.            
              Identification of heterogeneity in the location of restriction site            
              mutations will provide valuable information for character analysis             
              in future molecular systematic studies in the Asteraceae and other             
              angiosperm families.  Furthermore, new insights will be gained into            
              the rates and patterns of nucleotide substitutions within and                  
              between coding and noncoding sequences from three chloroplast genes            
              with different functions and locations in the chloroplast genome.
