Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Cis-Acting Sites in the Yeast Viral
               Double-Stranded RNAs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1993       
File        : a9020780

Award Number: 9020780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15570              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy A. Bruenn cambruen@nsm.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 5927      EAST ASIA, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1143,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Jeremy Bruenn,                      
              Department of Biological Sciences, State University of New                     
              York (SUNY) at Buffalo, to pursue with Dr. Hyun Sam Kang,                      
              Director, Institute for Molecular Biology  and Genetics,                       
              Seoul National University, for a period of 24 months, a                        
              program of cooperative research on cis-acting sites in the                     
              yeast viral double-stranded RNA's.  This research will                         
              address current problems involving the interaction of                          
              proteins and nucleic acids.  The collaborators will undertake                  
              a fine-structure mapping of the recognition  sites on the                      
              viral plus strand for viral proteins.  This will be                            
              accomplished by RNase protection experiments and by in vitro                   
              mutagenesis  of cDNA clones of relevant regions and their                      
              expression both in vivo and  in vitro.                                         
                                                                                             
              Viruses provide a convenient means of addressing some of the                   
              problems involving the interactions of proteins and nucleic                    
              acids.  In particular, viruses with their own packaged                         
              polymerases provide self-contained systems in which the                        
              interaction of both enzymatic and structural proteins with                     
              nucleic acids can be studied in an easily purified and                         
              isolated form.  The ScV, or Saccharomyces cerevisiae virus                     
              provides an opportunity to study these interactions and                        
              protein interaction with double stranded RNA's (dsRNA's) as                    
              well.  The U.S. and Korean collaborators are highly respected                  
              scientists who not only have extensive individual research                     
              records but also a record of successful collaboration in the                   
              field of the proposal.  This project is relevant to  the                       
              objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program                       
              which seeks  to increase the level of cooperation between                      
              U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange                  
              of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and                   
              through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Korean                   
              participation in the project is supported by the Korea                         
              Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).
