Title       : Stream Hyporheic Zones: Hydrology, Biogeochemistry, and Links to Surface Waters
               and Riparian Plant Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1994      
File        : a9020561

Award Number: 9020561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $615909             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Campana   (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Maurice Valett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford N. Dahm  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this project is to develop a detailed understanding of             
              the hydrology of hyporheic zones and to interface chemical and                 
              microbial processes occurring within hyporheic zones to the                    
              hydrologic dynamics of these environments.  The specific objectives            
              of this project are:                                                           
              1.   Develop and validate a numerical model coupling hyporheic                 
                   groundwater flow and open-channel flow.                                   
              2.   Install hydrologic monitoring networks in three catchments                
                   with differing parent lithologies to obtain uninterrupted                 
                   measurements of the hydrology of the hyporheic zones and                  
                   surface waters. These data will be used to test and validate              
                   the numerical models.                                                     
              3.   Perform tracer experiments to further validate the general                
                   applicability of the coupled flow/transport model.                        
              4.   Examine the interactions between hyporheic zone hydrology and             
                   microbial processes with regards to dissolved oxygen                      
                   availability, the form and amount of inorganic nutrients, and             
                   the cycling of carbon.                                                    
              5.   Evaluate the role of the hyporheic zone on microbial                      
                   photosynthesis and chemosynthesis at the sediment/water                   
                   interface.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Drs. Dahm and Campana are outstanding stream researchers.  This                
              project couples stream hydrology with the chemical and biological              
              processes that occur within the hyporheic zone.  The facilities                
              available for this research are outstanding.                                   
                                                                                             
              //
