Title       : UNIDATA Equipment Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1991    
File        : a9020365

Award Number: 9020365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford A. Jacobs                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6500               (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Merrill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1520      COMPUTING FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  A graphical workstation for use of the UNIDATA system to                  
              receive and process meteorological data at the University of                   
              Rhode Island Graduate School of Oceanography will be acquired.                 
              UNIDATA is the NSF-subsidized system allowing university                       
              departments access to real-time weather data, forecasts and                    
              specialized satellite images.  Data transmitted via satellite are              
              ingested and decoded by networked computers; they may be stored                
              or used in displays, in diagnostic calculations or perhaps in                  
              experimental forecasts.  At URI the required satellite receiving               
              gear is in place and has been in stable operation for four years.              
              The workstation acquired would augment the Educational Computer                
              Laboratory, which presently has microcomputers and workstations                
              on a local area network.  The UNIDATA software will be installed               
              and used in display analysis and archive meteorological data for               
              the purpose of teaching and research for strongly                              
              interdisciplinary programs.  Those studying atmospheric                        
              chemistry, physical oceanography and paleoclimatology are likely               
              to benefit most from the augmented laboratory facilities.                      
              Dedicated computers in laboratories across campus can access the               
              local network, and the system will also be used in these research              
              environments.  An example of such use is control or monitoring of              
              conditions for the planning or conduct of field experiments.
