Title       : Dissertation Research: Consequences of Seasonal Variation for Within-Population
               Genetic Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1991   
File        : a9020200

Award Number: 9020200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. McGraw   (Principal Investigator current)
              Milan C. Vavrek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Natural populations which have been surveyed exhibit large                     
              amounts of genetic diversity, i.e., differences in the genetic                 
              makeup between individuals.  This variability allows the                       
              population to respond to a changing environment.  Variability is               
              crucial to a population because it allows a population to evolve.              
                                                                                             
              Differences in the environment through time and space are thought              
              to be two primary factors maintaining this genetic variability.                
              Spatial heterogeneity is common in a range of environments and                 
              has been shown to support genetic variability.  Particular                     
              individuals are often better adapted to their microenvironment,                
              thus the population as a whole is comprised of many individuals                
              adapted to slightly different environments.                                    
                                                                                             
              The investigators will experimentally test if individuals of a                 
              population are better adapted to particular seasons.  By                       
              determining whether individuals grow and reproduce better at                   
              different times within the year, they can test the notion that                 
              temporal as well as spatial differences in the environment are                 
              important in maintaining genetic diversity.  No experiments using              
              plants have explicitly tested the importance of environmental                  
              differences among seasons or years.                                            
                                                                                             
              In addition to understanding underlying mechanisms supporting                  
              genetic diversity, knowledge of the seasonality of plant                       
              populations may be of practical benefit.  Efficacy of herbicide                
              applications, for example, is partially a function of when during              
              the plant life-cycle an herbicide is applied.  Additionally, if a              
              population represents an array of genotypes adapted to different               
              seasons, particular individuals or populations may have the                    
              ability to persist in or be "preadapted" to an altered                         
              environment.  A population's response to a global environmental                
              change such as warming maybe predicted.  Predictions of                        
              extinction or genetic change by populations may then be used to                
              examine potential shifts in species composition of communities                 
              and ecosystems.
