Title       : Integration of the UNIDATA Scientific Data Management System Into the
               Undergraduate Meteorology Curriculm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1991 
File        : a9020656

Award Number: 9020656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford A. Jacobs                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9790               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Murphy cmurphy@kean.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kean University
	      Morris Avenue
	      Union, NJ  07083    201/527-2000

NSF Program : 1520      COMPUTING FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Computer hardware and software will be acquired to run the                
              Scientific Data Management (SDM) system for meteorological data                
              access and analysis developed by the UNIDATA Project Center.  The              
              SDM system is an essential element in achieving the major                      
              objective of this project - the incorporation of the                           
              methodologies of computerized data analysis into the meteorology               
              curriculum at Kean College.  Today's meteorology students need                 
              experience with these methodologies, and they require the means                
              for efficient access to current data as well as new types of                   
              information to be available in the near future (i.e. NEXTRAD,                  
              profilers, and improved satellite capabilities).  These                        
              curriculum revisions are necessary to adapt our undergraduate                  
              program to the evolving technological developments in the field                
              of meteorology.                                                                
                                                                                             
                   The curriculum revisions will include new approaches to                   
              teaching using computerized data analysis and the development of               
              a range of case studies and student exercises to reinforce the                 
              new methodologies.  Coexisting with the revision of the                        
              meteorology curriculum will be evaluation and assessment of its                
              impact on student learning.  Evaluation of the curriculum                      
              objectives will be accomplished through a variety of standard                  
              means, as well as through specially designed assessment                        
              instruments as part of the existing program assessment effort at               
              Kean College.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                   In addition to the curriculum objectives, the SDM system                  
              will provide improved access to data for faculty research in                   
              neural network approaches to local forecasting and mesoscale                   
              modeling, as well as for student research projects.  It will also              
              enhance our ability to share data with local high schools and                  
              other colleges in the area.
