Title       : Exemplar-Based Processing in Social Judgement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1993     
File        : a9020807

Award Number: 9020807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111721             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eliot R. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Current theories emphasize that perceivers rely heavily on their               
              general knowledge in making judgments about specific people.  For              
              example, stereotyping is thought to involve the application of                 
              general knowledge about characteristics of a social group as the               
              perceiver makes judgments or forms expectations about an                       
              individual who is a member of that group.  However, this                       
              perspective requires additional assumptions to account for                     
              observations, and does not account for perceivers' judgments                   
              about an individual who is a member of two or more distinct                    
              groups about whom stereotypes exist (e.g., a female Marine).                   
              This proposal outlines four laboratory experiments and computer                
              simulations to develop and test a new theory of social judgment.               
              This theory holds that perceivers flexibly access and apply their              
              knowledge about specific persons--in addition to their general                 
              knowledge--to make judgments about other people.  The use of such              
              exemplar information depends on aspects of the perceiver's goals,              
              past experiences, and group memberships as well as the current                 
              social situation.  This theory promises to shed new light on                   
              previously problematic aspects of the stereotyping processes, and              
              suggests a new set of directions for research on person                        
              perception and social judgment in general.
