Title       : Structure, Regulation and Mechanism of the Action of Oxidizing Enzyme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1992  
File        : a9020015

Award Number: 9020015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Singer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rona R. Ramsay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed project is a direct continuation and expansion of                 
              studies conducted under NSF project                                            
              exploiting findings in that investigation.  One aspect of the                  
              project centers on the oxidation of the neurotoxic amine MPTP (N-              
              methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6- tetrahydropyridine) and of its                        
              structural analogs by the two forms of monoamine oxidase )MAO),                
              which are known to exist in mammalian mitochondria, and the                    
              reversible inhibition of MAO A and B by the pyridinium oxidation               
              products of MPTP analogs.  These tertiary amines are of profound               
              interest to biochemists, pharmacologists, and neurobiologists                  
              because in humans, subhuman primates, and certain other species                
              they induce neurological conditions essentially identical with                 
              those seen in Parkinson patients.  Expression of their neurotoxic              
              action is initiated by the 4-electron oxidation of these                       
              tetrahydropyridines by either or both forms of brain MAO.  A                   
              study of the structural requirements of MAO A and MAO B for rapid              
              oxidation of these tertiary amines has revealed completely                     
              unexpected facets of the specificities of these enzymes and has                
              already yielded major new information concerning their catalytic               
              properties.  Many more classes of structural analogs remain to                 
              be tested with these different enzyme forms.  Another aspect of                
              the program explores further the mechanism of neuronal death                   
              caused by the pyridinium compounds formed by MAO.  It is known                 
              that they inhibit the respiration of mitochondria by blocking the              
              reoxidation of the flavoprotein NADH dehydrogenase by Coenzyme                 
              Q. m Structure-function studies under this proposed program                    
              should greatly increase our understanding of the requirements for              
              the interaction of MPP+ analogs with NADH dehydrogenase.  We plan              
              to expand our recent experiments which have demonstrated that the              
              classical inhibitors of NADH dehydrogenase (rotenone, piericidin,              
              and barbiturates) bind at the same site and compete with MPP+ and              
              its analogs.  Extension of these studies to photoaffinity analogs              
              of MPP+ and congeners is expected to establish which of the                    
              subunits of the complex NADH dehydrogenase molecular are close                 
              to the Q reduction site.
