Title       : Mid-Infrared Spectroscopy of the Interstellar Medium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9020292

Award Number: 9020292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Lacy lacy@astro.as.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Lacy has constructed an echelle spectrograph which is an order             
              of magnitude more sensitive than other available instruments for               
              spectroscopy of moderate to high resolution at mid-infrared                    
              wavelengths.  With this grant he will continue his pioneering work             
              in this wavelength region of the spectrum.  Three projects will be             
              emphasized: 1) He will investigate the relative importance of gas-             
              phase and grain-surface reactions on the composition of molecular              
              clouds by observing absorption of various molecules in the gaseous             
              and solid phases; 2) He will study the pure rotational line                    
              emission of molecular hydrogen, to learn about the conditions in               
              shocked gas and photodissociation regions, and to determine the                
              ratio of hydrogen to carbon monoxide; and 3) He will observe the               
              mid-infrared emission lines of ions of neon and sulfur to study the            
              kinematics and excitation of infrared luminous galaxies.                       
                                                                                             
              There are two principal advantages to the mid-infrared spectral                
              region for astronomical spectroscopy: the small interstellar                   
              extinction relative to that at shorter wavelengths, and the                    
              presence of several interesting spectral features, notably                     
              vibrational transitions of molecules and fine-structure lines of               
              ions.  Many objects which are unobservable, because of extinction,             
              at visible or near-infrared wavelengths become accessible in the               
              mid-infrared.  Spectral lines of molecules and ions provide                    
              valuable information about the kinematics and physical conditions              
              of the newly revealed objects.  Dr. Lacy's spectrograph represents             
              a significant advance in the quality of instrumentation for                    
              exploring objects at mid-infrared wavelengths.
