Title       : SGER: Southern Andes Glacial Chronology: Test of Abrupt Global Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9020736

Award Number: 9020736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27324              (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Denton debbies@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  What drives glacial climate cycles?  This fundamental                     
              question lies at the heart of understanding global changes of                  
              recent ice ages.  The PI and others have suggested that abrupt                 
              reorganizations of the ocean-atmosphere system are the key                     
              events linking orbital perturbations to global ice-age climate                 
              changes.  This hypothesis has fundamental implication about                    
              understanding past climate changes as well as anticipating                     
              changes in the earth's present climate.  It is suggested that                  
              major ocean and atmospheric changes begin abruptly and                         
              synchronously on a global scale during major climate transitions.              
              To test such a prediction the PI proposes to compare detailed                  
              paleoclimatic records of glacier margins and equilibrium-line                  
              altitudes (which are sensitive indicators of atmospheric                       
              temperature changes) at mid latitudes in both polar hemispheres                
              through the last glacial-interglacial transition.  For this test,              
              he seeks a precise Southern Hemisphere alpine glacier record.                  
                                                                                             
                   This is a grant to support obtaining the necessary glacial                
              record while avoiding the inherent and time-consuming gamble of                
              mapping a moraine sequence and coming up empty for radiocarbon                 
              age control.  Most projects on alpine glaciation have not been                 
              particularly helpful because of lack of radiocarbon dates.  After              
              examining Southern Hemisphere alpine areas in New Zealand and                  
              South America, the PI proposes reconnaissance field work in                    
              southern Chile in the area covered by a former alpine glacier                  
              system that extended form the crest of the Andes westward to                   
              Chile Island.  This field work will involve reconnaissance                     
              mapping multiple moraines and outwash bodies of Llanquihue (late               
              Wisconsin/marine isotope stage 2) age on Chiloe Island and the                 
              adjacent mainland.  Existing radiocarbon sites will be tied into               
              this map and abundant new stratigraphic sites with organic                     
              material will be examined and dated to determine if they can                   
              yield additional chronologic control.  Pollen and spore                        
              stratigraphy will be examined for intertill peats.  Finally, the               
              PI will determine if minimum ages for ice recession deep into the              
              mountains can be obtained from basal dates in lakes and bogs.                  
              The resulting preliminary chronology will clarify whether this                 
              region of the Southern Andes is capable of producing a                         
              paleoclimatic record with the detailed age control necessary to                
              test the hypothesis of abrupt ocean-atmosphere reorganizations.                
              Hence, the feasibility of a long-term study in the southern Andes              
              will emerge from this preliminary chronology.                                  
                                                                                             
                   This work is supported by a Small Grant for Exploratory                   
              Research and is important because it seeks to understand climate               
              changes on time scales relevant to human activities.
