Title       : Insular and Continental, Amber and Living Diptera: Implications for Historical
               Biogeography and the Caribbean Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9020102

Award Number: 9020102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John R. Gold                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137936             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Grimaldi grimaldi@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The abundant deposits of Oligo-miocene amber from southern                
              Mexico and Hispaniola have yielded a great diversity of exquisitely            
              preserved biological inclusions, the large majority being                      
              arthropods and especially Diptera.  The amber specimens afford an              
              unparalleled opportunity to address questions on the relationships             
              and origins of the Caribbean fauna, but critical information is                
              lacking on the distributions of most extant Diptera in the                     
              caribbean, and the phylogenetic relationships of the amber fossil              
              taxa to living species.                                                        
                   This research proposes to examine selected groups represented             
              in the amber collections the AMNH and the NMNH: Asteia (Asteiidae),            
              Aulacigaster (Aulacigastridae), Beckeriella (Ephydridae),                      
              Beebeomyia (Richardiidae), Carnus/Meoneura (Carnidae),                         
              Lygistorrhina and Proceroplatus (Mycetophilidae), Diathoneura and              
              selected Drosophila groups (Drosophilidae), Odinia (Odiniidae), and            
              a species group within Pholeomyia (Milichiidae).  Taxonomic                    
              revisions of each will be based on species-level treatments using              
              adult morphology and cladistic methodology to examine phylogenetic             
              relationships.  Study will resort to pinned museum specimens but               
              requires extensive sampling using several general and specific                 
              collecting techniques in lowland tropical forests, which is                    
              proposed for Hispa ola, Cuba, and Costa Rica.  Gas                             
              chromatography/mass spectroscopy will be done by a collaborator on             
              selected amber specimens to more accurately determine their                    
              geological provenance.  Aims of the research are the following:                
              define species and their distributions for the above groups in the             
              Netropics; test for repeated, congruent patterns of distributions;             
              and place the fossils among the phylogenetic system of extant                  
              species.  Implications of these results are that distributions can             
              be examined for correspondence to island origins (vicariance), and             
              the minimum, fossil age of a clade may provide permissive evidence             
              for or refute a particular geological explanation.  Also, the role             
              of geographical extinctions in modifying distributions can be                  
              assessed, which is directly applicable to vicariance methodology.
