Title       : Neolithic Economy and Social Relations in the Eastern Sahara
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1991   
File        : a9020967

Award Number: 9020967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101819             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred Wendorf fwendorf@sun.cis.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angela E. Close  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Fred Wendorf and                 
              his international team of collaborators will conduct                           
              archaeological research in the Gebel Nabta and Bir Safsaf regions              
              of the Eastern Sahara Desert in Egypt.  They will return to sites              
              located in past work and employ a series of strategies which                   
              include survey, surface collection of exposed materials and                    
              careful excavation.  All sites date from the Neolithic period,                 
              ca. 9,000 to 6,000 years before the present. A series of houses                
              from Nabta are particularly important because they contain large               
              numbers of small depressions, probably the remains of cooking                  
              fires.  Each holds abundant and well preserved floral remains                  
              which possibly are the byproducts of individual cooking events.                
              With such data it is possible to gain unprecedented insight into               
              subsistence practices since it is extremely rare for plant                     
              materials be so well preserved.  A broad scale site survey should              
              provide information on settlement pattern and subsistence                      
              strategies.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The Neolithic period marked the appearance of many of the                      
              hallmarks which characterize our society today.  The first long                
              term settlements were established, pottery first appears in the                
              archaeological record, and plants and animals were domesticated.               
              Because this change was so important, archaeologists refer to it               
              as "The Neolithic Revolution."  However, it is not well                        
              understood what caused groups in many parts of the world to                    
              change from a hunting and gathering way of life to a more                      
              sedentary existence.  Dr. Wendorf's work focusses directly on                  
              this issue and the Egyptian desert provides an excellent region                
              for this study because sites are often visible from surface                    
              remains and the dry climate favors floral preservation.                        
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to a large number of archaeologists. It will                  
              explore indirectly the issue of black Africa and its contribution              
              to the development of civilization.  It will also shed light on                
              the processes which led to the emergence of complex societies.
