Title       : Dissertation Research: Political Evolution and Social Stratification In The
               Moche Valley, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1990   
File        : a9020514

Award Number: 9020514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian R. Billman  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Catharina Schreiber, Mr. Brian Billman              
              will collect archaeological data as part of his doctoral                       
              dissertation research.  He will conduct survey and excavation in               
              the Upper Moche Valley which is located in the northern coastal                
              region of Peru.  The Moche Valley is well known to archaeologists              
              because in its later prehistoric period it contained "cities"                  
              with large scale temple architecture and other attributes                      
              characteristic of civilization.  Mr. Billman wishes to understand              
              how this complexity developed, and will focus on the preceeding                
              periods where the roots of this process must lie.  His plan of                 
              research includes three stages.  Using aerial photographs as a                 
              guide he will locate Initial Period (1800-900 B.C.) and Early                  
              Period (900-200 B.C.) sites.  These can be dated on the basis of               
              associated ceramics.  These will then be mapped and surface                    
              collected.  The second stage consists of excavation of middens                 
              associated with individual dwellings.  Finally, he will conduct                
              laboratory analysis of artifactual, floral, and faunal remains.                
                                                                                             
              Archaeologists have proposed several theories about how complex                
              stratified societies arise.  Some believe that the causes are                  
              external and such factors as the need to join large numbers of                 
              people together for common goals demands the emergence of a                    
              hierarchy.  One example is the need to dig and maintain large                  
              scale irrigation canals.  Others believe that the driving force                
              is internal, that individuals compete for status and develop                   
              mechanisms to reinforce emergent status differences.  The Moche                
              Valley provides an excellent opportunity to examine this issue                 
              because crops were irrigated in this desert region and the scale               
              of irrigation was different in the upper and lower portions of                 
              the valley.  Because the lower valley region has been well                     
              studied, it provides an excellent comparative sample for                       
              Mr. Billman's upper valley data.                                               
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will help                  
              archaeologists understand how complex societies such as our own                
              originally developed and were maintained.  Since in many parts of              
              the world people still live at a Moche level of organization                   
              information of more direct relevance may also emerge.  Finally,                
              this project will assist in the training of an extremely                       
              promising young scientist.
