Title       : DNA Hybridization Comparison of Mitochondrial Versus NuclearDNA Evolution in
               Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1991  
File        : a9020183

Award Number: 9020183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152251             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick H. Sheldon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   By virtue of its simplicity and fast rate of evolution,                   
              mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is playing an increasingly important                 
              role in avian systematics.  Yet despite its great potential, the               
              application of mtDNA to avian problems depends heavily upon                    
              evolutionary assumptions extrapolated from mammal mtDNAs.  While               
              initial rates of bird mtDNA evolution appear to be fast, it is                 
              unknown whether they are the same as in mammals.  Further,                     
              evidence is accruing that the mtDNA saturation plateau in birds                
              may be lower than in mammals, which implies a difference between               
              bird and mammal rates at some levels of divergence.  The upshot                
              is that we are producing data on avian genetic divergences                     
              without knowing how rate patterns are influencing those                        
              estimates.                                                                     
                   In this project, mtDNA and single-copy nuclear (scn) DNA                  
              hybridization will be employed to estimate phylogenies of the                  
              Hirundinidae (swallows) and Paridae (chickadees and titmice) and               
              divergences among selected non-passerine taxa.  DNA hybridization              
              is especially appropriate for such analyses because it can                     
              measure overall divergence among taxa for both the small mt and                
              huge scn genomes, and present them in a single data form.  These               
              data can then be plotted, without conversion or reference to                   
              fossil datings, to depict relative rates and saturation levels.                
              DNA-hybridization phylogenies will also be compared to one                     
              another and to results of extensive restriction fragment analyses              
              to assess the various types of phylogenetic data.
