Title       : The Physical and Chemical Properties of Circumstellar Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1991  
File        : a9020782

Award Number: 9020782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Huggins patrick.huggins@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              An important area of current astronomical research concerns the                
              study of mass loss of red giant stars as they evolve to white                  
              dwarfs through the "planetary nebula" stage.  Although this                    
              research is significant to an understanding of stellar evolution               
              in its own right, it is also important because planetary nebulae               
              are bright and may be observed comparatively easily.  Thus,                    
              planetary nebulae are particularly convenient objects to study to              
              learn the properties of "circumstellar matter", material which has             
              has been recently ejected from hot stars in densities intermediate             
              between stellar and interstellar gas material.   Matter in a                   
              similar state also occurs around stars for different reasons, in               
              particular as "disks" around interacting binary stars, B-emission              
              stars, and dense molecular interstellar clouds.  However, in these             
              environments it is often difficult to observe this gas and to                  
              diagnose its properties.  The Principal Investigator (PI) proposes             
              to continue previous NSF-supported research on the physical and                
              chemical properties of matter as it leaves the star in a dense                 
              "wind" and eventually mingles with ambient interstellar gas.  The              
              PI will determine reaction rates among atoms, molecules, and                   
              radiation (starlight) in order to understand the distribution of               
              forms of matter (ions, neutral atoms, and molecules).  Because                 
              these atoms radiate away thermal energy that they absorb from gas              
              motions, this knowledge will lead to an understanding of the                   
              temperature and density of matter at different distances from the              
              star.  Comparisons of these theoretical predictions can then be                
              made with new observations from radio (millimeter wavelength)                  
              arrays.  The correctness of the models will then be evaluated.
