Title       : Evolutionary Genetics of the Est-6 Locus in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1993   
File        : a9020443

Award Number: 9020443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rollin C. Richmond   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1127,
Abstract    :
                   The goal of this research is to determine how much molecular              
              variability exists at a gene coding for the structure of an                    
              esterase enzyme, EST 6, in Drosophila melanogaster and to                      
              understand the meaning of this molecular variation.  Esterases                 
              are particularly interesting genes to study because they are                   
              representative of a class of highly variable loci found in many                
              organisms including humans.                                                    
                   The general objective of the work is to assess the                        
              hypothesis which argues that changes in the expression of genes                
              are more significant in evolution than changes in the regions of               
              genes which code for the structure of proteins.  Dr. Richmond                  
              will identify elements responsible for the regulation of the Est-              
              6 gene and a similar gene, Est-P.  He hopes to associate                       
              variation which controls expression with variation which controls              
              the structure of two related esterases.  Studies of molecular                  
              variation in Est-6 genes from different geographic populations of              
              Drosophila melanogaster will help to identify the molecular basis              
              for geographic variation.  Finally, Dr. Richmond hopes to obtain               
              molecular clones for the Est-6 genes from two other Drosophila                 
              species related to Drosophila melanogaster to determine what                   
              changes have occurred in these genes during the process of                     
              speciation.                                                                    
                   Recombinant DNA technologies will be used to clone and                    
              manipulate esterase gene sequences.  Factors regulating the                    
              expression of esterases will be investigated by using                          
              transposable-element mediated transformation of Drosophila                     
              embryos with cloned esterase genes.  Procedures for the                        
              amplification of specific genes from total genomic DNA will be                 
              used to obtain DNA for direct nucleotide sequencing.  Reliable                 
              data on the nature and extent of genetic variation will permit                 
              inferences on how the forces of evolution act to mold variation                
              at the molecular level into adapted phenotypes.  This work will                
              also contribute to an understanding of the mechanisms of gene                  
              regulation and how the evolution of regulation occurs.
