Title       : tRNA Splicing in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1991   
File        : a9020427

Award Number: 9020427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric M. Phizicky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rochester Sch Med
	      30 Administration Building
	      Rochester, NY  14627    /   -

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              How are introns spliced from tRNA molecules in the yeast                       
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae?  tRNA splicing is essential in yeast.                
              Study of tRNA splicing in yeast is a paradigm for splicing in a                
              wide variety of organisms since the mechanism of splicing is                   
              highly conserved in these organisms.  Splicing involves excision               
              of the intron by an endonuclease, ligation of the resultant half-              
              molecules by a ligase, and removal of a 2'-phosphate left at the               
              splice junction.  Since this phosphate is one base 3' of the tRNA              
              anticodon its removal is likely necessary to generate functional               
              tRNA.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              Removal of this 2'-phosphate is the subject of this proposal.                  
              The PI has recently identified and partially purified a protein                
              from yeast that can efficiently remove the splice junction                     
              phosphate from ligated tRNA.  This protein is unique: it is                    
              specific for 2'-phosphorylated substrates, requires NAD+ and acts              
              as a phosphotransferase.  Its activity also appears to be                      
              affected by cells carrying a tpd1 mutation. He proposes to                     
              determine how NAD+ is used in dephosphorylation of ligated tRNA                
              and to identify the proteins involved in this reaction.  He also               
              proposes to determine how TPD1 protein affects dephosphorylation               
              of ligated tRNA in the cell, and to study the interaction of the               
              2'-phosphotransferase with other components of the tRNA splicing               
              machinery.
