Title       : Investigation of Accretion Disk Model for SV Centauri
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1992   
File        : a9020459

Award Number: 9020459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert P. Linnell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Despite the fact that nearly half of all stars are in close                    
              binaries (double star systems), our understanding of their                     
              evolution is far less advanced than it is for single stars,                    
              primarily because an appreciable fraction of mass can be                       
              transferred from one star to the other, and sometimes back again,              
              or even lost to the system altogether.   The beta Lyrae class is               
              an important system among high-mass, eclipsing stellar binary                  
              systems in which mass transfer from the initially more massive star            
              has progressed to the stage where the ratio of masses has been                 
              reversed.  Despite a large number of beta Lyrae systems now known,             
              our understanding of these systems has been stymied by the absence             
              of any systems that have just begun this mass transfer as the                  
              massive star first evolves and enlarges.  The PI argues that the               
              binary star named SV Cen is just such a system.  He also suggests              
              that results from earlier attempts to model the light variations               
              of this system as the stars eclipse one another can be best                    
              explained by a binary early in its mass-transfer evolution.  In his            
              picture mass is lost from the more massive star to an accretion                
              disk around the less massive star.  The PI plans to simulate the               
              light variations and ultraviolet spectra with a computer model of              
              this picture.  The results are expected not only to clarify the                
              role SV Cen itself plays in binary evolution but to test the                   
              correctness of many past models of light curves of similar                     
              eclipsing binary systems by many authors.  Finally, the results of             
              this study are expected to force a greater interaction between                 
              researchers investigating binary star evolution and the phenomenon             
              of accretion disks.
