Title       : Mycorrhizal Mediation of Plant Competition and Community Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1993       
File        : a9020426

Award Number: 9020426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293069             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Hartnett hartnett@lter-konza.konza.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. P. Schwab  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B.A. Daniels Hetrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Various types of species interactions including competition,              
              herbivory, and mutualisms, as well as disturbance and other                    
              processes operating at different spatio-temporal scales may                    
              influence the structure and diversity of plant communities.  Many              
              of these processes have been studied independently, but the                    
              interactions between these various organizing influences are not               
              understood.  Asses how a mutualism (Vesicular-arbuscular                       
              Mycorrhizae (VAM) and plant competition interact to shape                      
              grassland community structure within the natural context of a                  
              variable regime of large scale disturbance.                                    
                                                                                             
              Co-occurring plant species may respond differentially to the                   
              effects of VAM fungi, and these differential responses to VAM                  
              fungi may strongly influence plant competition and community                   
              sturcture.  The objectives of this research are to 1) assess the               
              importance of VAM determine how VAM fungi influence competition                
              among co-occurring plants which vary in mycorrhizal dependence at              
              both the seedling and established plant stage, and 3) to                       
              understand how mycorrhizal-mediation of these processess                       
              influences plant community structure.  Tallgrass prairie                       
              represents an ideal system for the proposed studies because both               
              mycorrhiza dependent grasses and forbs (obligate mycotrophs and                
              relatively independent species (facultative mycotrophs) coexist                
              as important species and compets for resources.                                
                                                                                             
               //
