Title       : The Biological Significance of Cellular Alloantigen Systems in Captive Avian
               Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9020138

Award Number: 9020138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $508979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Worthie E. Briles wbriles@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The overall objective of this research is to apply immunogenetic               
              knowledge already acquired in the domestic fowl toward preserving              
              the genetic health of captive avian species, especially those in               
              danger of extinction.  In the chicken there are 12 genetic loci or             
              gene complexes producing antigens on erythrocytes and, more                    
              recently some five additional loci determining lymphocyte                      
              specificity have been discovered in this laboratory.  These genetic            
              systems of polymorphic genes are potentially beneficial in several             
              respects.  Some of the gene systems have distinct physiological                
              effects.  The B system is the major histocompatibility complex                 
              (MHC) of the chicken and is of prime significance in both humoral              
              and cellular immune response.  The B system serves as an example               
              of a multi-gene complex in which individuals inheriting two                    
              different B gene complexes are at a survival advantage because of              
              more effective immune defense.  The other more highly polymorphic              
              systems are to be examined for specific effects on survival under              
              exposure to naturally occurring diseases.  Other systems encoding              
              lymphocyte antigens are known to interact with the MHC in the                  
              overall immune response to environmental stimuli.  The unique                  
              genetic stocks and reagents developed for specific immunogenetic               
              objectives make possible interdisciplinary research with colleagues            
              in related areas--restriction fragment length polymorphisms,                   
              natural resistance to environmental disease organisms, genome                  
              mapping, and the use of alloantigen gene systems as markers in                 
              monitoring individual fitness.  Finally, studying these multigene              
              systems in avian populations over time will enhance our                        
              understanding of their function in the evolution of birds.                     
                                                                                             
              This research will apply immunogenetic knowledge obtained from                 
              study of chickens to develop new knowledge of the immunological                
              recognition systems of several wild bird species which currently               
              exist in very limited numbers.  This will be done by identifying,              
              on the surfaces of red and white blood cells, specific families of             
              molecules involved in immune recognition.  An immediate practical              
              benefit of being able to identify the immunological recognition                
              systems in captive bird species is their use in a simple blood test            
              to check pedigree information to avoid accidental mating of closely            
              related individuals, and thus to maximize the genetic diversity of             
              small populations. This information will contribute to our ability             
              to preserve the genetic health of captive bird species, especially             
              those in danger of extinction.
