Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Global Bifurcations of Forced Oscillator Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1992       
File        : a9020220

Award Number: 9020220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Peckham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Families of maps generated by periodically forced                         
              oscillators undergo a rich and fascinating set of bifurcations.                
              The investigator proposes to develop new numerical and analytical              
              tools to further investigate the bifurcations of these forced                  
              oscillator systems.  Current numerical "continuation" routines                 
              are able to trace out one-parameter curves of local bifurcations               
              of fixed and periodic points for orbits of low period, typically               
              less than four or five.  Proposed work will include development                
              of new routines that are expected to trace out bifurcations                    
              curves for higher period orbits.  These new "high period"                      
              routines will then be used for locating "global bifurcations,"                 
              where invariant manifolds, typically a stable one and an unstable              
              one, become tangent before crossing.  Once developed, these                    
              routines will enable a much more automatic and detailed                        
              bifurcation study, not only of maps generated by forced                        
              oscillators, but also of any two-parameter family of maps.                     
                   Many processes in science and engineering can be                          
              mathematically categorized as "forced oscillator systems."  One                
              example of an oscillator is a pendulum, because it swings back                 
              and forth, or oscillates.  We usually think of a pendulum as                   
              having a fixed support (the nail in the wall to which the string               
              with a weight is tied), but if we keep moving the location of the              
              support, we say the pendulum is being "forced;"  if we move the                
              support in a repeating pattern, such as back and forth, then we                
              have a "periodically forced oscillator."  It turns out that the                
              resulting motion depends critically on how fast the support is                 
              moved back and forth (the forcing frequency) and how far it is                 
              moved back and forth (the forcing amplitude).  Fairly simple                   
              mathematical models also exhibit this same behavior, including                 
              the sensitivity to changes in "parameters" analogous to forcing                
              frequency and amplitude.  Changes in the qualitative behavior of               
              the system (how the pendulum bob moves) that occur as the                      
              parameters are varied are called "bifurcations."  Much is known                
              about these bifurcations, but much is still unknown.  The                      
              investigator proposes to fill in some of the missing gaps in this              
              area.  Results will help explain observed behavior in any process              
              that can be classified mathematically as a forced oscillator                   
              system.
