Title       : Biodegradable Polymers for Orthopaedic Applications - Creativity Award for
               Undergraduate Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9020124

Award Number: 9020124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Goldstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9262,
Abstract    :
                   The primary objectives of this research project are the                   
              synthesis and characterization of of a new class of biodegradable,             
              phosphorous-containing polymers. The biological, chemical, and                 
              mechanical properties of these polymers will be evaluated to                   
              determine their potential for orthopedic implant applications.                 
              The synthesis technique involves the polycondensation of a diol,               
              the main component of the backbone, and a phosphate compound which             
              contains a pendant molecule.  The two are dissolved and blended                
              together.  After separation into an organic layer, the polymer is              
              washed and quenced in a petroleum ether.  The final product is a               
              clear, white powder.  A wider variety of polymers can be                       
              anticipated by further changing the components and degrees of                  
              cross-linking. The polymers will be characterized chemically in                
              several ways. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, gel                     
              permeation chromatography and differential scanning calorimetry                
              are characterization techniques that will be used. A comprehensive             
              model will be considered to explain relationships suggested by the             
              results of testing. Such factors as the mechanism of polymer                   
              particles release to the physiological environment, the effects of             
              certain biological agents on the degradation process, the ability              
              of the polymer to induce significant tissue in growth, and the                 
              degradation and eventual performance of the implant will be                    
              investigated.                                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
                   A wide range of medical orthopedic applications is possible:              
              less rigid fixation plates, joint stability with fixation rods,                
              resurfacing materials to induce regeneration, and prosthetic                   
              ligaments and tendons.
