Title       : Species Diversity and Abundance in Insular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1993      
File        : a9020052

Award Number: 9020052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Schoener twschoener@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Spiller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This proposal seeks continuing support for research on food-               
                                                                                            
              web structure, species extinctions and ecological interactions.                
                                                                                             
              Small islands are used as a model system, because they are                     
              numerous, simple, discrete and have species and trophic types in               
                                                                                             
              various combinations.  How top predators affect intermediate                   
              predators, ambient insects and foliage damage is studied in an                 
              introduction experiment of lizards onto small islets.  The same                
              phenomena, plus the degree to which intermediate predators                     
              compensate in top-predator absence, is studied in a lizard/spider              
                                                                                             
              removal experiment in large enclosures.  A second experiment will              
                                                                                             
              measure spider competition with and without lizards.  Natural                  
              extinction is studied using a system of over 100 islands; we                   
              focus on the effect of top predators on spider extinction rate,                
              and on how extinction rate varies with mean, variability and                   
              skewness of population-size values over time and with life-                    
              history characteristics.  Spatial patchiness in spider population              
                                                                                             
              distributions will be studied both between islands and within                  
                                                                                             
              larger islands; the latter will be related to top predator                     
                                                                                             
              occurrence and density.  Characteristics of the founder effect                 
                                                                                             
              (loss of genetic variability; degree of morphological and                      
                                                                                             
              behavioral change) will be assessed for colonizing populations of              
                                                                                             
              lizards introduced onto islands during earlier support periods.                
                                                                                             
              The results will provide very valuable information on news                     
                                                                                             
              relating to global the interactions leading to extinctions.
