Title       : Development of a Decision-Analytic Methodology for Definition of Standards of
               Disclosure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9020984

Award Number: 9020984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Baruch Fischhoff bf0r@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              One of the most critical areas where law and medicine intersect is             
              on medical informed consent.  From a scientific standpoint little              
              is known about the range of information that should be disclosed               
              to patients to enhance their ability to make an informed decision.             
              Both theoretically and methodologically, there is need for an                  
              analytically based approach to enable such decisionmaking.                     
                                                                                             
              Dr. Fischhoff and his colleagues are seeking to develop such an                
              approach to disclosure that is applicable to physicians' legal                 
              obligations to insure informed consent from patients.  Their work              
              aims to model quantitatively the variation in evaluations of                   
              possible health outcomes of patients.  The research draws on a new             
              technique whereby logistic regression is used to explain the                   
              variable contribution of input information to decision variation               
              in a Monte Carlo simulation of a model.  This method will produce              
              an objective, "reasonable" range of subjective differences.  These             
              objective values will then be applied in a decision analysis                   
              modeling of several medical procedures.                                        
                                                                                             
              This study promises important advances.  It will show the strengths            
              and limitations of the analysis and permit the further development,            
              generalization, and implementation of this approach within the                 
              medical-legal setting.  Also, it is an essential precursor to                  
              examining the ways in which the law can accommodate quantitative               
              analyses underlying professional disclosure practices.
