Title       : Interactions Between Planktonic Community Structure and Nutrient Cycling
               Processes in Freshwater Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1991    
File        : a9020302

Award Number: 9020302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140016             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nelson G. Hairston ngh1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Howarth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will continue an investigation on the major                  
              interactions between planktonic community structure and nutrient               
              cycling in aquatic ecosystems.  Because community composition is               
              tightly coupled with nutrient dynamics in a number of complex                  
              cause-effect relationships, the relative importance of different               
              interactions in any particular habitat can be difficult to                     
              assess.  For example, phosphorus fertilization, water column N:P               
              and planktivorous fish abundance may each independently influence              
              (directly or indirectly) phytoplankton and zooplankton abundance               
              and species composition.  The latter variables may, in turn,                   
              influence nutrient cycling rates and routes (either directly                   
              through water-column effects, or indirectly through sedimentation              
              and benthic regeneration).                                                     
                   Three major variables can be experimentally manipulated to                
              identify circumstances under which particular processes are                    
              important: the abundance of zooplanktivorous fish, the ratio of                
              nitrogen to phosphorus available for uptake by phytoplankton,                  
              and the absolute amount of phosphorus added to the environment.                
              Using a set of 16 large experimental ponds, researchers will                   
              manipulate two variables at a time with 4 replicate ponds per                  
              treatment.  At present, N:P (high vs low) and fish (presence vs.               
              absence)  are being manipulated.  This increment will be a                     
              further 1-year experiment to manipulate the third variable, P-                 
              loading (high vs. low) again + fish.  Research will contribute to              
              basic ecological concepts and will provide data useful in lake                 
              management.
