Title       : Evolution and Faunal Turnover in the Neogene of NortheasternAsia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1996   
File        : a9020065

Award Number: 9020065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Flynn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Qiu Zhanxiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Tedford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to extend the fossil record in time, fill             
              in gaps, and study the fossils themselves in a site in China which             
              will be important in understanding global change.  This research               
              will provide more precise age control to specify when and how                  
              faunal change occurred, thereby providing data relevant to theory              
              on community change.  It will provide data to test the hypothesis              
              that faunal change in Asia and North America was synchronous and               
              driven, in part, by global climatic events.  It will show timing,              
              direction, and nature of exchange of terrestrial fauna between Asia            
              and North America.                                                             
                   The best and most accessible record of mammalian history in               
              northeastern Asia during the last six million years is Yushe Basin,            
              Shanxi Province, People's Republic of China.  The record is good               
              because it contains, in one upland valley/lake setting, superposed             
              fossil assemblages of late Miocene to Pleistocene age.  Previous               
              collaborative work between American geologists and Chinese                     
              researchers has outlined the faunal succession and provided the                
              time scale for it.  The additional goals above will be met by one              
              month of field work and by continued museum research, primarily in             
              Beijing and New York.
