Title       : Investigations of the Mesoscale Structure of Continental Winter Cyclonic Storms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9020753

Award Number: 9020753
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Rauber r-rauber@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohan K. Ramamurthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Due to the potential for disruption of human and economic                 
              activities, precipitation characteristics of winter-time                       
              cyclones are of great practical as well as scientific interest.                
              It has been known for some time that the heaviest precipitation                
              from these systems occurs in relatively narrow precipitation                   
              bands.                                                                         
                   Over the past several years, the organization of                          
              precipitation bands in cyclonic storms has received a great deal               
              of attention with a variety of physical mechanisms being                       
              proposed to explain the characteristics of these bands.  Most of               
              the previous observational studies of bandedness in winter                     
              cyclonic storms have been conducted in coastal regions which                   
              experience quite different meteorological conditions than the                  
              mid-continental area.                                                          
                   Previously, the Principal Investigators were involved in                  
              field experiments to collect data on these winter-time banded                  
              structures.  The field projects included advanced                              
              instrumentation such as Doppler radar and wind profiling system.               
              The Principal Investigators will continue their analysis of this               
              observational data and expand their research to contain a                      
              numerical modelling component.  Primary objectives will be to                  
              describe the physical characteristics and mesoscale organization               
              of precipitation bands and to isolate the dynamic mechanisms                   
              responsible for the formation and evolution of the bands.
