Title       : Clonal Molecular Evolution in E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1993  
File        : a9020173

Award Number: 9020173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger D. Milkman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                   Most animals and plants get their genetic material DNA from               
              two immediate parents, and proceeding to more distant ancestors,               
              from a very large number of contributors.  How long a stretch of               
              DNA typically survives this recombination process without itself               
              being broken up, over a given time?  Bacteria, too owe their                   
              genetic material to many sources, although the exchange of DNA                 
              fragments begins with small pieces (as opposed to the crossing                 
              over known in higher organisms) and takes place less frequently.               
              In any event, the same question arises.  A model has been                      
              developed to serve as a framework for the analysis of the                      
              transmission over many generation of pieces of DNA in both                     
              bacteria and higher organisms.  The model has worked well so far               
              in the analysis of genetic variation in bacteria using both                    
              direct and indirect assessment of nucleotide sequences.  It will,              
              hopefully, lead to clearer insight in to the dynamics of                       
              evolution in bacteria.  This has practical applications for the                
              release of genetically engineered microorganisms:  how likely is               
              a form, designed to work within safe bounds, to pick up genes                  
              that permit it to "escape" and become virulent?  It should, in                 
              addition help solve ancient questions as to whether certain                    
              organisms persist without genetic recombination indefinitely.  It              
              should also help us interpret and make long-term predictions                   
              about the likely associations of alleles at two or more nearby                 
              loci in humans.  The present project is designed to get values                 
              for the following variables in the well known bacterium E. coli:               
              the initial size of DNA replacements, the frequency of                         
              replacements in relation to the frequency of individual time, and              
              the rate of selection of new favorable mutations that can cause a              
              strain of bacteria to spread all over the world.
