Title       : REU: Collaborative Research: Avian Digestive Physiology: A Comparative and
               Integrative Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1991       
File        : a9020280

Award Number: 9020280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88678              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Karasov wkarasov@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1143      BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The ability to digest different kinds of foods has an                     
              enormous influence on the kinds of foods chosen by animals, on                 
              how and when they feed, and on the rates at which they grow and                
              reproduce. The influence of digestive studies on ecology and                   
              behavior, however, has been practically ignored. The application               
              of digestive physiology has been hampered by a wide gap between                
              detailed studies of digestion and absorption at the cellular and               
              biochemical levels, and the measurement of food assimilation at                
              the whole organism level.                                                      
                   The analogy between the digestive systems of animals and                  
              chemical reactors provides a bridge that links measurements of                 
              digestive processes at the cellular and whole organism level into              
              a integrative and predictive framework. Mathematical models based              
              on chemical engineering principles will be used to generate and                
              test productions about the digestive processes of birds feeding                
              on nectar and fruit pulp.  Our models also provide predictions                 
              about the feeding preferences of birds with different                          
              physiological traits, and thus provide a direct liaison between                
              digestive processes and the ecologically relevant process of food              
              selection.                                                                     
                   The digestive traits of animals are not fixed; within a                   
              span, they depend on acclimation to different diets. The                       
              influence of different diets on the digestive processes of birds               
              with contrasting dietary habits, how changing a diet influences                
              the ability to digest and absorb carbohydrates, lipids, and                    
              proteins, and how dietary changes influence these digestive                    
              processes at the cellular, organ, and whole organism levels, will              
              be investigated. Chemical reactor theory will be used to                       
              integrate our results.                                                         
                   In addition to providing a bridge between digestive                       
              physiology and ecology and behavior, our research will provide                 
              information on the digestive capabilities and limitations of                   
              birds in captivity, and in improving husbandry practices for both              
              endangered species in zoological parks and animals with economic               
              value.
