Title       : Effects of Earthworms on Nitrogen Cycling Processes and Decomposer Community
               Structure in Organic-based and Conventional Agroecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9020461

Award Number: 9020461
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555529             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin R. Stinner   (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Blair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clive A. Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9198,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Earthworms affect many basic soil processes, but the overall                   
              impact of these important invertebrates on ecosystem-level                     
              processes are poorly understood.  Drs. Stinner, Blair and Edwards              
              suggest that earthworms are key organisms affecting the structure              
              and function of decomposer communities and soil processes in many              
              terrestrial ecosystems, including agroecosystems.  This research               
              examines the importance of earthworms as regulators of decomposer              
              community structure, organic matter decomposition and N cycling                
              in agroecosystems based on organic or inorganic sources of                     
              nutrients. Earthworm populations in field enclosures will be                   
              manipulated in three experimental agroecosystems where N is                    
              supplied primarily as  i) legume-derived N, ii) animal manure N,               
              or iii) inorganic fertilizer.  Organic matter decomposition and N              
              cycling processes will be used as integrating variables to assess              
              the effects of earthworm activity on agroecosystem function.                   
              The following effects will be quantified: a) soil microbial                    
              numbers and activity, b) populations of other soil                             
              invertebrates, c)  organic matter decomposition and changes in                 
              soil organic matter fractions, d) soil physical characteristics,               
              e) partitions of N into selected above- and below-ground pools                 
              (plant biomass N, litter N, SOM , active (microbial) soil N,                   
              slow/passive soil N, extractable soil N); and f) rates and                     
              patterns of release of N from 15N-labelled plant residues,                     
              recovery in selected soil pools and plant uptake of N.                         
                                                                                             
              This approach provides a unique, holistic perspective of the                   
              importance of earthworms in affecting ecosystem-level processes.               
              Examining the effects of earthworms in systems based on organic                
              inputs or inorganic N will provide data on the relative impact of              
              earthworms in systems under different degrees of C or N                        
              limitation.  Analysis of the interactive effects of earthworms                 
              and organic matter inputs on soil biota and processes will                     
              provide new insights into the basic mechanisms affecting N use                 
              efficiency and conservation in terrestrial ecosystems in general.              
              The research will also contribute greatly to an understanding of               
              regulation by earthworms of N dynamics in both organic N-based                 
              agroecosystems and conventional inorganically fertilized                       
              agroecosystems.  The support and facilities for this research are              
              outstanding.
