Title       : Chemical Ecology of Resin Secretion in Dalechampia (Euphorbiacea): Radical
               Evolutionary Shifts in the Functions of Triterpenses?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9020265

Award Number: 9020265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taber D. Allison                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219666             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Scott Armbruster ffwsa@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kent E. Schwaegerle  (Principal Investigator former)
              Thomas P. Clausen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Plant secondary chemicals mediate many relationships between              
              plants and their mutualists and antagonists.  The number and                   
              specificity of these plant-animal relationships generates much of              
              the biodiversity of the tropics.  Plants commonly use secondary                
              compounds as defense against herbivores or as attractants for                  
              mutualists.  Chemically similar compounds may serve different                  
              functions in related plants.  The proposed research will                       
              elucidate a model system of plant-animal interactions by testing               
              the hypothesis that terpenoid resins, which function as floral                 
              rewards for bees in most species of Dalechampia, function in the               
              leaves, stipules, and floral bractlets of primitive species as a               
              defense against herbivores and/or pathogens, and play no role in               
              pollination.  Primitive species of Rhopalostylis, according to                 
              the hypothesis, should defend flowers and leaves against                       
              herbivores with resin, while offering pollinators some other                   
              reward, such as pollen or fragrances.  To test these ideas the                 
              proposed project will i) establish whether or not the terpenoid                
              resins of glandless and gland-bearing species deter herbivores,                
              by using resin extracts in feeding trials with natural                         
              herbivores; ii) establish whether or not the terpenoid resins                  
              inhibit microorganisms, by testing extracts in bioassays with                  
              microorganisms; iii) investigate the chemical relationships                    
              between the floral and vegetative resins by surveying and                      
              analyzing the compounds produced; and iv) make observations on                 
              the pollination of, and herbivory on, primitively glandless                    
              species of Dalechampia.  Information from this study will give us              
              greater insight into the chemical basis of plant-animal                        
              interactions, how such interactions evolve, and how novel                      
              mutualisms arise.
