Title       : Computational Science Across the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9952806

Award Number: 9952806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396075             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ignatios Vakalis ivakalis@capital.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry Lahm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne J. Becktel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jens M. Hemmingsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea M. Karkowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Capital University
	      E Main Street
	      Columbus, OH  43209    614/236-6011

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computing - Other (35)         
Interdisciplinary (99)

The emerging field of
              computational science, at the intersection of math, computer science, and
              science, offers an interdisciplinary approach to scientific research that is
              used in industry and academic settings. In order to be prepared for graduate
              studies and the workplace, students need experience in computational science.
              The problem at the undergraduate level is a lack of educational materials for
              computational science. 

The goal of this educational materials development
              project is to create course materials and a curriculum that culminate in a
              comprehensive, interdisciplinary minor in computational science. A team of
              faculty members from a variety of disciplines is developing, evaluating,
              performing in-class testing, and disseminating materials for computational
              courses in biology, chemistry, environmental science, mathematics,
              neuroscience, physics, and psychology. The new courses emphasize critical
              thinking and problem solving skills. 

Students in science, math, computer
              science, and pre-service secondary education are the target audience for this
              curriculum.  Features of the minor include a seminar to encourage involvement
              by under-represented groups (e.g., women and minorities), core courses in
              computational science to provide the necessary mathematical and computational
              background, discipline-specific courses to generate interest and provide direct
              application of computational science skills, and a capstone collaborative
              research experience in computational science. 

The curricular materials are
              being site-tested and evaluated at various institutions to enhance their
              effectiveness and adoption across diverse student populations. Strategies to
              widely disseminate the proposed materials include publication via the Web and
              commercial publishers, discipline-specific conference presentations, and
              hosting a computational science conference. 
