Title       : Integration of FT-NMR Spectroscopy Throughout the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9952794

Award Number: 9952794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40435              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daryl G. Cox dcox@snu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Reinbold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Nazarene Universi
	      6729 NW 39th Expressway
	      Bethany, OK  730082605    405/491-6692

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) Fourier transform applications to NMR have revolutionized
              chemical inquiry.   FT-NMR spectroscopy plays an essential role in the
              undergraduate chemistry curriculum.  In this project, an older continuous-wave
              NMR which has been converted  to a modern multinuclear Anasazi EFT-60 FT- NMR
              plays a key role in achieving the goal of obtaining the sophistication and
              speed of FT-NMR.  Such upgrades have proven to be a low-maintenance and
              cost-effective alternative to expensive high-field NMR spectrometers for small
              undergraduate schools. The long-term goal is the integration FT-NMR
              spectroscopy throughout the curriculum to produce graduates educated in the
              technical and scientific aspects of modern FT-NMR spectroscopy. Beginning with
              the freshman courses (General Chemistry, General Chemistry for Allied Health
              Professions, and Chemistry , Environment and Health) students are introduced to
              FT-NMR spectroscopy both theoretically and experientially through a series of
              experiments designed to require "hands-on" involvement. As students progress
              through the chemistry curriculum  (Organic, Instrumental Analysis,
              Biochemistry, Advanced Inorganic and Physical Chemistry) they perform
              experiments that develop technical competency in preparing samples and running
              routine 1H and 13C NMR spectra. By graduation, the chemistry major experiences
              2D- and  heteronuclear techniques by means of thorough, well-planned
              experiments that demonstrate the breadth and applications of modern FT-NMR
              spectroscopy.  These experiments are introduced in a measured incremental
              fashion and are adapted from recent literature (primarily the J. Chemical
              Education).  The non-science major is introduced to FT-NMR spectroscopy so they
              can respect and appreciate the necessity of sophisticated instrumentation in
              modern chemistry.  Continuous assessments using both external (Advisory Board)
              and internal evaluations provide feedback and guidance on the success of the
              project as a significant curricular enhancement. 
