Title       : Physiology Laboratory Tools for Asynchronous and Distance Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a9952440

Award Number: 9952440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71178              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Stephens phil.stephens@villanova.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)

The challenge of providing a lab experience in
              physiology in a distance learning format is being addressed through this
              proof-of-concept project, which aims to develop a set of JAVA applets, to be
              used as tools to make interactive physiology laboratory modules for
              asynchronous and distance learning. Chart and oscilloscope players are allowing
              data files to be played across the web and permit users to make measurements
              and perform data analysis. These players and data files are being integrated
              into HTML files to produce learning modules, with which the students interact
              and, thus, produce an experience similar to that seen in the traditional lab
              setting.  The long-term goal of the project is to produce a large number of
              learning modules for on-line physiology teaching. The number and scope of the
              modules is being increased over and above that provided by the PI by
              collaboration with physiologists in neighboring institutions. The resulting
              library of learning modules is being mixed-and-matched using a third JAVA
              applet, which is allowing instructors to build customized lab packages for
              their students. While the primary goal of the proposal is to produce a lab
              experience for on-line learners, the flexibility within the system is
              permitting the instructors to build lab packages with a combination of wet and
              computer modules. Thus, the integration of technology into lab education is
              allowing students to use on-line labs to augment their traditional hands-on lab
              experience. This may be especially useful for students in institutions where
              lab facilities, teaching equipment and animal maintenance are restricted, as
              found in certain community and junior colleges, and high schools.

