Title       : Interdisciplinary Approach to Instrumental Analysis Involving Biochemical,
               Pharmaceutical, and Biological Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9952638

Award Number: 9952638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Victoria M. Bragin                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23125              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark F. Vitha mark.vitha@drake.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nita K. Pandit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              LaRhee Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drake University
	      2507 University Avenue
	      Des Moines, IA  503114505    515/271-2011

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry  (12)  The aim of this project is to revitalize and redesign the
              instrumental analysis laboratory course by adapting and implementing
              interdisciplinary experiments involving relevant biochemical, pharmaceutical,
              and biological samples. Literature from journals provides the source for the
              adapted experiments.  A capillary electrophoresis (CE) system, purchased with
              project funds, is used to analyze DNA, proteins, nucleotides, and chiral
              pharmaceutical compounds, and thus complements and promotes the
              interdisciplinary nature of the course.  In addition to CE, students use
              current chromatographic, spectroscopic, and electrochemical techniques to
              analyze biochemical, biological, and pharmaceutical samples.  Our goal in this
              course is for students to learn and understand the fundamental principles
              underlying chemical instrumentation and how these principles are applied to the
              analysis of samples in a wide variety of chemistry-related fields.  The
              acquisition of a CE impacts students in three other major fields of study. The
              CE is used in a pharmaceutical science laboratory course, an advanced
              biochemistry laboratory, and an advanced molecular life science course. 
              Undergraduate students in the advanced molecular life science course use the CE
              to conduct research aimed at quantifying the effects of trauma on nucleotide
              levels in tissue samples.  The CE is also used in undergraduate research aimed
              at elucidating the intermolecular interactions governing micellar
              electrokinetic capillary electrophoresis separations.  In the future, the
              instrumental analysis course may be fused with the advanced biochemistry
              laboratory course and used as a model in the progression of our advanced
              laboratory sequence toward a truly integrated and interdisciplinary format.
              Thus, this project represents modest, but carefully considered initial changes
              in the overall advanced laboratory curriculum, with the changes being aimed at
              offering a truly interdisciplinary and pedagogically sound laboratory
              experience for students.


