Title       : Discovery-Based Laboratory for Calculus-Based Introductory Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1999  
File        : a9952385

Award Number: 9952385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred M. Loxsom floxsom@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Hough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene C. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel R. Spiegel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78212    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The objectives of the introductory physics laboratory are to help
              students learn experimental techniques, to enable students to think creatively
              about physical measurements, and to increase students' understanding of
              physical concepts and processes. Evaluation of student work indicates that the
              introductory physics laboratory sequence only accomplishes the first of these
              three objectives. Most students learn how to acquire and analyze data
              correctly, but many do not fully understand what they are doing and few
              increase their understanding of physics through the laboratory experience. In
              order to deal with this well-documented characteristic of the traditional
              introductory physics laboratory course, Thornton, Sokoloff, and Laws created a
              series of discovery-based laboratories. These curricular products - Workshop
              Physics (WP), Tools for Scientific Thinking (TST), and RealTime Physics (RTP) -
              have been shown to increase greatly students' conceptual understanding of
              introductory physics. The project is using RTP as a model to develop a
              discovery-based laboratory sequence that is appropriate for the calculus-based
              introductory lecture sequence.  The RTP approach is being modified by adding
              computer simulations, adding calculus applications, and reducing coverage of
              topics treated in high school. Also, these materials will be supplemented with
              exercises related to the application of physics to astronomy. Even with these
              changes, the project will adhere to the discovery-based philosophy: students
              must construct their own conceptual understanding through making predictions
              and testing predictions. The project is effectively integrating technology into
              undergraduate education, developing the faculty's ability to use
              discovery-based educational techniques, and serving as an example of
              student-centered education and thus serving as a catalyst for educational
              change at Trinity University.
