Title       : Development of Interdisciplinary Courseware in Configuration Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9952277

Award Number: 9952277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : April 15,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Leonard mike.leonard@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith I. McKnew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nagraj Balakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59) Configuration Management (CM) is the discipline of
              identifying the components of a continuously evolving system (taking into
              account relevant system interfaces) for the purpose of controlling changes to
              these components and maintaining integrity and traceability throughout the
              system life cycle. The importance of CM has been well-documented in the defense
              and aerospace industries and is now gaining attention in general manufacturing
              firms.

This project is developing innovative, high-quality CM educational
              materials that incorporate effective educational practices to improve student
              learning in engineering and management. At its completion the project will have
              developed a CM Overview Module and an accompanying Teacher's Guide for use as
              part of regularly scheduled courses in engineering and business curricula. The
              CM Overview Module will provide 1-2 weeks of undergraduate college-level
              coursework covering the importance of CM, the need for CM, components of CM,
              and CM case studies. The module educational materials will be made available to
              interested individuals in print form (word-processing files), through the World
              Wide Web, and possibly as a CD-ROM (supplied at production cost).

The CM
              Overview Module and Teacher's Guide are being developed, tested, and assessed
              by engineering and management faculty and students at Clemson University. The
              PI team is also engaged in efforts to promote the effective implementation of
              these materials in institutions across the United States. By way of its
              dissemination efforts, the project team will work to make available and
              encourage the use of the CM educational materials by engineering and management
              colleagues across the nation.

