Title       : Improving Spatial Skills through GPS Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1999  
File        : a9952830

Award Number: 9952830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37657              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Francek Mark.Francek@cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bin Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce M. Pape  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Grossa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Althausen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) To improve students' understanding of Global Positioning System
              (GPS) technology, and their ability to collect, process, and analyze spatial
              data, we have adapted the Wikle, et al. approach of integrating GPS exercises
              across the curriculum.  This approach, from "Undergraduate Field Program for
              Implementing Global Positioning Technology"(NSF-ILI #9452441), uses field- and
              inquiry-based exercises to address real world problems.    In introductory
              Physical Geography classes. lecture-based methods about the Earth's coordinate
              system are supplemented with a field-based "road rally" approach using GPS to
              better understand distance, direction, and navigation using familiar campus
              landmarks.  Student teams also give GPS demonstrations at local elementary
              schools as part of an Earth science fair.   To encourage a greater interest in
              careers in science and technology for groups traditionally underrepresented,
              the students give GPS demonstrations at the local Native American school
              located at the nearby Chippewa Indian Reservation.  At the intermediate and
              advanced level, students use GPS to map local spatial phenomena, rectify remote
              sensing imagery; and, modeling techniques adapted from Martha Potvin, et al.
              "Using GIS as a Platform for Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Education"
              (NSF-ILI #9551429), the incorporation of GPS data into a GIS database.  All
              projects are inquiry-based in which students identify a problem to be solved
              using GPS, devise a problem-solving strategy, conduct the analysis, and then
              present results through group computer presentations, by papers, or at the
              annual Undergraduate Research Fair.   The equipment is used by 300+ students
              per semester at different levels in eleven different courses including Physical
              Geography, Cartography, Soil Science, Surface Hydrology, GIS, Remote Sensing,
              and GPS.  Approximately 80 of these students are pre-service teachers, enrolled
              mainly in Physical Geography and Cartography classes.   Each semester, classes
              targeted by the project are assessed using off-campus evaluators, focus groups,
              and written questionnaires.  Feedback from these three assessment methods
              provides a quantitative and qualitative evaluation on 1) how well learning
              objectives are met; 2) students' comfort with GPS software and hardware; and 3)
              students' attitude toward technology in general.  
