Title       : Enhancement of an Advanced Integrated Student Optics Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9952773

Award Number: 9952773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58616              (Estimated)
Investigator: Justin B. Peatross peat@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) This project improves the advanced optics course for physics
              undergraduates. This is being done primarily through the implementation of new
              laboratory experiments which illustrate basic concepts in hard-to-grasp topics.
              The lab experiments are being housed in a newly renovated laboratory space
              specifically devoted to the course and located near the classroom. The same
              equipment is being used both for classroom demonstrations and
              homework/laboratory exercises. This allows a close integration of analytical
              and laboratory experiences. Students are being encouraged to work in teams in
              the laboratory and in the classroom. The new laboratory setups better prepare
              students for future research situations where an intuitive connection between
              theory and practice is essential.

 Specifically, this project is bolstering
              curriculum in the areas of lens system design, laser cavity performance,
              coherence theory, and quantum optics. Students are using Zemax raytracing
              software, studying Gaussian laser beams and cavities, performing Fourier
              spectroscopy, and viewing quantum interference effects. The particular topics
              were chosen because they illustrate fundamental concepts while providing
              students with hands-on exposure to contemporary equipment and optical methods.
              A modest amount of support is also being used for the development of computer
              animations for illustrating advanced optical concepts, animations which can be
              viewed over the internet. The goal is to provide a multifaceted learning
              experience where students are motivated to master analytical concepts through
              improved visualization and experience.


