Title       : NMR Collaborative Training Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a9952369

Award Number: 9952369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183887             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce S. Burnham bburnham@rider.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Grushow  (Principal Investigator former)
              John E. Sheats  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Helen Tanzini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Schueler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rider University
	      P O Box 6400
	      Lawrenceville, NJ  086480400    609/896-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) We are developing a program of cooperative instructional use of a
              Fourier transform nuclear magnetic resonance (FT-NMR) spectrometer. Using a
              network workstation, students from several nearby institutions have access to
              data acquired on a 300 MHz FT-NMR instrument located at Rider University.  The
              other collaborating institutions include Mercer County Community College,
              Raritan Valley Community College, Bucks County Community College, Middlesex
              County Community College, and Delaware Valley College. Cooperatively used NMR
              instruments have been installed at other locales with the assistance of NSF-ILI
              grants. We are using these models as a basis for our project. Since the
              participating institutions outside of Rider had been unable to include
              experimental FT-NMR in their curriculum, this program exposes students from a
              number of geographically related two- and four-year undergraduate institutions
              to the modern experimental techniques of FT-NMR. Additionally we are developing
              a web-based tutorial for use by all students participating in the
              program.

The project includes the installation of a 300 MHz network-capable
              NMR at Rider University. Initial training of students and faculty from other
              locations is the responsibility of an NMR trainer/coordinator.  After their
              initial training using the web-based tutorial, students prepare NMR samples at
              their own institution and transport them to Rider. Once the raw spectral data
              have been acquired, they are available on the network for full analysis at the
              remote location. In this way students learn how to analyze and produce their
              own NMR spectra under the guidance of their own instructor. This type of remote
              access and workstation driven system is fairly common in most large chemical
              research laboratories. Given the prevalent use of NMR in the field of
              chemistry, the exposure to this kind of environment for the students at the
              participating institutions better prepares them for any future work in chemical
              research or industry.



