Title       : Intelligent Tutoring System for Visual Reasoning in Solid Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2000 
File        : a9952703

Award Number: 9952703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375392             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan W. McRoy mcroy@cs.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jim Dicker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yong Se Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Mechanical (56)
The ability of an engineer to visualize and
              reason about geometric aspects of physical objects and processes is crucial to
              the success of the activities of the engineer.  The visual reasoning capability
              forms the essential foundation for engineering education in all disciplines. 
              The objective of this project is to develop an intelligent instructional
              software system for visual reasoning which can adaptively support different
              student learning needs, track students' progress and give an active critique. 
              The intent is to provide a learning system with which a student can develop
              visualizing and spatial reasoning capabilities in a self-paced series of
              exercises related to solid modeling.  A comprehensive set of visual and spatial
              reasoning problems is being developed where a combination of visual analysis
              and visual synthesis is required.  The intelligent tutoring module provides a
              step-by-step critique in solving individual problems as well as properly
              routing the student through a series of problems with varying difficulties and
              different types.  The software system significantly expands both the scope and
              depth of the visual reasoning instructional software system which has already
              been developed and tested by the principal investigator of this project.  The
              educational materials developed will be tested at two University of Wisconsin
              campuses: Milwaukee and Madison, as well as at St. Martin's College and
              Northern Illinois University.  The software system and pedagogical materials
              will be disseminated nationally using the University of Wisconsin's Learning
              Center for distribution.
