Title       : Incorporation of Instrumentation into an Innovative Introductory Chemistry
               Laboratory Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2000       
File        : a9952313

Award Number: 9952313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55508              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Smith rhsmith@wmdc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Rouzer  (Principal Investigator former)
              Marilyn K. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : McDaniel College
	      2 College Hill
	      Westminster, MD  21157    410/857-2222

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)  Recent changes in our General Chemistry curriculum are designed
              to move students away from quantitative, algorithmic problem solving to
              concept-based problem solving, both in the classroom and the laboratory.  The
              standard lecture format has been supplemented by student-oriented projects
              which are solved during the classroom period.  To coincide with these changes
              in the classroom part of the course, the laboratory portion has been totally
              revamped to include discovery-based experiments, in which students learn by
              performing exercises that help them discover important scientific principles on
              their own.  The students first learn about a concept in this type of laboratory
              setting, and they then apply their acquired knowledge to solve a problem of
              interest in real life.  Experiments developed by others and reported in the
              chemical education literature are being adapted to create this new laboratory
              experience.  This project is helping to accomplish these goals by exposing the
              students to more instrumentation than in the previous laboratory curriculum. 
              In addition, students are using computers to a greater extent, both for
              molecular modeling as well as data manipulation. In conjunction with the
              revised course and laboratory format, this project is also incorporating
              additional instrumentation, including UV-Vis spectrometers, an atomic
              adsorption spectrometer, an IR spectrometer, and two gas chromatographs, along
              with computers and software. 


