Title       : Life Lines Online: Accessible Investigative Biology for Community Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9952525

Award Number: 9952525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258683             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret A. Waterman waterman@biology.semo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ethel D. Stanley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southeast Missouri State U
	      900 Normal
	      Cape Girardeau, MO  637014753    314/651-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)  Typical community college students are over 25,
              working while attending classes, and are enrolled in introductory biology as
              their only science course after high school.  By 2001, this population will
              make up more than half of all undergraduates in the U.S. and will represent
              more minorities, women, and adults returning to education than the population
              of students in four-year institutions.  The goal of this project is to
              encourage these adult learners to use problem-solving strategies informed by
              science and to value science as private citizens and workers.  The challenge
              with respect to meeting this goal is to develop educational materials that put
              biology into meaningful contexts, that help students develop problem-solving
              and information management skills, and that are pedagogically consistent with
              adult learning strategies.  To accomplish this goal, Southeast Missouri State
              University and the BioQUEST Curriculum Consortium are collaborating with
              community college faculty to extensively field test and further develop
              problem-based, technology-rich curriculum modules and teaching strategies in
              the LifeLines OnLine project.  A robust faculty development program that
              includes ongoing peer and expert mentoring is preparing community college
              biology teachers to implement LifeLines OnLine materials and teaching
              strategies within their current courses.  Each LifeLines OnLine module
              (available on the Internet) includes:  (a) an electronic newspaper interface
              whose items are points of access into materials that include a case to be
              investigated and case-related tools and resources, and (b) extensive notes to
              instructors about using these materials in a variety of community college
              settings.  While targeted to the community college, this approach to biology
              should be widely applicable in undergraduate biology education because the
              problems addressed are generally reflected in the dynamics of post-secondary
              science education. 


