Title       : Integration of GC/MS Into the Undergraudate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2000   
File        : a9952748

Award Number: 9952748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37507              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Muzyka muzyka@centre.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Miles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jose M. Workman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Centre College of Kentucky
	      West Walnut Street
	      Danville, KY  40422    606/236-5211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) This project uses gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/MS)
              experiences to enhance the undergraduate curriculum.  The instrumentation is
              incorporated into the laboratory component of seven courses including general
              chemistry, organic chemistry, instrumental analysis, three advanced courses
              (organic, inorganic and analytical), and undergraduate research.  This
              instrumentation adds a new and necessary dimension to the array of equipment
              used by students to solve real and complex problems.  Based on a belief that it
              is important for students to comprehend the fundamental physical and chemical
              principles involved in GC/MS, to understand the major design features of the
              instrumentation, to recognize appropriate applications of the technique, and to
              appreciate the limitation of the data provided by GC/MS, this project will add
              an important practical component to courses where before it was only possible
              to present theoretical descriptions of GC/MS through classroom instruction.   A
              series of experiments, beginning with the first term of general chemistry and
              extending through the senior year, are being adapted from the educational
              chemical literature (primarily the Journal of Chemical Education) and
              implemented. Through these laboratory experiences students are learning to
              interpret isotopic mass and abundance data, to interpret fragmentation
              patterns, to analyze complex mixtures and to make qualitative identifications
              through use of library match software. They are also developing a sound
              background in the fundamental operating principles of the technique.  The
              unique feature of this project is the sequenced manner in which GC/MS
              experiences are built into the curriculum at three levels and integrated to
              develop the student's comprehension of the technique through multiple direct
              experiences.
