Title       : Biology Lab Adaptation and Digital Imaging Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9952337

Award Number: 9952337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59289              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher F. Sacchi sacchi@kutztown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendy L. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol C. Mapes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Zayaitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Towne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kutztown University
	      
	      Kutztown, PA  19530    215/683-4000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)

The biology faculty have identified the need to
              expose all majors to investigative labs and to enhance instruction in
              traditional lab exercises by introducing students to technologies and
              approaches that will improve their understanding of biological principles and
              the scientific method.  Change and adaptation is systemic, with new approaches
              and technologies introduced into laboratory exercises throughout our
              curriculum, from first year core courses through upper division animal
              behavior, physiology, microbiology and marine biology courses. The changes
              include four overarching goals: 1) Students use an important technology, the
              preparation and analysis of digital images of microscopic and macroscopic
              biological materials. 2) Students are introduced to the importance of
              collection, analysis, and presentation of quantitative data. 3) Students use
              computers to label digital images to develop a fuller understanding of
              biological principles. 4) Students clearly present the results of observations
              and experiments in written reports, posters, and oral presentations.  A number
              of experiments from the educational literature are being adapted to provide
              appropriate experiences for undergraduates in a range of courses.  Products
              derived from this project include laboratory exercises modified from original
              sources reflecting use of new technologies and faculty submission to education
              journals of papers detailing useful applications of use and analysis of digital
              images based on students' experiences.  Majors prepare a portfolio of work
              reflecting their development; students produce images and reports that can be
              saved in multiple formats. Graduates are better prepared to use imaging
              equipment, quantitative methods, and computers, all of which are of increasing
              importance in university and private-sector laboratories.  It is hoped that the
              secondary Ed/Biology majors we serve will convey to their future students a
              keener sense of the process of science.

