Title       : Strengthening Undergraduate Education through Research in Radio Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a9952246

Award Number: 9952246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $735000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Salah   (Principal Investigator current)
              Preethi Pratap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeast Radio Obs Corp
	      77 Massachusetts Ave
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/692-4764

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Astronomy (11) Linking education and research is an important national goal for
              the improvement of undergraduate student education in science, mathematics,
              engineering and technology, and this project contributes to the implementation
              of that goal through radio astronomy. Radio astronomy is a multidisciplinary
              field that combines physics with engineering, and offers exciting practical
              applications of concepts in physics and chemistry in the interpretation of
              observations of radio emission in our galaxy. This program utilizes the
              instrumentation resources of the MIT Haystack Observatory, which include a
              world-class 37-m radio telescope, a small radio telescope kit, and a web-based
              set of instructional materials.

Pilot projects, conducted and tested
              successfully by undergraduates using the Haystack Observatory resources, have
              demonstrated the educational benefits of inquiry-based, observational
              experiences using radio astronomy. Advances in information technology have
              allowed the project to offer these resources to undergraduates at all levels
              from non-science majors to senior physical science majors interested in
              challenging independent research projects. This program is also being applied
              to pre-college students. The project is assisting faculty at colleges to access
              the 37-m telescope, and use it in their classrooms and laboratory exercises as
              well as for special research projects. Up to 2000 telescope hours are being
              allocated annually to this effort. In addition, the project is providing design
              details and support for the construction of small radio telescopes as hands-on
              engineering projects, and as an introduction to radio astronomy techniques and
              science. Also being develop are projects and instructional materials for use at
              all levels of undergraduate education, and which are being disseminate through
              the world wide web.



