Title       : A Faculty Development Program for Quantitative Reasoning Across the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2000      
File        : a9952807

Award Number: 9952807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27289              (Estimated)
Investigator: Caren L. Diefenderfer cdiefenderfer@hollins.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia W. Hammer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hollins University
	      
	      Roanoke, VA  24020    703/362-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
The goal of this project is to develop a program in
              quantitative reasoning (QR) across the curriculum. This development involves
              the adaptation and implementation of ideas and materials from successful
              Mathematics across the Curriculum (MATC) programs at other institutions,
              notably Wellesley College, Dartmouth College, and DePauw University.  This
              project was inspired by the report of the Mathematics Association of America,
              "Quantitative Reasoning for College Literacy" (1997).  The participating
              faculty will read "Why Numbers Count:  Quantitative Literacy for Tomorrow's
              America," edited by Lynn Steen.  

The development of this program presents a
              unique challenge. We have in place the foundational pieces of a QR program and
              are now pressing ahead with faculty professional development.  We believe that
              an important step in building a successful QR program is to increase awareness,
              understanding, enthusiasm, and applications of quantitative reasoning across
              campus. Our approach to supporting this goal is to bring four scholars to
              campus to lead interactive workshops for faculty as we adapt and modify their
              ideas to create QR courses across the academic disciplines. The visiting
              scholars have been chosen based on direct involvement with successful MATC
              programs, courses and/or workshops at University of Nevada (Reno), Trinity
              College, the University of Tennessee (Knoxville), and Dartmouth College.  We
              are offering follow-up workshops led by the principal investigators for the
              purpose of developing specific course materials to be included in QR courses at
              our college.  These workshops are engaging twenty faculty members with the goal
              of creating or modifying at least twenty courses to incorporate quantitative
              reasoning components. 

This QR program will have an impact on all
              undergraduate students, beginning with those young women entering in fall 2000.
               Additionally, we believe the QR program at our institution will provide a
              model to follow for other liberal arts colleges, especially those accredited by
              the Southern Association of Schools and Colleges (SACS).



