Title       : An Environment for Interpreter-based Projects for the Programming Language
               Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1999  
File        : a9952398

Award Number: 9952398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74429              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurie A. Smith King LA@mathcs.holycross.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Barr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Holy Cross College
	      1 College Street
	      Worcester, MA  01610    508/793-2011

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY

A teaching tool for the programming languages course which
              enhance the students' grasp of fundamental programming language concepts,
              constructs, and paradigms that contribute to the students' appreciation of the
              relationship between language features and their implementation, is now in
              development.  The tool is a software environment, MULE, supporting
              interpreter-based projects for multiple programming language paradigms (e.g.
              OOP, procedural, functional, logic programming). An incomplete implementation
              of MULE, whose shortcomings are being addressed in this project, is being
              scrutinized. These shortcomings are technical barriers to widespread adoption
              of MULE. Removing these barriers is demonstrating whether MULE stands on its
              own merit as an effective part of a programming language course. First, MULE
              was implemented in a commercial version of Scheme (Ed Scheme) which limits the
              usability of MULE 's graphical user interface and runs only on the Macintosh
              (the necessary graphical interfaces are missing in the Windows version of Ed
              Scheme).  This redesigning MULE in Dr. Scheme a completely free (GNU Public
              License) version of Scheme which runs on Windows (95/98, NT), UNIX, and
              Macintosh, has strong graphical support for GUI development. Second, good
              software engineering principles and software quality assurance practices are
              used to develop a robust MULE implementation. Finally, MULE offers simple
              demonstration languages, which are being used to teach by counter-example. 
              This method involves keeping all aspects of the simple languages constant while
              one particular feature is changed to explore the effect of that design on the
              expressive power and efficiency of the language. As part of the standard MULE
              package, a number of counter-example modules are being implemented.

