Title       : Infusing Technology into Non-Science Major Laboratory Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  2000      
File        : a9952831

Award Number: 9952831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68866              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abigail Zoger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Garrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sonoma County Jr College D
	      1501 Mendocino Ave
	      Santa Rosa, CA  954014332    707/527-4431

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) The Departments of Life Science and Earth and Space
              Science serve a variety of students: those who are majoring in the sciences,
              those who are entering allied health programs, and those who need a general
              education science requirement, frequently for entrance into a teaching
              credential program. Many of our students are women, under-represented
              minorities and reentry students with weak science, math and computer
              backgrounds. The co-principal investigators on this project represent faculty
              from the Life Science and Earth and Space Science departments who have
              recognized the need to enhance the delivery of instruction and remove the
              barriers to success for non-science majors and traditionally under-represented
              students. Our goal is to improve student performance through the introduction
              of computer technology in the laboratory portions of the non-major's courses
              for the Life Sciences and Earth and Space Sciences departments. The
              investigators determined that the primary instructional improvements needed for
              these students are: 1) to incorporate simulations and animations into the
              laboratory curriculum; and 2) to integrate experimentation, real time data
              analysis and manipulation to the laboratory portion of the courses. These
              activities are aimed at increasing student retention and success rates and
              subsequently student transfer rates. In addition, the project aims to enhance
              students' computer and scientific literacy as well as their grasp of abstract
              and challenging scientific concepts. The inspiration for this effort comes from
              extensive study of the science education literature, such as the Journal of
              College Science Teaching.
