Title       : Integrating Models and Experiments to Enhance Investigative Learning in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9952828

Award Number: 9952828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34417              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven K. Rice rices@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grant E. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Paul Willing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)  This project is developing laboratory experiences that
              combine modeling exercises with student-designed experiments to improve the
              ability of students to connect biological content (e.g., theories, empirical
              knowledge) with experimental design and results.  Much of the modeling employs
              the STELLA programming package.  With this software, students generate and
              explore dynamic computer models that realistically simulate lab and field-based
              experiments.  The Systems Thinking and Curriculum Innovation Project (STACI)
              demonstrated that such exercises improve students' ability to understand causal
              relationships in complex systems and to develop and interpret models and their
              output.  Following initiatives undertaken in the Department of Biology at Wake
              Forest University where students employ STELLA modeling explore population
              dynamics and physiological response, we are adapting this software to our
              present investigative teaching laboratories by developing model-experiment
              experiences across all levels of the biology curriculum.  Modeling efforts
              prior to experiments help students design more relevant experiments, articulate
              specific hypotheses, and generate quantitative predictions that logically
              follow from their hypotheses.  Following experiments, summary models force
              students to clarify outcomes and provide opportunities to apply their results
              to novel situations, much like practicing biologists.  Models and experiments
              are integrated into diverse fields of study that include animal behavior,
              ecology, and plant physiology.  This project also is expanding three major
              experimental capabilities; quantitative analysis of behavior using a
              video-image capture and processing system; nitrogen and phosphorus analysis of
              tissues, water and soils using a continuous flow autoanalyzer; and growth of
              plants under elevated carbon dioxide conditions in open-topped growth chambers.
               Each extends the capacity of students to carry out meaningful experiments, and
              each is used in combination with modeling exercises to enhance investigative
              learning in several different courses.  This project presents a strategy for
              integrating modeling with experiments in teaching laboratories that strengthens
              Union College's curriculum.  


