Title       : Computer Interfacing in the General Chemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2000     
File        : a9952255

Award Number: 9952255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert K. Boggess                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27105              (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Robinson grobinso@spsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Polytechnic State
	      1100 S. Marietta Parkway
	      Marietta, GA  30060    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) This project will equip 12 student stations in the general
              chemistry laboratory with sensors interfaced to computers for data acquisition
              and analysis. The interface and software (LabWorks II), developed under a
              previous NSF initiative, adapts and integrates computer technology into the
              chemistry laboratory. This project involves the adaptation and implementation
              of well documented (and referenced) materials.  Over 300 students majoring in
              various disciplines of engineering technology, computer science, and other
              degree programs take the general chemistry course each year. It is service
              oriented since all students are non-majors.  A chemistry major is not offered. 
              The goals and objectives of the project focus on getting students fully engaged
              in the process of chemical experimentation and utilizing laboratory time
              effectively in the learning process. Using these platforms (LabWorks II),
              students become engaged in the overall design of an experiment as they enter or
              review the program for data collection. Sensors that detect changes in pH,
              temperature, pressure, conductivity, and color change or light absorption
              enable students to investigate a wide range of scientific questions, and
              interfacing these sensors with computers permits rapid data acquisition and
              expression of results in the form of graphs or statistical parameters. Students
              have time during the laboratory to analyze and interpret their data and often
              to redesign and repeat the data collection procedure. With these platforms, the
              emphasis of the laboratory changes from verifying and illustrating scientific
              principles to utilizing these principles for the exploration and investigation
              of practical problems and to thinking about what the results mean.  Project
              evaluation is directed to assessing students' skills in critical thinking,
              quantitative reasoning and the application of scientific reasoning.  The
              evaluation and assessment phase of the project is being assisted by the
              involvement of an outside evaluator (chemist, different college) and an
              internal (non-departmental) professional.  
