Title       : Sparky IntroChem: A Student-Oriented Introductory Chemistry Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9952426

Award Number: 9952426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98591              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Butcher butcher@email.wcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Brandt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry  (12)
This project is revising the introductory chemistry (IntroChem)
              course to include three distinct student populations: health science majors,
              science majors with little chemistry background, and nonscience majors.  The
              goal is to integrate several previously developed student-oriented initiatives
              into a proposed Sparky IntroChem course to promote student learning in:
              mathematical problem-solving, understanding concepts, scientific reasoning, and
              development of positive attitudes towards science. Six class modules, which are
              being adapted from existing materials or developed as part of the project, are
              providing the focus of classroom activities, along with the use of Concept Test
              questions to assess student progress. The modules are focused upon chemical
              issues of local interest, including industrial wood chemistry, air pollution,
              and water quality. Peer-led workshops of eight students, conducted by
              undergraduates who have taken the course, are being employed to solve problems
              and discuss issues for presentation to the entire class. Discovery based and
              problem-based laboratories are being adapted or developed to provide students
              with meaningful, hands-on experience with chemistry. Technological approaches
              to learning include the use of LUCID to provide interactive models, virtual
              instruments, and tool kits, and a WWW discussion board to promote
              student-teacher and student-student interaction.  Sparky IntroChem is being
              evaluated on the basis of participant perceptions, performance, grade
              distribution, and impact in subsequent science courses using classroom
              observation, surveys, and interviews adapted from the literature. Our findings
              are being disseminated through conference presentations, pedagogical journals,
              and our web site. In addition, our results are being sent to the consortia that
              developed the initiatives for dissemination through their mechanisms.




