Title       : Concurrent Computing in an Upper-Level Computer Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2000   
File        : a9952509

Award Number: 9952509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Carr carr@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean Mayo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ching-Kuang Shene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              omputer Science (31)

The primary goal of this project is to design a set of
              comprehensive and flexible course materials that cover multithreaded,
              multiprocess, shared memory and distributed memory parallel, and distributed
              programming under a few common principles (e.g., concurrency and
              nondeterminism). These materials can be used across several courses or with a
              single dedicated course.  A secondary goal is to develop software tools that
              abstract low-level details and accomplish all important concurrent operations
              under a single and unified interface. Furthermore, these tools include a
              visualization component to help students visualize the behavior of concurrent
              programs and the inner working of synchronization protocols, communication
              mechanisms, clock synchronization, and many other algorithms. 

With unified
              course materials, pedagogical tools, and a visualization system, it is expected
              that students can become familiar with the state-of-the-art of concurrency,
              acquire basic knowledge and skills, know how to handle concurrency under
              different environments, and be well-prepared to approach concurrent
              applications and their software development in their future careers. The work
              builds on a previously funded NSF project on teaching multi-threaded
              programming.  An evaluation advisory committee is assisting in the formative
              and summative evaluations of this project to determine the impact of the
              materials on student understanding of the content and their productivity using
              the tools.   The materials are being tested and evaluated at three additional
              sites to assess their effectiveness for diverse student populations. 
              Dissemination is being accomplished by the development of faculty workshops and
              short courses at national and regional conferences.  The materials are being
              developed for publication by a national publisher.
