Title       : Online Learning Environments: A Collaborative Education Project in Math,
               Science, and Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a9952681

Award Number: 9952681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis E. Davenport                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74822              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Crouch gcrouch@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary R. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edith A. Jenkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Hallgren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew G. Hudelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) This "Proof of Concept" project is creating, developing,
              and pilot testing the "Online Learning Environments (OLE)" system, a
              server-side software infrastructure to support local and distance educational
              opportunities for, and to promote interdisciplinary collaboration among
              students. The project involves faculty from several departments, including
              Chemistry, Mathematics, Communications, and English. In addition, scientists
              and programmers at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) are
              collaborating on aspects of the software design and application development
              using the Pachelbel technology developed at PNNL. Web-based learning modules in
              organic chemistry and calculus are being used by students in the pilot phase,
              and student progress through the modules is being monitored as part of the
              evaluation plan. The impact of the learning modules and the online environment
              on student learning is also being assessed using tools from the "Flashlight"
              project sponsored by the AAHE-affiliated Teaching, Learning, and Technology
              Roundtable Group.
