Title       : Laboratory for Undergraduate Instruction and Research in Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9952631

Award Number: 9952631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29712              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carey S. Ryan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Cognitive (73) 
An undergraduate laboratory for instruction and
              research is providing undergraduate psychology students with the foundation in
              scientific methodology and information technology that will enable them to use
              and interpret research in their subsequent careers. Such skills are becoming
              increasingly important in all sectors of our society. The lab serves
              approximately 500 students, well over half of whom are female, at the
              University of Pittsburgh, an institution that has been recognized for its
              recruitment and retention of African Americans. The newly developed E-Prime
              software is being adapted for use in the laboratory. E-Prime provides the basis
              for far more effective teaching of research principles by enabling students in
              normal laboratory courses to develop, design, conduct, and analyze their own
              experiments. Students can generate and perform novelexperiments as well as gain
              experience using a wide range of methodologies, including the collection of
              behavioral and physiological measures, the re-analysis of brain imaging data,
              and the coding of digitized facial expressions. Lab activities, involving the
              use of E-Prime, are being adapted for a general course in Experimental Methods
              that is required of all majors, as well as two substantive upper level courses:
              a) Learning and Motivation and b) Human Cognition and Learning. The lab is also
              available to students doing Directed Individual Research and Honors Theses,
              both of which involve conducting empirical research. With NSF support, we are
              having a major impact on the way information technology is utilized in the
              teaching of research methodology for undergraduate students of psychology, one
              of the largest undergraduate majors in the country.  This project has the
              opportunity to affect science education on a national scale through the
              development and testing of experiments that are distributed through our
              industrial partner, Psychology Software Tools. Ultimately, the experiments and
              related instructional materials are likely to be used by tens of thousands of
              undergraduates annually.
