Title       : Atomic Scale Imaging Instrumentation: Hands On Visualization for Undergraduate
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2000    
File        : a9952628

Award Number: 9952628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119613             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chuan-Jian Zhong cjzhong@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne E. Jones, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) Visualization at atomic and molecular levels using STM and AFM
              has become one of the most important advancements in science and technology in
              the last decade. While examples of atomic imaging techniques in new chemistry
              textbooks have enhanced students' visualization of atoms and molecules, the
              lack of laboratory experiences integrated across the curriculum has impeded the
              learning processes. As part of a recent campus wide emphasis on materials, we
              are building this important new technique into the entire undergraduate
              chemistry curriculum, bridging the gap between coursework and the laboratory.
              This is being achieved by creating three laboratory demonstration modules for
              lower level chemistry courses and four hands-on laboratories in upper level
              analytical and inorganic/materials courses based on the guided inquiry approach
              to education. Building on the successful experience on this campus in the
              inorganic/materials laboratory, this approach involves following a
              verification-type experience with a more open-ended question for students to
              explore. The types of samples used in the demonstration modules and in the
              hands-on experiments are designed so that students experience both the
              visualization of atomic arrangements of ideal solid surfaces, and also adlayer
              assemblies on surfaces and interfaces.  This project adapts a number of
              experiments primarily from the research literature to create these new
              demonstration modules and hands-on laboratories.  Through collaboration with
              Broome Community College, the applicability of the new materials to the
              two-year college curriculum is being assured, specifically for use as part of
              Instrumental Analysis in the Chemical Technology Program.    

