Title       : Adaption and Implementation of Modeling Instruction to a Life Science-Based
               College Introductory Physics Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9952668

Award Number: 9952668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79331              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Vesenka jvesenka@une.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan Callahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New England
	      11 Hills Beach Road
	      Biddeford, ME  040059526    207/283-0171

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) The University of New England is engaged in adapting and
              implementing interactive engagement strategies into its introductory physics
              sequence. This three-year project is serving a large undergraduate life and
              health sciences student body through a two-semester service course in physics
              that will have impact across the life science curriculum at his university. The
              proposal provides a set of integrated concepts wedding physics with other
              undergraduate departments participating in this project -- anatomy, biology,
              chemistry, and microbiology. The project involves instructing UNE faculty and
              in-service high school science teachers in the Portland Maine locality to use
              proven instructional tools. These faculty will play an essential role in
              continued adaptation and implementation in both the lab and lecture sequence.
              At the core of this teaching approach is David Hestenes' "Modeling Instruction
              for High School Physics," a nation-wide NSF-funded effort housed at Arizona
              State University. Modeling includes descriptive, graphical, mathematical, and
              diagrammatic representations, as well as laboratory and demonstration-based
              constructivist learning methods, adopting many of the best elements from
              physics education research groups around the US. Students are engaged in
              Socratic dialog both in lecture and laboratory to address their misconceptions
              and promote more accurate physical pictures. Hands-on, guided laboratory
              activities first introduce simple models that are later reinforced in lecture.
              

Laboratory improvement is being implemented through the installation of
              microcomputer-based laboratory equipment for improved student learning. This
              project will also achieve improvements in the curriculum by implementing an
              education program for summer laboratory instructors, overhauling introductory
              laboratories, and keeping abreast of technological developments. As an example
              of technological integration with introductory course content, students in the
              second semester will examine the atomic nature of matter through remote
              operation of an atomic force microscope. The PI is educating laboratory
              instructors from a pool of interested faculty and in-service high school
              physics instructors both during the academic year and the summer. Evaluation is
              being conducted by a quantitative comparison of student learning under
              different teaching methods. 



