Title       : Integration of NMR Spectroscopy across the Chemistry and Biochemistry
               Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2000     
File        : a9952264

Award Number: 9952264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murray Zanger m.zanger@usip.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guillermo Moyna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of the Scs in Philade
	      43rd St Kingsessing Mall
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/596-8800

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is one of the most useful and
              versatile instrumental techniques currently available to researchers in all
              areas of chemistry. Despite its importance, NMR is typically covered
              incompletely, and oftentimes haphazardly, across the chemistry and biochemistry
              curricula. Typically, NMR is used for structural elucidation in organic
              chemistry and instrumental analysis courses. Most students graduate without
              knowing that NMR can also be used to study kinetics, thermodynamics,
              equilibria, and conformation, just to name a few applications. The main reasons
              for this weak emphasis on NMR instruction, even in institutions with large NMR
              research facilities, are the lack of a cohesive curricula plan and lack of
              broad faculty expertise. In this project, we address and overcome these
              deficiencies through the incorporation of the theory and practice of NMR
              spectroscopy across the chemistry and biochemistry undergraduate curricula, and
              training of the faculty. Students are introduced to NMR as early as their
              freshman year, with increasingly sophisticated experiences added in later
              courses. The program underway at Ursinus College is serving as an overall model
              for our program. The experiments and materials used in the implementation of
              the curricula changes derive from different sources. First, experiments
              developed by successful DUE-NSF funded programs at other institutions are being
              adapted to the student audience at USP in order to reflect their interest in
              biochemical and biomedical problems. Second, well-tested experiments aimed at
              undergraduates are being adapted from the literature, and, finally, faculty are
              developing novel experiments targeting specific problems. Furthermore, the
              availability of a modern high resolution NMR spectrometer allows students in
              all chemistry-related majors (e.g., chemistry, biochemistry, biology,
              pharmacology & toxicology) to perform undergraduate research at levels
              previously impossible at our institution. Since virtually all students at USP
              take one full year of chemistry, and 70% take three years, a very large number
              of young scientists will graduate with knowledge of multinuclear,
              multiple-pulse, and 2D NMR techniques, which will give them an important edge
              in their future careers.

The project also is evaluating and disseminating
              the results from the undergraduate NMR program. In addition to conventional
              methods, such as presentation and publication of novel laboratory experiments
              and results from undergraduate research in peer-reviewed journals and at local
              and national meetings, we are using internet-based tools for program evaluation
              and dissemination. These tools also provide convenient routes for dissemination
              of materials to students and faculty, and they allow for rapid evaluation and
              program adaptation guided by student feedback.


