Title       : Adaptions Using Remote Realtime and Interactive Nano-Visualization for Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9952451

Award Number: 9952451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199367             (Estimated)
Investigator: B L. Ramakrishna Bramakrishna@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ed Ong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anshuman Razdan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent B. Pizziconi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Glaunsinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) Undergraduate students in the physical and life sciences
              and engineering are participating in courses that have been modified to take
              advantage of INVSEE (Interactive Nano-Visualization in Science and Engineering
              Education), developed at Arizona State University. INVSEE allows users to have
              remote access to research-grade scanning probe microscopes in a cost-effective
              way. This technology is being used as the basis for a novel project in which
              faculty in 5 other institutions are adapting and implementing web-based modules
              to incorporate INVSEE over the web into their courses. Participating
              institutions are Cornell University, the University of Wisconsin, and 3
              community colleges: Arizona Western College, Glendale College, and Mesa
              College. ARRIVE is helping faculty and students to realize the full potential
              of INVSEE through adaptations that had not been envisioned earlier, in settings
              different from those proposed during the INVSEE project. INVSEE created an
              interactive web site and a consortium of university and industry scientists,
              community college and high school science faculty, and museum educators to
              develop a new dimension in science and engineering education that allows the
              remote operation of advanced microscopes and nanofabrication tools coupled to
              powerful surface characterization methods. This educational product can be
              accessed by any classroom that is linked the web. ARRIVE is assisting teachers
              and faculty to adapt and implement this technology in local courses through the
              development of interactive educational modules. ARRIVE is also assisting
              faculty and students to incorporate INVSEE into undergraduate research
              projects. ARRIVE is intended to serve as a national model that demonstrates how
              the integration of technology and research instrumentation can be coupled
              asynchronously to undergraduate education to support student participation and
              thereby improved knowledge of research grade equipment. 

