Title       : Hardware-Software Co-Design in an Undergraduate Microcontroller Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1999  
File        : a9952540

Award Number: 9952540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230609             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daryl G. Beetner daryl@ece.umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hardy J. Pottinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Engineering (32)

Skills in hardware-software co-design are quickly
              becoming critical to product development in high-technology computer
              industries. To satisfy growing demand in industry, students in electrical
              engineering, computer engineering, and computer science should be introduced to
              concepts of hardware-software co-design at the undergraduate level. The goal of
              this Educational Materials Development project is to improve educational
              practices and student learning through development of materials that introduce
              hardware-software co-design in an undergraduate microcontrollers course. This
              goal is being accomplished by the following activities:  
1) development of a
              fully-functional hardware-software simulation model of the 8051
              microcontroller; 2) development of student laboratories that demonstrate
              concepts of hardware-software codesign; and 3) development of lecture materials
              to introduce concepts of hardware-software co-design.

This project
              integrates cutting-edge technology with the latest educational practices to
              provide a low-cost, innovative addition to the undergraduate engineering
              curriculum.  Materials are being developed and evaluated in an undergraduate
              course that draws a mix of students from electrical engineering, computer
              engineering, and computer science. 

Formative evaluations of student
              learning using a pilot system are being used to refine the overall quality of
              the materials. The materials are being tested at five other institutions with a
              common evaluation protocol to demonstrate the adaptability of the materials
              across diverse student populations.  

Results of the evaluation and the
              materials themselves are being disseminated through appropriate conferences and
              journals and through the world-wide web.  A faculty workshop and teaching
              tutorial is being developed to be presented at two professional meetings as
              well as available on-line to assist other faculty members in adapting the
              materials at their institutions.  A commercially published laboratory manual is
              being developed to be used with the web site.

