Title       : Demos with Positive Impact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1999   
File        : a9952306

Award Number: 9952306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74587              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Hill hill@math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lila F. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences  (21)The view of the mathematics classroom is changing due
              to the availability of technological innovations such as computational and
              graphical software, graphing calculators, and the Internet. Much of the
              instructional materials development that has been done to address technology
              issues has focused on making the classroom more student-centered, and
              presenting information in a manner that fosters an intuitive understanding of
              concepts is a great challenge of mathematics instruction.  Good demonstrations
              to accompany mathematical concepts are a requirement for effective
              instruction

This proof-of-concept project is collecting and disseminating
              instructional demonstrations that colleagues and peers can use to make a
              positive impact on learning. Activities in which the project is engaging, and
              learning to coordinate, include: encouraging colleagues and peers to submit
              demos and ideas for demos that have made a difference in learning; processing
              those ideas into an attractive web-accessible format; disseminating information
              to the mathematics community about the availability of the collection; and
              evaluating the content, presentation style, and usefulness of the collection. 
              The target audience is both experienced and inexperienced instructors of
              mathematics courses across the undergraduate curriculum.  The primary theme of
              the project is the effective integration of technology into instruction.  In
              addition, the project is providing faculty development by enhancing the
              abilities of faculty members to adapt and introduce pedagogical methods into
              the learning environment. 



