Title       : Magnetism Tools for Learning and Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9952735

Award Number: 9952735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis J. Hieggelke curth@jjc.cc.il.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Maloney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. O'Kuma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Joliet Junior College
	      1215 Houbolt Road
	      Joliet, IL  60431    815/729-9020

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The objective of this project is to produce an interrelated
              collection of easy-to-use and ready-to-go materials for the topics and concepts
              in magnetism that can be used as classroom materials, web assignments, or
              homework assignments. In addition, tools for pre/post assessment in the same
              area are being developed. These materials are employing TIPERs (Tasks Inspired
              by Physics Education Research) and are designed to be easy to incorporate, in
              part (or in whole), into existing courses and teaching styles. They are based
              on the efforts and recent developments in physics education research and are
              focused on developing materials in magnetism. This material development project
              envisions the incremental development over a period of years of a collection of
              related materials in a variety of new formats in targeted areas that are being
              classroom-tested and are leading to a large, full scale materials development
              project. The first stage targeted the area of electrically charged objects,
              static electric fields, and electric potential. This second stage is expected
              to be followed by several other stages focusing on thermodynamics, waves,
              optics, and modem physics. This project is a collaboration between two-year
              college and university physics professors who have worked together in the past.
              These materials are being classroom tested at several different institutions
              and are being made available in both print and electronic versions. This
              project facilitates the incorporation and application of the results of physics
              education research into classrooms and thus improve the learning of physics by
              students at post-secondary education institutions. 













