Title       : Development of a Microelectronics Process Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2001   
File        : a9952707

Award Number: 9952707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $478817             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily L. Allen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Greg Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Parent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stacy Gleixner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yasser Dessouky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yudong Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Materials Science (57) This project is developing courses,
              laboratory modules, and a faculty development workshop in support of an
              interdisciplinary curriculum to educate BS-level process engineers for
              microelectronics and related industries. This industry is comprised of
              companies which manufacture and package microelectronics products,
              semiconductor equipment, data storage devices, flat panel displays, analytical
              services and equipment, sensors and actuators, and increasingly, companies
              making microfluidic devices for onchip biological and chemical research. The
              goal of the project and the curriculum is to meet industry's need for
              bachelor's level process engineers with an interdisciplinary background. The
              focus of the curriculum is on process engineering, defined as the engineering
              resources needed to develop, maintain, monitor and evaluate the fabrication
              processes used in these industries. The interdisciplinary program draws from
              traditional materials, chemical, electrical and industrial engineering courses.
              Tying the program together are courses, internships and projects integrating
              and synthesizing specialized fabrication methods and manufacturing
              knowledge.
The objectives of the project include the development of two
              interdisciplinary upper division laboratory courses, lower division laboratory
              module development, and a faculty development program for high school and
              community college educators. Significant funding collaborations exist with
              local industry and with the Maricopa Advanced Technology Education Center
              (MATEC) in Tempe, Arizona. An industry-funded fabrication facility is being
              designed to support the program. The proposed curriculum fills a niche for BS
              level process engineers that is not met by any other program in the U.S. and
              provides a model for programs at other universities in high technology
              areas.




 
