Title       : Development of Active Learning Materials for Physiology and Functional Anatomy:
               A Cooperative Haps-Aps Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a9952458

Award Number: 9952458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62551              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dee U. Silverthorn silverth@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Implementation of undergraduate science education
              reform in the past decade has been very slow despite extensive publicity about
              the need to increase scientific literacy and problem-solving skills. One reason
              for the slow progress appears to be a lack of widely-disseminated curriculum
              materials designed to support these goals. This project is creating the first
              of four modules for teaching integrative physiological concepts. The modules
              emphasize active learning and inquiry approaches and include pedagogical
              information to help faculty with their implementation. The project is a
              collaboration of the American Physiological Society (APS), composed primarily
              of research faculty at medical schools and major universities, and the Human
              Anatomy and Physiology Society (HAPS), composed largely of people teaching
              anatomy and physiology or physiology at smaller schools. The latter group forms
              the target population for dissemination of the material and for faculty
              development efforts. Project team members drawn from APS and HAPS are
              developing each module. The modules are being presented at HAPS meetings to
              ensure that faulty are appropriately trained in its content and pedagogy.
              Volunteers from APS and HAPS are site-testing the modules on student
              populations that include significant numbers of women and underrepresented
              minorities. An independent evaluation team is monitoring adaptability and
              effectiveness of the curriculum materials in the modules. Draft and final
              versions will be disseminated through a web page sponsored by APS and linked to
              the home page of professional societies such as the American Institute of
              Biological Sciences. Once all four modules are complete, Prentice Hall College
              Publishers will publish them as part of their Series in Educational
              Innovation.

