Title       : Learning Biology Through Relevant Questions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1999   
File        : a9952541

Award Number: 9952541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna Tan-Wilson annatan@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Van Buskirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Science  (61)
The need to know drives people to learn much more than
              they think possible. This is why a relevant question, a question that fits
              within a student's frame of reference, is a powerful tool for learning. The
              goal is for students, science as well as non-science majors, to have just such
              a learning experience in science through which they will gain the research
              skills and confidence needed for lifelong learning. S.U.N.Y. Binghamton is
              creating a Biology course where upper-level science and non-science majors team
              up to find answers to questions posed by high school students. Answering a
              question such as "Why are my eyebrow hairs short while the hair on my head can
              grow long?" engages students in fascinating research into genetics, cell cycles
              and hormonal control. As in daily life where academic boundaries do not exist
              students will cross over into relevant topics such as gender differences and
              cultural concepts of beauty. The work is calling for careful distinction
              between fact and inference, effective communication and creativity. This is a
              workshop course where students develop screens on the computer for an actual
              CDROM that the department is producing. Students' abilities to carry out
              research, communicate effectively, and apply computer technologies, are being
              evaluated. It is being determined whether students gained confidence in
              learning science through this course. It is intended that this is only the
              first in a series of courses in Biology and the other sciences that uses
              relevant questions and computer technologies in science education. The premise
              for the course is based on and is an adaptation of "best practices" advocated
              by the Boyer Commission Reinventing Undergraduate Education [Learning based on
              discovery guided by mentoring rather than transmission of information],
              literature on constructivist education, and on literature on the value of
              service-learning.  This constitutes a significant step in Science across the
              Curriculum, our program of Institution-wide reform that started with an NSF
              grant, S.U.N.Y. Binghamton's answer to our national need for scientifically
              sophisticated citizens and leaders.



