Title       : Integrative Neuroscience Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2000   
File        : a9952711

Award Number: 9952711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25577              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene R. Delay edelay@regis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan L. Betz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford L. Barnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Surendra N. Mahapatro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Regis University
	      3333 Regis Blvd
	      Denver, CO  802211099    303/458-4100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)

Neuroscience employs experimental methods from
              various disciplines to investigate functions of the nervous system.
              Undergraduates studying neuroscience require educational experiences that teach
              basic processes of scientific inquiry such as problem solving, critical
              thinking, an appreciation of the strengths and limitations of knowledge gained
              from discipline-specific methods, and integration of diverse information. The
              project is an adaptation of efforts at Wake Forest University and Coe College. 
              Our neuroscience program draws upon faculty in psychology, biology, and
              chemistry to bridge disciplinary boundaries but it lacks critical equipment
              needed to teach scientific inquiry in an integrated, multidisciplinary
              approach. The goals of this project are to develop students' critical thinking
              and problem solving skills, integrate multidisciplinary approaches to study
              context-based research questions, and increase opportunities for independent
              student research. The project is redesigning two neuroscience laboratories to
              give students hands-on roles in designing, executing and analyzing experiments.
              Key elements of the project are collaborations with biology and biochemistry
              labs for multidisciplinary study of structure and function of the nervous
              system (e.g. tubulin, c-Fos activation, glutamate receptors, intracellular
              Ca++, electrophysiological and behavioral assays).  This project provides
              students with a solid grounding in neuroscience concepts and the experimental
              basis from which to pursue independent research projects. The collaborations
              with students in biology and biochemistry courses promotes an appreciation of
              each other's tools, and an integration of material between different
              disciplines. Our project aims to substantially increase the quality, quantity,
              and breadth of research conducted by undergraduates and their subsequent
              success in graduate and professional schools. 
