Title       : Undergraduate Laboratory Exercises in Stable Isotope Geochemistry for Geology,
               Environmental Sciences, and Meterology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2000   
File        : a9952256

Award Number: 9952256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63280              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kirschner dkirschn@eas.slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Graves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology   (42)  
The implementation of a gas-source mass spectrometer and
              stable isotope extraction lines in our undergraduate curriculum provides
              students with hands-on experience in instrument-based laboratory exercises.  In
              our geoscience program, we have designed, developed, and implemented stable
              isotope lab exercises for use in our Surface Water Hydrology, Petrology,
              Geomorphology, Groundwater, and Geochemistry courses. In our atmospheric
              science program, we have designed, developed, and implemented lab exercises for
              use in our Global Climate Change, Elements of Air Pollution, and Principles of
              Dynamic Meteorology courses.
The developed exercises are an adaptation of a
              stable isotope lab exercise used at Dartmouth College (J. Geosc. Ed.
              45:157-161).  Students are involved in designing experiment(s), collecting
              samples, extracting stable isotopes of carbon and oxygen from samples, making
              measurements on a mass spectrometer, interpreting data, and writing reports. 
              We are adapting cooperative learning techniques that are being used
              successfully in chemistry laboratories (J. Chem. Ed. 71:141-143) by structuring
              the exercises so that students work in small groups during multi-week lab
              exercise(s).  Such a learning environment improves the educational experience
              of all students (The Teaching Professor 4:1-2) with particular emphasis on
              increasing female participation and involvement (Teaching of Psychology
              20:7-13).  These active-learning exercises allow students to participate
              directly in the process of scientific inquiry from formulation of the problem
              to presentation of results.  The activities also help students appreciate the
              importance of stable isotope geochemistry to the earth and atmospheric
              sciences.
Students work with faculty in formulating scientific questions
              relevant to a given course. This approach is a modification of
              guided-inquiry-based experiments that are used in chemistry labs (J. Chem. Ed.
              75:470-471).  The questions focus primarily on geologic, environmental, and/or
              atmospheric issues that are related to the urban environment surrounding Saint
              Louis University providing a sense of ownership for the students.  During the
              course of the project, students collect and prepare samples for analysis and
              make extractions and mass spectrometric analyses. They graph their data and
              incorporate the data from other groups in order to document spatial or temporal
              trends, and make calculations to determine specific parameters relevant to the
              question(s) being addressed (e.g., origin of isotopes, extent of fluid-rock
              interaction, temperature of mineral formation). Students write a report and
              present their results to the rest of the class. By being involved in the
              project from beginning to end, students gain a deeper appreciation for science
              and the processes involved in scientific inquiry.
