Title       : Adapting Field Based Science to Education at Newberry National Volcanic
               Momument, the Deschutes River and the Southern Oregon Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1999   
File        : a9952484

Award Number: 9952484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William C. Beston                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20785              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Reynolds bob_reynolds@cocc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Oregon Comm Col
	      2600 NW College Way
	      Bend, OR  977015933    503/382-6112

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)  
This proposal uses environmental monitoring equipment, including
              global positioning systems (GPS), sonar, electronic water quality devices,
              bottom sampling (coring, dredging), water chemistry test kits and scuba
              equipment to implement field-based, multi-faceted science projects for
              undergraduate oceanography and geology courses.  This equipment enables
              restructuring of the lab component of several science courses to include field
              experiments and projects using modern oceanographic equipment and techniques. 
              This proposal is based upon research conducted at the Keck Geology Consortium
              (Manduca, 1996) whereby structuring hands-on and small group field research
              activities using modern field equipment for real-life data gathering
              situations, students have demonstrated deeper conceptual understanding and
              confidence in dealing with quantitative data.  They have learned how to design
              and carry out all phases of scientific investigation. The pedagogical value of
              field-based small group projects has also been substantiated in other science
              courses such as environmental science (de Wet, 1994) and at other inland lake
              locations (Smith, 1995)   A variety of field sites used include the volcanic
              lakes located in Newberry National Volcanic Monument, the scenic reach of the
              Deschutes River located near the college, and South Slough National Estuarine
              Reserve located on the southern Oregon coast.  The field based approach enables
              students to receive high quality, intellectually stimulating educational
              experiences and engages them in the collection of meaningful scientific data,
              provides opportunities for students to apply their knowledge to solving
              realistic problems in science, and increases student confidence with modern
              technology including quantitative applications. The target audience includes
              nontraditional students enrolled in K-12 education and applied science
              programs.  Eighty to one hundred students annually participate in the affected
              courses.  Student designed projects provide meaningful data with which to
              characterize and monitor the lakes, rivers and estuaries in Oregon.   The
              success of this curriculum restructuring is assessed by using pre- and post-
              course concept inventory testing, similar to that used by  Deslaughter (1998),
              project evaluation by the PI, peer evaluations, and train and trade exercises
              (Smith, 1995) used to gain familiarity with equipment. Exemplary projects are
              publicized through meetings and journals of American Geophysical Union and
              Geological Society of America.  The framework of this curriculum restructuring
              is designed to be readily adapted to any lake, river or coastal environment and
              to a variety of scientific disciplines. 
