Title       : Teaching Advanced Surface Mount Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9952759

Award Number: 9952759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn R. Blackwell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering -Technology (58).

This project is addressing three areas in the
              field of electronics-manufacturing technology known as Surface Mount Technology
              (SMT): 1)Implementation of SMT as a replacement technology for older component
              technologies; 2)Education of other faculty members on SMT concepts, since they
              must now be able to utilize SMT-type components in their courses;
              3)Quantitative analyses of SMT-implementation processes.

These areas must be
              addressed not only at Purdue, but at all institutions which use older-style
              "through-hole technology" (THT) components. These components are widely used in
              Electrical Engineering and Electrical Engineering Technology programs because
              their lead configuration allows easy use of temporary connection systems known
              as breadboards. However SMT components do not lend themselves for easy use of
              breadboards. The second issue follows the first, since faculty must also
              understand SMT as many of the integrated circuits used in their courses are now
              only available in SMT packages. In addition, quantitative analysis is a
              cornerstone of any SMET curriculum. Currently many of the process steps in SMT
              are taught using qualitative analysis of results. 

The ideas for this
              project are adapted from the NSF-sponsored, "Faculty Enhancement Workshop on
              Assembly and Packaging of Microelectronic Devices". The equipment is being used
              to implement ideas in the area of absorption of moisture by IC packages,
              opening and inspection of microelectronic packages, and laboratory on board
              level packing. In addition, the implementation of these topics at Purdue will
              add quantitative measurements of the microelectronic and board level
              packages.

