Title       : Integrating GPS and GIS Tools into Liberal Arts Ecology Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a9952834

Award Number: 9952834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86768              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula J. Sanchini psanchin@coe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coe College
	      1220 First Avenue NE
	      Cedar Rapids, IA  524025008    319/399-8000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

The Biology Department at Coe College operates a Spatial
              Ecology Laboratory that provides access to autonomous GPS and dGPS capability
              and desktop Geographic Information System (GIS) software for undergraduate
              students in an introductory laboratory class and for students who participate
              in the department's summer research program. First-year students learn to
              operate GPS handsets, capture spatial data in a field study and use ArcView
              software to classify thematic maps and test hypotheses. This curriculum project
              expand on this starting sequence and builds conceptual understanding of
              large-scale ecological processes through technology-rich field experiments
              analyzed by queries of GIS software in four additional courses.

Two courses
              enhance the abilities of biology majors to use GPS handsets to capture spatial
              data in more complex experimental settings and to use GIS software to discover,
              classify and interpret spatial and environmental trends in larger datasets.
              These tools will replace traditional approaches to field studies of urban deer
              populations in an existing Urban Ecology course. A new course called Spatial
              Ecology introduce differential correction including RTK, and the roles of base
              stations and network control in achieving high quality GPS solutions. These
              skills will be used in landscape-level investigations in urban, agricultural
              and natural settings with ArcView and S+. This proposal supports purchase of
              equipment and software required for high quality RTK surveys and transport of
              presentation materials to community and school groups. A FirstYear Seminar
              course called Biodiversity will introduce novice students to GIS, specifically
              how to pose questions to and interpret patterns in a GIS database. The
              Biodiversity course will use commercially available datasets for inquiry-based
              investigations that use desk-top GIS to discover trends and test hypotheses
              about spatial (habitatspecific, regional, and latitudinal) patterns of species
              diversity. Field Ecology Activities using GPS and GIS is a course designed for
              in-service high school teachers. The course covers use of GPS handsets in field
              studies at local parks and preserves, production of classified maps in ArcView
              GIS and supports transport of course materials to the school setting.



