Title       : Enhancing the Undergraduate Chemistry Experience WIth High Field NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9952343

Award Number: 9952343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Wallace wallacri@mail.armstrong.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Will E. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Armstrong Atlan State Univ
	      11935 Abercorn Street
	      Savannah, GA  314191909    912/927-5211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) In order to enhance the undergraduate curriculum, the Department
              of Chemistry and Physics at the university is acquiring a high field NMR. The
              instrument is widely used in a number of courses in the department. The
              acquisition of a high field NMR allows a number of the current laboratories to
              be more educational and informative for the students, as well as making
              possible the introduction of a number of new experiments. The NMR spectrometer
              is used in organic chemistry, instrumental analysis, inorganic chemistry,
              honors general chemistry, and in several upper level chemistry courses
              (physical chemistry, biochemistry, and advanced organic chemistry).
              Undergraduate research students also benefit from having access to a high field
              NMR on campus. The laboratory experiments being implemented have been adapted
              from a variety of sources, but primarily from the Journal of Chemical
              Education. Many of these published experiments have been generated from NSF
              supported projects. Additional sources of the adapted materials include
              laboratory texts (modifications and enhancements), and research articles in
              journals. The NMR is also used by students at nearby Coastal Georgia Community
              College as part of an existing program in which they visit the university and
              make use of instrumentation not available on their campus. An additional use of
              the instrument is in the university's Community Outreach Program in which high
              school students visit the university and carry out laboratory experiments.
              Excercises have been developed to introduce high school advanced placement
              chemistry classes to NMR, one of the most widely used pieces of scientific
              instrumentation.
