Title       : A New Approach to Science for Non-Science and Elementary Education Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9952826

Award Number: 9952826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172600             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Mickus JMickus@ben.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eileen M. Kolich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Benedictine University
	      5700 College Road
	      Lisle, IL  605320900    630/829-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
A citizenry that is not properly educated in science
              will be at risk. We live in an increasingly technological society where the
              majority of discoveries that make life safer and more convenient result from
              work in the sciences. A foundational understanding of scientific processes and
              concepts is essential if citizens are to intelligently assess matters of
              scientific importance related to their health, the environment and other
              technological accomplishments with the propensity for great societal impact
              (i.e., reproductive research and cloning are just two examples). The goal of
              this project is to develop a core of four laboratory-based courses for
              non-science majors, which integrate themes common to the physical and natural
              sciences. Mathematics is being integrated into the courses and all of the
              courses have a discovery-based laboratory experience. Nine hundred and
              thirty-eight non-science majors, including 82 elementary education majors are
              taking these courses. The program's objectives are as follows: First, to adapt
              from model curricula developed elsewhere, an integrated set of four science
              content courses that are fulfilling the science requirements of the
              University's general education curriculum. Second, to develop a general science
              major that provides opportunities for direct application of science theory for
              students, particularly those majoring in elementary education. Finally, to
              develop an in-service program that provides opportunities for direct
              application of science theory for current elementary educators.
Fifteen
              members of the science faculty and eight members of the education faculty are
              participating in the development, implementation, and piloting of courses and
              laboratories. The program directors have also convened a steering committee
              comprised of science faculty and an advisory board comprised of local experts
              in science education that is assisting with the developing curricular
              model.






