Title       : Molecular Modeling Throughout the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1999  
File        : a9952381

Award Number: 9952381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36874              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott E. Feller fellers@wabash.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Olsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wabash College
	      301 West Wabash
	      Crawfordsville, IN  47933    317/362-1400

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) Molecular modeling tools are being used to integrate topics in
              quantum chemistry and thermodynamics across the curriculum. By focusing on
              molecules and employing computational power in both visualization and
              manipulation and in the calculation of molecular properties, physical chemistry
              topics presented in introductory, organic, physical, and biochemistry are 
              unified.  Additionally, students are being educated both in the use of
              computers within the field of chemistry, and in the theories upon which these
              methods are based. Materials are adapted from recent educational literature
              sources employing this integrative curriculum mode.  Beginning with
              introductory courses (for both science majors and non-majors), molecular
              modeling exercises emphasizing the three-dimensional geometry of molecules and
              the idea of electronic wave functions  introduce students to a computer program
              (the Spartan family of programs) that they can use throughout the chemistry
              curriculum.  In organic chemistry, students use more sophisticated techniques
              to study the energetics of molecular conformations and to explore the role of
              electronic structure in chemical reactivity. The physical chemistry course uses
              molecular modeling techniques and describes the theoretical basis of these
              methods (including a discussion of their limitations and shortcomings).
              Students receive the immediate opportunity to apply their knowledge in a new
              biochemistry course that is required of all majors.  This effort provides a
              model for the continued expansion of computational methods into the remainder
              of the chemistry curriculum, as well as the introduction of similar
              technologies into the biology department (e.g., bioinformatics tools). Other
              benefits of this project include the availability of computer resources to be
              shared with the department of Mathematics & Computer Science, as well as an
              outreach program to local high schools whereby students and teachers have the
              opportunity to use the molecular modeling facility developed in the
              project.






 






