Title       : Textile and Apparel Product Development and Testing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  2000   
File        : a9952283

Award Number: 9952283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell D. Strauss mitchell.strauss@uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Mord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Annette F. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-6437

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)PROJECT SUMMARY

This project is addressing
              laboratory equipment for the purpose of physically testing and analyzing
              materials used in the manufacture of textiles and apparel.  It is integrating
              technology to produce a more effective learning environment for undergraduates,
              and strengthening undergraduate education by increasing the participation and
              success of women in SMET programs.  As a collateral benefit, faculty
              development is also being gained as a result of interacting with the testing
              equipment.

The addition of this new laboratory infrastructure is
              facilitating purposeful and substantive linkages between industry and the
              textile and apparel program.  This, in turn, is creating research and
              educational experiences that will enable graduates to enter the workforce with
              advanced technological skills on-par with professionals currently working in
              the industry.  Technological preparation is increasingly necessary for
              graduates to compete for high quality entry level positions in the textile and
              apparel industry.

The project's textile testing equipment, conditioning
              room, and environmental chamber meet the new academic imperative of improving
              student technical competence, and are serving as an academic testing site for
              national and regional apparel organizations that develop and source their own
              product lines.  This program is largely unique in the U.S., and represents the
              next generation of textile and apparel programs.  Furthermore, as a program
              primarily serving women, the infusion of technology into the curriculum is
              better preparing females to enter the workforce feeling comfortable and capable
              of performing within a technological and science-based industry.  Finally, a
              dissemination plan is projecting the program outwards to the corporate and
              academic communities as a model of "best methods and practices" for others to
              consider emulating.

