Title       : Cross-Disciplinary Use of Mass Spectrometry for Integrated Undergraduate
               (Bio)chemistry Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2000    
File        : a9952486

Award Number: 9952486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Victoria M. Bragin                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell E. Johnson johnsonm@duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
This project continues the ongoing replacement of
              course-specific, upper level teaching laboratories with cross-disciplinary,
              project-based ones.  By building on the experience of others in teaching
              discovery-based, guided-inquiry, or problem-based laboratories, a curriculum is
              being fashioned that will provide an intense learning environment for chemistry
              and biochemistry students.  The resulting curriculum provides students with
              experiences and tools needed to become successful scientists and serves as the
              link between undergraduate courses and undergraduate research.

A critical
              component in guiding students to an understanding of chemistry is getting them
              to see that the fundamental principles of (bio)chemistry are intrinsically
              cross-disciplinary.  The problems they investigate must therefore be
              cross-disciplinary in nature.  The thesis is that instrumental techniques that
              span disciplines are likewise critical to the development of "chemical
              Weltanschauung."  Mass spectrometry is an essential component in this
              development.  Experiments from journal articles will be adapted for use in
              various courses.  Other critical components -- high-field NMR and visible
              spectroscopy -- are already available to this institution's undergraduate
              students.  Laboratory projects incorporating cross-disciplinary use of NMR,
              visible spectroscopy, and LC/MS continue to be developed.
