Title       : Digital Signal Processing Laboratory for Real-Time Systems Design and
               Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9952720

Award Number: 9952720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37585              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Waldo dwaldo@oc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma Christian Univ
	      P.O. Box 11000
	      Oklahoma City, OK  731361100    405/478-1661

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55)
Real-time digital signal processing (DSP)
              embedded systems are becoming more pervasive throughout the engineering design
              industry.  DSP is a major tool used in electrical engineering design solutions.
               Because of the increased reliance on digital systems in engineering solutions,
              the demands on signal processing continue to increase.  It is of utmost
              importance that many of these systems operate in real-time.  However, in most
              DSP curricula, the importance of real-time is not emphasized.  It is the goal
              of this project to develop a laboratory that supports the design and
              implementation of real-time systems.  This laboratory supports a three course
              sequence in DSP with accompanying hands-on laboratories.  The first course
              focuses on DSP fundamentals and DSP algorithm implementation.  The second
              course deals with real-time DSP issues such as real-time operating systems
              (RTOS), DSP architectures, parallel processors, system and software design
              issues, optimization, and programming techniques.  The third course extends the
              fundamentals and real-time issues to adaptive signal processing topics that
              require real-time processing.  This laboratory also supports the communications
              curriculum as well as the capstone design courses.  Material developed for the
              laboratory is being distributed electronically through the
              internet.

Material adapted in the DSP courses are primarily from three
              sources: 1) DSP Fundamentals course offered at the University of Massachusetts
              at Dartmouth, 2) the two courses Real-Time DSP Design and Adaptive Filtering
              offered at Georgia Institute of Technology and 3) DSP Teaching Kit and Design
              Workshop notes developed by Texas Instruments.  Course syllabi, notes and
              laboratory experiments from these three sources are adapted to meet the
              objectives of the proposed DSP courses.  The DSP Fundamentals course is
              providing materials for hands-on learning of DSP basics through real-time
              experimentation.  Real-Time DSP Design provides the methodology to foster team
              work and real-time system design techniques.  Adaptive Filtering is helping to
              promote advanced theory at the undergraduate level, and the materials from
              Texas Instruments is providing the tie to implementing all the systems in a
              real-time DSP hardware system.


