Title       : Integration of Technology into the Materials Science and Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2000   
File        : a9952597

Award Number: 9952597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne E. Mohney mohney@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ian R. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul C. Painter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael M. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Trolier-McKinstry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Materials Science (57)
The goal of this project is to develop
              multimedia courseware for upper level undergraduate students in materials
              science and engineering and related disciplines. The courseware is cutting
              across boundaries of the sub-disciplines of materials science and engineering
              and includes simulations, animations, and virtual instruments. Courseware is
              being developed through the collaborative efforts of faculty specializing in
              ceramics, electronic and photonic materials, metals, polymers, and engineering
              science. The majority of the courseware  emphasizes active learning, requiring
              students to interact with the software as well as each other; and requires them
              to work with the information they gather from the computer to complete
              assignments. The courseware is initially being tested at The Pennsylvania State
              University, both in classes populated primarily by students in Materials
              Science and Engineering as well as in classes taken by students in various
              branches of engineering, chemistry, forestry, and food science. After initial
              testing and formative assessment, course materials are being disseminated to
              faculty at other institutions for further site testing. Commercial publication
              of the software and an instructional manual are being investigated.  

