Title       : Universal Application of a GS-MS in Science Education: Integrating Courses and
               Programs Using Instrumental Teaching Assistants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a9952294

Award Number: 9952294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore R. Williams williams@acs.wooster.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul L. Edmiston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Wooster
	      
	      Wooster, OH  44691    216/263-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) This project integrates and expands the teaching of instrumental
              techniques to pre-college and college students in a way that uses students to
              teach students. Our goals are two-fold: to develop science literacy in both
              pre-college and non-science major college students and to enhance the education
              of our chemistry majors by generating a means by which they will be held
              accountable for their own learning. We are attempting to achieve these goals in
              a singular effort by instituting Instrumental Teaching Assistants; these
              positions are staffed by upper-class chemistry majors. The responsibilities of
              the Instrumental Teaching Assistants include learning how to use the
              instrumentation through their coursework and apprenticeship, acting as the
              principal persons involved in the up-keep of instruments, and teaching
              pre-college and non-science major peers with faculty assistance. The initial
              program is designed specifically around a gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer
              which has nearly universal application in all of our current programs, classes,
              and laboratories. In this manner we are creating a diverse community of users
              and learners centered about the Instrumental Teaching Assistants.  These
              Assistants are adapting a number of experiments from the educational literature
              in order to provide experiments that allow students to learn the process of
              scientific investigation including the power and limitations of instrumental
              techniques, and, for science majors, also to learn specific principles and
              independent investigation

