Title       : Improving Undergraduate Biology Laboratory Experiences by Performing Experiments
               with Controlled Environment Chambers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9952366

Award Number: 9952366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35791              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stokes S. Baker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Josephine M. Gambini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Detroit
	      4001 West McNichols Road
	      Detroit, MI  482190900    313/927-1000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)  The Biology Department of the University of
              Detroit
Mercy is committed to changing how we teach science in accordance to
              the recommendation of the National Research Council.  To accomplish our goals,
              we have replaced laboratory exercises that are largely "cookbook" to exercises
              involving the "process of science."  Thus, our students are designing and
              executing their own experiments in laboratory courses.  This involves the
              students conceiving a testable hypothesis and designing experiments that test
              their hypothesis.  After executing their experiments, they develop their own
              conclusions based upon their analyzed data.  Controlled environment chambers
              are used to manipulate physical factors that affect whole organism physiology
              in our students' experiments.  Introductory biology students investigate the
              process of plant cold-acclimation.  This curriculum change incorporates
              methodology invented by the principal investigator (Baker et al., 1994, Plant
              Molecular Biology) that has been modified for use in the general biology
              laboratory courses (Gelvin and Karcher, 1996, Proceedings of the 17th
              Workshop/Conference of the Association of Biology Laboratory Education). 
              Ecology students are investigating the effects of increasing atmospheric carbon
              dioxide levels on terrestrial food chains.  This line of investigation
              complements and adapts research on aquatic food chains (Urabe and Sterner,
              1996, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences) as well as methods from
              botany laboratory courses that have been successfully taught using directed
              research on model plant systems (Monroe, 1994,
              www.jmu.edu/biology/pplab/poster1.html).  Our students are identifying and
              analyzing developmental mutants in Arabidopsis thaliana along with developing
              their own tissue culture regeneration protocols on numerous plant species. 
              Additionally, undergraduates use these chambers in their faculty-supervised
              independent research projects.


