Title       : Developing Research-based Laboratories in Cell Biology Using Green Fluorescent
               Protein as a Unifying Theme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1999   
File        : a9952672

Award Number: 9952672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dunne Fong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Science  (61)  This new laboratory course in cell biology, part of
              the recently approved major in Cell Biology and Neuroscience, consists of three
              inter-related modules. The modules are designed to develop essential laboratory
              skills in cell biology, as well as more general skills emphasized in both the
              Rutgers University learning goals and the new curriculum, including critical
              thinking and problem solving. Participants acquire key skills in cell biology,
              including bacterial and mammalian cell culture, organelle isolation,
              recombinant DNA methodology and fluorescence microscopy.  Green fluorescent
              protein (GFP), the basic research material of the modules, provides a unifying
              theme throughout the course. After an introduction to cutting-edge methods in
              cell biology, undergraduate students undertake a guided research project.  They
              are prepared for this endeavor by reading assignments, discussion of research
              papers, and group meetings with guest faculties, who bring individual insights
              in their areas of expertise. From this experience, the students design and then
              complete the guided project, utilizing GFP as a research tool. Final reports
              are delivered orally, written up as if for publication, and revised versions
              published on the Internet. By participating in hypothesis-driven and
              inquiry-based laboratory projects, with communication skills linked to the
              course projects, students increase their ability to think logically, write
              clearly, and speak coherently.  The project adapts and implements, and is based
              on, a number of studies showing the need for and effective incorporation of
              research into undergraduate courses (Brown, 1988 and Kenny, 1998).  The modules
              described adapt and implement techniques outlined in research articles citing
              the ease of use of Green Fluorescent Protein as a marker and research tool
              (Misteli, 1997 and Conn, 1999).

