Title       : Targeting Reform of the Undergraduate Mathematics Preparation of
               Elementary/Middle School Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2000    
File        : a9952309

Award Number: 9952309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine A. Browning christine.browning@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Klespis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              DeAnn M. Huinker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dwayne E. Channell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)

Current efforts to reform K-12 mathematics content
              and its teaching, urged by professional standards and supported by social
              constructivist theories of knowing, are bringing about new emphases on active
              learning, new expectations for student-teacher and student-student
              communication patterns, greater reliance on sense-making and reasoning and new
              roles and responsibilities for both the teacher and the student in the learning
              process. This teacher preparation project  is designed to address the important
              challenges that such reform brings to the teaching of mathematics by redefining
              the manner in which the preservice elementary and middle school teacher
              audience come to understand mathematical content.  The project is a
              collaborative effort by faculty at multiple institutions to produce a set of
              innovative, standards-based instructional materials and instructor resources
              integrating appropriate computing technologies, alternative assessments, and
              challenging learning opportunities, often situated in the context of core tasks
              of teaching, for the preservice elementary and middle school teacher audience. 
              By using the project materials, teachers acquire a comprehensive mathematics
              background necessary to support the quality and style of teaching envisioned by
              current K-8 mathematics reform curricula. Teachers emerge with the attitudes
              that allow them to be receptive to change and to the increasing influence of
              technology on learning mathematics, teaching methodologies, and school
              mathematics content.  They also value sense making and reasoning as necessary
              components of mathematical understanding and can instill those values in their
              own students.
