Title       : Using Physical Chemistry Laboratory to Improve High School Teaching and
               Undergraduate Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  2000   
File        : a9952686

Award Number: 9952686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127072             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Rick Fletcher fletcher@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
This project attacks two parallel goals involving science
              education.  Laser-based state-of-the-art physical chemistry laboratory
              experiments are being adapted from articles in standard journals.  In addition,
              new experiments are being developed in the general areas of spectroscopy,
              quantum mechanics, photochemistry and kinetics.  The result is a product which
              will allow faculty at other institutions to set up turn-key labs even if
              experience is lacking in these important areas.  This project also introduces
              undergraduate science students to modern techniques they will encounter in
              graduate school and the work place.  The areas addressed in this project are
              currently underrepresented in modern physical chemistry instructional
              laboratories.  The second major goal is to bring high school teachers currently
              teaching in the Pacific Northwest states into the new lab for two weeks in the
              summer to improve their knowledge and skills teaching laboratory science.  The
              teachers will receive lectures and hands on training using the newest
              techniques and equipment, while developing the procedures for the new
              undergraduate physical chemistry labs.  This exposure will present the high
              school teachers with new knowledge, and allows them to make actual measurements
              with advanced equipment and learn new lab skills while helping develop the new
              lab procedures.  This project will improve the educational infrastructure in
              the Northwest as both goals are met and will also provide college and
              university faculty around the country with a prescription for building modern
              physical chemistry loabs at their institutions.
