Title       : MCCCD: Systemic Reform in Science - Phase I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a9952695

Award Number: 9952695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey C. Pommerville jeffrey.pommerville@domial.maricopa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Mildrew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan K. Tippett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pushpa Ramakrishna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Maricopa County CC Distric
	      2411 W 14th St
	      Tempe, AZ  852816941    480/731-8031

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) The Systemic Reform in Science Phase I Project is
              involving faculty from the 10 colleges of the nation's largest community
              college system (200,000 students) in interdisciplinary activities to better
              prepare them for teaching students who have a wider range of learning needs
              than in the past. The project's overall goal is to improve student success
              through increased faculty use of methods, which link science courses through
              real-life applications. The major activity is the adaptation of content to
              create 20 interdisciplinary modules for science courses. Implementation of
              these modules is being accomplished through the Management Team (MT) whose
              members are the PI, Co-Pls, and nine science faculty who serve as Peer Mentors
              (PM) at the individual colleges. Activities are being implemented to support
              integration and use of the interdisciplinary modules through faculty workshops
              and seminars. This includes an annual 1-2 day workshop on implementing active
              learning in science classrooms, and the establishment of Collaborative Learning
              Teams (CLT) of science faculty at each college who are working together with
              PMs to implement interdisciplinary modules and active learning in science
              classrooms. Outcome objectives include: 1) increasing, by 75 % over the
              baseline year, the number of full-time science faculty who use approaches
              aligned with systemic reform and 2) bringing the overall proportion of
              full-time science faculty who routinely use new approaches to 50% (50 faculty
              of 100). This project will be guided by using the adaptation and implementation
              of best practice examples, many generated by NSF sponsored projects, which
              foster the promotion of critical thinking, problem-solving skills and
              creativity/collaborative learning and which are interdisciplinary/contextually
              relevant.  Major evaluation activities are: 1) regular monitoring by the MT; 2)
              pilot-testing of modules; 3) and pre-post evaluation design to measure
              implementation levels. Following preparation of a Final Evaluation Report,
              project processes/outcomes and interdisciplinary modules are being disseminated
              through the Project's website and through presentations at selected regional
              and national conferences.  Other plans include the generation of a multimedia
              CD-ROM, the dissemination of videotapes of the workshops and publications in
              relevant professional journals.  Because of the potential for impact on the
              education of technicians, this project is being co-funded by the Advanced
              Technological Education program.



