Title       : Integration of Optical Spectroscopy into the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a9952727

Award Number: 9952727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41728              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Treichel dat@nebrwesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel B. Howell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nebraska Wesleyan Univ
	      50th and Saint Paul Sts
	      Lincoln, NE  68504    402/466-2371

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) As part of our continuing effort to integrate new technology into
              our curriculum, the chemistry department is constructing six desk-top laser
              systems with computerized data acquisition for use at the beginning level, and
              is integrating use of a more sophisticated laser laboratory facility into the
              advanced courses and independent study projects. These systems are helping us
              to organize and enliven instruction of our students in optical spectroscopy by
              replacing the current haphazard introduction to the nature of light and to
              spectroscopy with a coordinated progression of learning throughout our
              curriculum.  Experiments from the Journal of Chemical Education and from
              laboratory texts are being adapted and modified in order to achieve this
              progression.  The desk-top systems allow us to introduce laser based
              spectroscopy at the freshman level, with absorption spectrophotometry and light
              scattering experiments as well as demonstrations of fluorescence, refraction,
              diffraction and polarization of light. One or more experiments using these
              systems is carried out by students in each course during the first two years. 
              To help our majors take advantage of the knowledge gained in lower-division
              courses, we are putting in place a laser laboratory centered initially on Raman
              spectroscopy, with the capacity to be extended to nanosecond time resolved
              kinetics studies.  In addition to enhancing our own students' understanding of
              optical spectroscopy, the project is allowing development of equipment and
              experiments, applicable to introductory and upper level laboratories, that are
              appropriate for dissemination to other institutions.




