Title       : Second-Generation Laser Experiments in Undergraduate Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a9952435

Award Number: 9952435
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert K. Boggess                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76665              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Bahr dbahr@bemidjistate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ravichandran Kalyanaraman  (Principal Investigator former)
              Julie E. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald K. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bemidji State University
	      
	      Bemidji, MN  56601    218/755-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) While lasers (helium-neon, nitrogen, and dye lasers) have been
              used in undergraduate pedagogy to conduct first-generation laser experiments,
              the availability of Nd:YAG lasers, with high pulse energy and superior beam
              quality, have paved the way for second-generation laser experiments. The
              departments of chemistry and physics are taking the vital step of incorporating
              second generation laser experiments into the laboratory curriculum by using
              Nd:YAG lasers. Six advanced laser experiments are being introduced initially as
              research projects and later, as regular experiments, into the laboratory
              courses (physical, organic and inorganic chemistry and optics). These
              experiments are  adapted from both recent educational sources (e.g. Journal of
              Chemical Education) and from the research literature.  The integrated use of
              Nd:YAG, YAG pumped dye lasers and a FTIR spectrometer facilitates a wide range
              of advanced experiments for undergraduates, covering the areas of gas-phase,
              non-linear, and low-temperature spectroscopy. The experiments include
              stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) of hydrogen, deuterium, nitrogen and oxygen;
              coherent anti-Stokes Raman (CARS) scattering of air; time-resolved
              laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) of OH radicals in flame; low-temperature
              matrix assisted photolysis (LTMAP) of organometallics; photoreduction of
              benzophenone; and conventional Raman (CRS) and IR spectroscopy of organic
              molecules. Most of them use a computer interface, a boxcar averager and a 
              pre-amplifier along with a monochromator and a photomultiplier tube to scan,
              collect and analyze the spectral data. This exposes students to advanced lasers
              and to computer-based data acquisition techniques in a non-black box learning
              environment. Collectively, these experiments upgrade the optics laboratory
              (physics) and enhance the curriculum in physical, organic, and inorganic
              chemistry and optics courses.
