Title       : Integration of Environmental Chemistry and Good Laboratory Practices Into
               Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9952730

Award Number: 9952730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53204              (Estimated)
Investigator: Omowunmi A. Sadik osadik@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
This project makes use of an atomic absorption spectrophotometer
              and an accelerated solvent extraction system  to improve the delivery of course
              content and integrate environmental chemistry and Good Laboratory Practices
              (GLP) into the curriculum.  Experiments from standard literature and GLPs which
              reflect industry-based standards are being adapted for use in the curriculum. 
              Connections between chemistry principles and real-life problem-solving skills
              are presented early in the training process.  Experiments are designed to
              introduce students to essential components of real-world analysis including
              regulatory requirements, quality assurance, and information management.  Three
              major areas are targeted, including sophomore level quantitative analysis,
              upper-level instrumental analysis, and undergraduate research experience. 
              Typical laboratory exercise involves sample collection and handling, in line
              with EPA's GLP principles.  The immediate impact includes (i) improved
              classroom learning resulting from experiences which show the relevance of
              science to real life, (ii) exposure of students to GLP elements such as quality
              assurance and statistical analysis, (iii) increased availability and use of
              high quality analytical instrumentation.    Evaluation plans include use of an
              external evaluator, survey instruments to assess both the cognitive and
              affective aspects of student learning, exam performance, informal discussions
              with students, as well as feedback from instructors.  Dissemination plans
              involve the development of laboratory manuals and publication of key results of
              the GLP-based environmental analysis in technical journals. 
