Title       : DSP-based, Software-Reconfigurable Laboratory to Nationally Revitalize Electric
               Drives and Power Electronics Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a9952704

Award Number: 9952704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276292             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ned Mohan mohan@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Engineering - Electrical (55)

Electric drives and power electronics are
              enabling technologies for important applications such as robotics and automated
              factories. The energy conservation is estimated to save an equivalent of the
              energy consumed by the state of New York, electric and hybrid-electric vehicles
              that will reshape the trillion dollar/year automotive industry, the emerging
              micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) and vital space and defense
              applications. This project is making a significant step towards reversing the
              national trend of falling enrollments in related course.

The project is
              developing an innovative curricula for Electric Drives(machines) and Power
              Electronics courses. The courses are based on the use of the Digital Signal
              Processing (DSP) software for control of various electric machines and drives.
              Specifically, laboratory manuals for both instructors and students are being
              developed. This DSP-based laboratory uses rapid prototyping tool and is
              providing students with real-world experiences. Real examples from industry are
              used to teach students the basic concepts of energy conversion. A natural
              extension of this effort is digital control of power electronics experiments,
              which meshes well with the trend towards digital control in industry, thus
              making students better prepared. 

The project has 9 test-sites, Auburn
              University, Tuskegee University, Drexel University, Arizona State University,
              Howard University, Texas Tech University, Oregon State University, University
              of Missiouri-Rolla, and Penn State University, which will also serve as the
              regional distribution centers. In addition, the laboratory manuals will be
              disseminated by the use of the internet allowing for exchange of innovative
              ideas and suggestions for improvement.

