Title       : Active Learning in Undergraduate Education Using the Iowa Electronic Markets
               (iem)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9952362

Award Number: 9952362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $459798             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Forsythe robert-forsythe@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joyce E. Berg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Gruca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Rietz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Economics (82) The development of learning environments to facilitate
              undergraduate education in economics and political science is important because
              economics and politics impact citizens' lives dramatically but many students
              have little understanding of them. Teaching economics effectively has proven
              difficult because economic science rests on a framework of mathematical
              equations that many students find quite abstract. This project is developing,
              testing and implementing curricular materials to make use of the successfully
              developed Iowa Electronic Market technology (IEM) in a range of undergraduate
              courses in economics (and political science). Most existing courses that study
              the function of markets for trading financial assets, goods, services, and
              opinions will, in principle, benefit from these materials. The project is
              developing complete, internet-accessible instructional materials, which will
              adapt to a wide range of learning approaches including distance and web-based
              education. Their common theme is to use the IEM as a laboratory exercise,
              allowing active learning in much the same way laboratories facilitate learning
              in other sciences. This helps overcome the abstract nature of economics while
              giving students incentives to learn technical concepts. During this project,
              over 60 faculty from more than 30 HBCUs, HSIs and rural community colleges are
              learning to use the IEM with their specific student populations and learning
              environments. Materials are introducing students to the Internet (through IEM
              trading) and encouraging students to use it as an information source to make
              more informed economic decisions. Thus, this project addresses all four themes
              of the Division of Undergraduate Education: teacher preparation, diversity,
              faculty development and the integration of technology into the classroom.
              



