Title       : The Foundation Series Modules in Materials Science and Engineering: Intergrated
               Science, Math, and Engineering Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9952609

Award Number: 9952609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Vanasupa   (Principal Investigator current)
              Blair London  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Heather S. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey E. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lanny V. Griffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Eng-Material Scie   (57)  A proof of concept project is completing, implementing
              and assessing the first of a series of Foundation Modules in Materials Science
              and Engineering. The Foundation Series is envisioned as a set of portable and
              complete laboratory modules structured upon a paradigm that incorporates
              several learning theories and embraces an interdisciplinary spirit. The
              objectives are to address the need for clear bridges between math, science and
              technology in the engineering curriculum and to provide a means of faculty
              development primarily at community colleges. As a result, the modules are
              designed to allow the engineering student to experience the synergy of science,
              math and engineering technology in a laboratory setting. Recent findings in
              higher-education educational research are used in the module design to develop
              the ability to work in a team and to communicate results as well as to reach
              students of diverse learning styles.  The targeted audience is sophomore
              engineering majors at community colleges and institutions without Materials
              Science and Engineering programs. The Foundation Series Team includes faculty
              from Mathematics, Engineering, and Materials Science and Engineering from a
              4-year and a 2-year institution. During the proof of concept phase, one
              complete laboratory module that includes the learning objectives and
              accompanying educational materials is being produced. The effectiveness of the
              prototype Foundation Series module ("Corrosion") are being evaluated against
              seven other "traditional" experiments by over 200 sophomore engineering
              students at Cal Poly (a 4-year institution) and Cuesta Community College (a
              2-year institution). Development of new laboratory modules based upon the
              Foundation Series paradigm is planned for follow-on proposals.



