Title       : Dinosaur Paleocology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9952247

Award Number: 9952247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Wolosz woloszth@splava.cc.plattsburgh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Plattsburgh
	      
	      Plattsburgh, NY  12901    518/564-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) This project develops applied, interdisciplinary laboratory
              clusters exploring questions for non-science majors emphasizing scientific
              methodology in geology, biology and physics.  The clusters include the creation
              and testing of both observational and experimental models, multiple approaches
              to the testing of models, examination of assumptions inherent in some models,
              use of basic statistics, Internet research, and experimental design. Teamwork
              and discussion among students occurs with writing a group report and a group
              presentation of results.  Project development includes two laboratory clusters
              for the development of a Dinosaur Paleoecology Laboratory Manual.  Cluster 1:
              Dinosaur Weight Estimates, allows students to make weight estimates through
              volume estimation, calculation of bone cross-sectional area, and static bone
              fracture strength.  Students evaluate the procedures used to determine weight
              of various dinosaurs and the variables, which control the accuracy of
              estimates.  These evaluations and estimations compare and test against the
              measurements of live animals, examine data from literature, compute linear
              regression for predictive purposes, and test actual fracture strengths. 
              Cluster 2, How Fast Did They Run, illustrates two approaches to the same
              problem by allowing students to experiment with estimating speed from a) stride
              length, and b) dynamic bone fracture strength.  The two clusters exemplify the
              interconnectedness of the weight and running speed questions through the
              evaluation of bone fracture strength in both clusters. Assessment of the
              clusters is based on student performance and laboratory experience.  The
              students' performance assessment procedures for evaluation of the resulting
              clusters focus on three aspects of the their performance: 1) an individual
              laboratory notebook, 2) a collaborative group report, and 3) a collaborative
              group presentation and distribution plan for identification of potential test
              sites.  Assessment of the on-campus laboratory experience is based on feedback
              in the laboratory and biweekly critical thinking exercises, and a comparison of
              two student populations taking the introductory Dinosaur Lecture class and
              their understanding of scientific methodology between one group taking the
              optional laboratory exercises and the other group not taking the optional
              laboratory exercises.  Faculty at institutions currently teaching introductory
              Dinosaur Lecture courses have access to the exercises and will are involved in
              the assessment. 
