Title       : Introducing FT-NMR In The Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9952420

Award Number: 9952420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25687              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Roll rolld@roberts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Roberts Wesleyan College
	      2301 Westside Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146241933    716/594-9471

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
Fourier transform nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
              (FT-NMR) is a powerful instrumental method that chemists and biochemists now
              use routinely for elucidating the structures of various small and large
              macromolecules.  This technique is not always adequately addressed in small
              colleges because of the expensive instrumentation required.  Traditional
              undergraduate textbooks have been slow to introduce this topic into the
              sophomore level organic chemistry course.  In order to provide students with a
              more adequate background and understanding of FT-NMR, the following objectives
              have been identified for this proposal:  (1) Introduce FT-NMR theory and offer
              hands-on instrumental analysis to students in the courses of sophomore organic
              chemistry, first semester biochemistry laboratory, instrumental analysis
              laboratory, and forensic science laboratory.  (2) Introduce FT-NMR concepts to
              talented high school students in a two-week summer lecture and lab-minicourse.
              (3) Increase the interest and enthusiasm of students for FT-NMR as a valuable
              tool for structure analysis.  To help meet these objectives the college has
              purchased an FT-NMR conversion package which provides a low-cost alternative
              FT-NMR unit in the laboratory and utilizes the magnet for an already owned
              Varian EM-390 NMR system.  This unit does not require an expensive maintenance
              contract or the ongoing cost of liquid helium and liquid nitrogen to maintain a
              supercooled magnet.  Both students and faculty are able to obtain their own
              spectra with a minimum amount of time and training.  One-step experimental
              setup guides allow the FT-NMR system to be up and running in a short period of
              time.  A variety of laboratory experiments and applications from literature are
              being adapted and introduced into the above courses.  As a result, students are
              able to understand the basic theory of FT-NMR, to collect and process their own
              spectra, and to interpret the spectra, thereby identifying the partial or
              complete structure of a given organic molecule.
