Title       : Educating Teaching Assistants in New Models for Teaching and Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a9952376

Award Number: 9952376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelica M. Stacy stacy@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)  During the 1990s, NSF funded five chemistry initiatives as major
              efforts to improve undergraduate chemistry education by using new pedagogical
              strategies for increasing student engagement in their own learning processes. 
              Evaluations done by the ModularChem Consortium and the ChemLinks coalition
              showed learning gains across institutions for students using the new materials.
               In small class settings, students also reported significantly greater
              enjoyment of the course as well as the feeling that the course met their needs
              better than the traditional counterparts, attitudes not shared by the majority
              of students in large class settings.  However, it is becoming increasingly
              clear that in order for the chemistry reform efforts to succeed, they must be
              successful in large "lecture" classes.  Even when faculty are well versed in
              new models for teaching and learning and are committed to the shift from a
              teacher-centered environment to a student-center environment, the effort may
              not succeed because of the deeply socialized, conservative views of science
              teaching and learning held by the Teaching Assistants.  Systemic reform efforts
              in institutions with large lecture classes may depend upon the extent to which
              Teaching Assistants understand and see the usefulness of new models of teaching
              and learning.  Since large universities are also the source for significant
              numbers of the future chemistry faculty, the ultimate success of reform efforts
              may well depend upon the education of Teaching Assistants.  Providing Teaching
              Assistants with the experiences and tools that they need to understand,
              support, and contribute to reform efforts is the primary purpose of this
              project. These experiences and tools are included in three Handbooks as
              follows: 1) Training Handbook for instructors who train Teaching Assistants
              prior to the beginning of a course. This handbook contains detailed
              descriptions of how to teach 2-hour sessions on various topics about teaching
              and learning using inquiry-based methods. 2) Pedagogy Handbook for instructors
              to use during the term to provide continued support to Teaching Assistants so
              that they may gain skill in new models for teaching and learning. This Handbook
              contains 30-minute activities that address issues in pedagogy that arise during
              the semester.  3) Chemistry Concepts Handbook for Teaching Assistants to use as
              they discuss various concepts in chemistry with their students. This Handbook
              contains discussion worksheets for recitation sessions that are aimed at
              helping students confront their misconceptions and providing evidence to help
              them modify their ideas. Examples of ideas that students hold and how to
              discuss these ideas productively with students is being provided.  All
              materials are being tested at a variety of institutional types, and refined to
              ensure their effectiveness for diverse Teaching Assistant populations. At
              present this includes the University of New Mexico, which is designated as both
              a Carnegie I Research Institution and a Minority/ Hispanic-Service Institution,
              and New Mexico State University with its coalition partners, Eastern New Mexico
              University and Northern Arizona University.  The impact of these materials is
              being evaluated through written assessments, focus groups, and comparisons of
              undergraduate student performance. The materials are being broadly disseminated
              by presentations at professional meetings, by presentations at workshops
              sponsored by Chemistry Connections, and on the World Wide Web.  We are working
              with a publisher to promote distribution of these materials to accompany
              textbooks and modules.

