Title       : Comlabgames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9952280

Award Number: 9952280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393015             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Miller ramiller@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Ochs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Holt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Van Huyck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vesna Prasnikar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Varadarajan V. Chari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Economics (82) This project is developing new educational software for running
              classroom experiments in courses offered within undergraduate social science
              programs, and propagating the use of internet-mediated experimental games as a
              teaching aid. The project software has three advantages over existing software
              designed for classroom experiments with human subjects: it is more reliable and
              flexible, and is easily mounted on a variety of platforms with minimal fuss and
              effort; with global access to internet connections, it is more portable;
              finally, many kinds of games are included and several representations of each
              game will be released, making this software much more general than the
              relatively specific applications now available. These advantages are opening up
              new opportunities for using experimental methods in teaching, and instructors
              are adopting this software in undergraduate courses taught throughout the
              world. The core of the software consists of five modules, each of which is
              based around a family of games. A pilot project has produced the first versions
              of the first two modules, which are available for public use at the website
              http://www.cmu.edu/comlabgames/. The project is developing a piece of software
              called a session organizer, which allows the moderator to program the agenda of
              games for the class, and display the outcomes for the purposes of classroom
              discussion and student evaluation. The project is designing the modules,
              programming the software for them, writing instructions to accompany the
              programs, acquiring experience using the modules in a variety of experimental
              settings, and revising the modules on the basis of this experience, as well as
              the experience of instructors at other academic institutions who use the
              modules in their own classes.




