Title       : An Interdisciplinary Project-Based Laboratory Curriculum in Chemistry Based on
               Ion Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1999   
File        : a9952797

Award Number: 9952797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64909              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bert E. Holmes bholmes@unca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra L. Van Engelen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Asheville
	      One University Heights
	      Asheville, NC  288048503    828/251-6470

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry  (12)
This project is developing an interdisciplinary, multi-week,
              project-based, cooperative-learning laboratory program in freshman chemistry
              and in two analytical chemistry courses. This project combines the disciplines
              of biology, environmental science and chemistry in investigating the area of
              phytoremediation or the use of hyperaccumulators, plants capable of
              accumulating metal ions to reduce levels of metal in soils.  Investigations
              outlined in journals such as Science, J. Environ. Qual., and J. Geochem.
              Explor. are being adapted for use in this project.  An objective is to guide
              the students away from simply memorizing scientific concepts and toward guided
              scientific inquiry with an emphasis on interdisciplinary work. Students  (a)
              learn experimental techniques, (b) learn concepts required to understand the
              problem they choose to investigate, (c) select the "problem" to investigate,
              (d) design the experimental methods, (e) conduct the data collection, (f)
              analyze the results and (g) communicate their findings to their peers in a
              seminar format. By working to solve open-ended problems that are of interest to
              them and are interdisciplinary in nature, students learn to think critically
              and become better problem solvers, and the learning process becomes more
              exciting and relevant. Early exposure to interdisciplinary problem solving
              encourages students to enthusiastically remain in science and to have
              successful undergraduate research experiences. While studies have shown that
              project-based, cooperative learning increases achievement for students of all
              ability levels from diverse academic backgrounds, this type of learning is
              shown to be particularly beneficial to female, minority, or handicapped
              students. The major instrument that is essential for the development of this
              project-based curriculum is a dual-channel ion chromatography system suitable
              for determining anions and Group I and 11 cations with electrochemical
              detection, or transition metal cations and organic compounds with absorption
              detection.



