Title       : Development of Inquiry-Based Human Physiology Laboratories Using Computerized
               Data Acquisition Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9952386

Award Number: 9952386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43657              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan C. LePere slepere@cerritos.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chester L. Harbut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cerritos College
	      11110 E Alondra Blvd
	      Norwalk, CA  906506203    213/860-2451

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
The development of new guided inquiry-based lab
              activities which utilize computerized data acquisition instrumentation is
              providing students with the opportunity to become more involved in the process
              of science and perform computer-assisted analysis of data. The activities being
              provided by this project are an adaptation of innovative teaching strategies
              and activities from several institutions, most notably CSU Fullerton, Hampshire
              College and Butler University. Students are being introduced to basic
              physiological experimental procedures using the requested equipment.
              Collaborative student groups are then being presented with experimental
              questions to which they must discover the answers. With guidance from the
              instructor, student groups are forming a testable hypothesis, designing the
              experiment and analyzing the data. These activities are building the necessary
              skills for students in the advanced physiology labs to conduct independent
              projects. Written lab reports and group presentations, are incorporated into
              the labs. This new approach is promoting the development of critical and
              analytical thinking, increasing student comprehension of physiological
              concepts, and introducing students to the usefulness of computers as biological
              and analytical tools.  Expected outcomes include: summative evaluations to
              measure student learning in the targeted courses; the development of a web page
              to disseminate the developed activities and procedures; and a workshop to
              promote inquiry-based learning in two year colleges. The project is impacting
              approximately 350 students each year and emphasizes two DUE themes: diversity
              and integration of technology to improve learning.


