Title       : Improving Undergraduate Power Engineering Education: A System-Level Approach to
               Teaching Electromechanical Energy Conversion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1999  
File        : a9952517

Award Number: 9952517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Hietpas steven_hietpas@sdstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Ropp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55)

	South Dakota State University improves and
              enhances its program in electromechanical energy conversion (EMEC) by adopting
              a systems-level approach in which electric power generation, power control and
              conditioning, and end uses of electric power are integrated.  The adoption of
              this approach recognizes the fundamental shift of power technology toward power
              electronics, distributed generation, and embedded control.  The system-level
              approach is implemented in a new 2000 ft sq. energy and power electronics
              laboratory and classroom that is part of a new 20,000 ft sq.  engineering
              building addition. The new laboratory and classroom are featuring a design that
              centers around a Power Workstation Bench (PWB) at which students may design and
              experiment with power electronics and distributed generation technologies, as
              well as new, modern electric machines. The two undergraduate "electric
              machines" courses are being converted into "EMEC systems" courses. They are
              being restructured using a system-level approach in which power generation,
              power processing, and end-use equipment is being integrated. Also, a
              "Just-in-time" strategy that has successfully been developed for "First Course
              on Electric Drives" is being used. Finally, educational technologies is being
              extensively used throughout the course. Students are using computer-assisted
              design software to guide their experimentation. Flux2D software is being used
              to create animated flux distribution within the electric
              machines.

Additional enhancements are being realized through adaptation and
              implementation of materials from the University of Minnesota-NSF First Course
              on Electric Drives Project and animation tools developed under the
              NSF-Greensfield Project.  The new laboratory not only provides a more relevant
              and multidisciplinary education in electric power engineering, but also
              stimulates renewed student interest in this area during a time in which power
              engineers are in short supply.
