Title       : Use of HPLC Methods for Problem-Based Laboratories in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2000   
File        : a9952342

Award Number: 9952342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47606              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Glover kglover@keller.clarke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diana F. Malone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Caffery  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Woolfrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarke College
	      1550 Clarke Drive
	      Dubuque, IA  520013198    563/588-6300

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)  This project is part of an ongoing plan to add new technology
              and to integrate its use into the chemistry curriculum in a manner that
              enhances critical thinking and problem solving skills. Past experience in
              introducing analytical instrumentation in the first and second year courses
              along with the use of "real world" applications has proven to be a valuable
              tool for keeping students interested in chemistry.  We are integrating the use
              of two high-pressure liquid chromatograph systems (HPLC) into the chemistry
              program by adapting some of the experiments and pedagogical methods developed
              by previous NSF grantees and recommended by an NSF Workshop on Analytical
              Chemistry, as well as applications described by the manufacturer of the HPLC
              instruments.  Four department faculty members are participating in the project
              over a three-year period of development, integration and evaluation.  The
              instruments are being used at all curricular levels from introductory courses
              to senior research projects.

As a result of this project we expect our
              students to gain an understanding of the scientific approach to analysis using
              one of the most common separation tools available. They are gaining competence
              in applying scientific concepts and principles while using modern analytical
              instruments. Students work as team members. They gain experience in
              collaboration with others as they devise procedures to explore interesting
              examples in environmental science, organic chemistry and biochemistry.

