Title       : A Virtual Classroom Experiment for Teaching the Economic Principles of
               Engineering Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a9952750

Award Number: 9952750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Sullivan bills@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janis P. Terpenny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
As decision-makers, engineers must be knowledgeable
              and competent in multiple aspects of design. Engineering is more than a problem
              solving activity focusing on simply the expected performance of designed
              artifacts. Consideration must also be given to the economic consequences of
              design decisions on life-cycle issues. A major challenge to undergraduate
              engineering education is to increase student competency in the economic
              elements that are such a critical part of the engineering process. To succeed,
              the fundamentals of economics needs to be introduced early and reinforced
              throughout the undergraduate program.
The objective of this project is to
              conduct an experiment to determine whether a virtual classroom environment is
              improving proficiency in the economic principles of engineering design. As
              envisioned, the virtual classroom is providing the basic introduction to
              economics for engineers. Also, it serve as a continuing resource for
              undergraduates and for practicing professionals. Farther reaching, this
              research is an integral part of a longer-term and broader vision to build an
              undergraduate program for selected core courses in the engineering curriculum.
              It is anticipated that through computer-based learning methods utilized at the
              undergraduate level, higher quality core engineering courses can be offered to
              more students in a very cost-effective manner.
This project is a collaborative
              effort. At the conclusion of this research, an electronic version of the course
              will be made available via the Internet and will include modularized course
              notes, software, materials for testing/assessment, and industrial case studies.
              The Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE) themes directly addressed by this
              research include faculty development, diversity, and integration of technology
              in education.




 
