Title       : Solving the Distance Learning Problem Through "Super-Teaching"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9952819

Award Number: 9952819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105619             (Estimated)
Investigator: Selmer C. Bringsjord selmer@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald W. Noel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) Distance learning is exploding in popularity. But is such
              learning "as good as" traditional learning? How, exactly, is it different than
              traditional learning? And is it possible that intensely interactive courses
              (via, e.g., such pedagogical techniques as the Socratic method and hands-on
              robotics) can be successfully rendered in the distance mode? There are still no
              answers to this important question. One reason is that much research on this
              subject has been flawed in certain specific ways -- ways recently summarized in
              "What's the Difference? A Review of Contemporary Research on the Effectiveness
              of Distance Learning in Higher Education (Institute for Higher Education Policy
              for the American Federation of Teachers and the National Education Association,
              1999). This project is testing the feasibility of a solution that comes in (at
              least) two parts: (1) The first part is to harness a quartet of advanced
              information technologies -- "2D" virtual reality, avatars, artificial agents,
              and high-bandwidth networks -- to turn the tables on the problem by enabling
              what we call "super-teaching," which allows distance education to have the
              tried-and-true distinguishing features of quality classroom education. The
              "human factor" is absent in today's distance education (or at least severely
              minimized). Super-teaching is devoted to giving distance learning the same
              intimate feel as traditional face-to-face instruction. (2) Carry out three
              experiments, one for each of three courses (1. Introduction to Logic; 2
              Philosophy of Artificial Intelligence; 3 Introduction to Cognitive Robotics).
              Each experiment is a controlled one covering a substantial part of each course.
              (Subjects are being assigned on the basis of aptitude and skill in the relevant
              domains, and the PIs are examining both performance on post-tests and
              satisfaction (as expressed in surveys).) While these three courses share an
              intellectual foundation (logic and computation), they are nonetheless
              fundamentally different in promising ways. The first course is a
              large-enrollment course that does not put a premium on face-to-face interaction
              between student and instructor; and the course seeks to cultivate a very
              specific skill: proof construction. The second course, Philosophy of AI, is a
              traditional philosophy course centered around the Socratic method; this course
              is perhaps as interactive as a course can get. The emphasis in this course is
              on cogent argumentation in clear English. The third course is also interactive,
              but in a different way: students and instructor work together around physical
              objects (sensors, effectors, logic controllers, etc.). The objective is to
              determine whether or not first-rate distance learning can take place for
              courses as intensely interactive as the second and third. We hypothesize that
              our results will show super-teaching to be nearly as effective as intensely
              interactive face-to-face instruction on our campus. The final part of the
              solution would involve generalizing and sharing super-teaching with others in
              the United States, but a plan for doing so would be part of a full scale
              development effort that lies in the future.
