Title       : Interactive Multimedia Labware for Civil Engineering Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9952577

Award Number: 9952577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206079             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Craddock craddock@ce.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Riley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lizette R. Chevalier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chandrasekhar Vallath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Civil (54)This project is creating interactive multimedia
              laboratory manuals for a Strength of Materials course and for an Introduction
              to Environmental Engineering course. The Strength of Materials Laboratory is
              covering tension, compression, torsion and flexure; the Environmental
              Engineering Laboratory covers biochemical oxygen demand, solids measurement,
              temperature and dissolved oxygen profiles, and deep bed filter efficiency. The
              pedagogy promoted by the approach is to engage students in active learning and
              to accommodate various learning styles. The labware is serving a number of
              purposes: (1) to act as a virtual laboratory primer prior to performing an
              actual laboratory (for those institutions who have the necessary equipment);
              (2) to act as an instruction tool for data reduction and synthesis; (3) to act
              as a primer in developing laboratory reports; (4) to provide additional data
              from databases of previous experiments to enhance their laboratory experience;
              and (5) to provide a virtual experience in all of the above for those
              institutions lacking the necessary laboratory equipment. The labware is
              combining text, illustrations, photographs, video-clips, sound, simulations,
              animations, hypertext descriptions, and hot-links to the Internet. The final
              product will serve as a national model for a diverse range of institutions.
