Title       : Undergraduate Environmental Technology Instrumentation Project: Analyzing the
               Cape Cod Aquifer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1999   
File        : a9952649

Award Number: 9952649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William C. Beston                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15275              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine M. Etter cetter@capecod.mass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas Bill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cape Cod Cmty College
	      Route 132
	      West Barnstable, MA  02668    617/362-2131

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Earth Systems Science (40)
This project uses the hydrologic boundaries of Cape
              Cod to adapt and implement the strategies and lessons learned from the NSF ILI
              project at Truckee Meadows Community College in which a Groundwater Simulator
              III (GSIII) was a key element.  The students are adapting the GSIII to monitor
              the sensitivities associated with the Cape's sole source aquifer now threatened
              by the pollution discovered at the Massachusetts Military Reservation, (MMR), a
              SuperFund site located on Cape Cod.  Cape Cod Community College and two
              neighboring Massachusetts institutions have developed an education program
              which includes degree options, certificate programs and internships to prepare
              students for jobs at the MMR and other Cape locations. The GSIII gives small
              teams of students a rigorous, hands-on experience in science related to the
              impact of the Superfund site on the Cape's aquifer.
Science, math and
              technology concepts have been introduced by examining current issues for which
              students have some personal context as recommended in the NSF publication,
              Shaping the Future, New Expectations for Undergraduate Education in Science,
              Mathematics, Engineering and Technology. The equipment implemented enhances the
              laboratory experience for students in three courses at CCCC and complements the
              instrumentation acquired through a 1997 NSF ILI grant.  The plan to have small
              teams of students using the GSIII enables them to have frequent experience with
              active learning and peer group collaboration in the laboratory.  This method
              has been strongly encouraged by the Massachusetts Department of Education to
              improve students' communication and cognitive skills. The addition of the Ion
              Chromatograph (IC) allows upper level students to train on three different
              pieces of state-of- the-art instrumentation, including the Spec 20 and UV/VIS
              and compare the results from these different instruments.  The implementation
              of EPA Method 300 for the IC exposes students to relevant and accepted
              workplace practices.  Most laboratories on Cape Cod use the IC for groundwater
              and other analysis.  These powerful hands-on instrumentation experiences
              stimulate interest among current and prospective students and generate
              increased enrollment. The program has gained a reputation for state-of-the-art
              instrumentation training and problem solving techniques.  Assessment of student
              response and success with these exercises is being carefully measured. 
              Questionnaires assess how well the students have been prepared.  Advisory
              committee members review the relevance of the laboratory exercises and teaching
              techniques from the industry point of view.  Evaluation  activities follow the
              implementation guidelines described in the publication Executive Guide:
              Effectively Implementing the Government Performance and Results Act. 
              Dissemination occurs within the network of Massachusetts community colleges and
              nationally through the Partners in Environmental Technology Education (PETE)
              conferences, publications and Internet database.   
