Title       : Instrumentation to Enhance an Investigative Approach to Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9952552

Award Number: 9952552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Weidenhamer jweiden@ashland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian K. Mohney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              T.Michelle Jones-Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ashland College
	      401 College Avenue
	      Ashland, OH  448053702    419/289-4142

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) This project involves the acquisition of instrumentation to
              enhance the ability to support a hands-on, investigative approach in the
              laboratory: a high performance liquid chromatograph with diode array detector
              (HPLC-DAD), a gas chromatograph with flame ionization and thermal conductivity
              detectors (GC-FID/TCD), a flame/graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometer
              (AA), and a spectrofluorometer. Specific objectives include increased
              involvement of undergraduates in research, extension of an investigative
              approach to Physical Chemistry and Biochemistry, support of a broader array of
              investigative projects in other courses, and the extension of this
              investigative approach to new courses for non-majors which are being developed 
              as part of a new Core Curriculum . This equipment is supporting laboratory
              experiments in several courses for science majors and for undergraduate
              research projects. This includes inquiry-based laboratory projects beginning in
              the freshman year. In addition, the equipment is being used for inquiry-based
              laboratory projects in new courses for non-majors (The Impact of Lead on Human
              Society; Nicotine and Addiction). These courses are intensive and
              problem-focused rather than broad surveys of scientific knowledge. The
              restricted focus and small class sizes are allowing the use of this
              instrumentation in non-majors laboratories.  The approach and many of the
              experiments are drawn from NSF supported Systemic Initiatives including
              ModularCHEM and the ChemLinks coalition.  Additional experiments to be adapted
              are drawn from traditional pedagogical literature (J. Chem. Educ.) and from
              research articles.

