Title       : Development of Laboratory and Field Experience Based Course in Asphalt
               Technology for Civil Engineering Undergraduate Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9952620

Award Number: 9952620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31479              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajib B. Mallick rajib@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Civil (54)Project Summary

In order to implement the Superpave
              asphalt mixture design system properly, and realize its full benefit through
              improved performance of pavements, it must be ensured that mix production,
              laydown and compaction in field projects are controlled to maintain compliance
              with Superpave specification. However, results of recent research regarding
              improved mix design systems and quality control techniques have remained
              largely unknown to undergraduate students who will be building and maintaining
              the pavements in near future. At present, there is a severe lack of opportunity
              for the undergraduate students to gain field experience and learn application
              of statistical concepts in quality control in asphalt technology. The
              objectives of this project are to provide the undergraduate students tools for
              field experience in asphalt pavement construction, including quality control
              techniques, and to teach the concepts of statistical quality control through
              analysis of real time quality control test data. A thorough knowledge of all
              aspects of asphalt mix design and construction, and an experience of using real
              time data for statistical quality control is needed to understand the link
              between design and construction, and identify potential problems during
              production, construction, and life of the pavement. The equipment requested
              will be used with the existing equipment to provide an all around well-balanced
              coursework, which integrates design, production, laydown and compaction of
              asphalt mixtures. Three pieces of equipment will be used by the students: the
              pavement quality indicator for measuring in-place density during construction,
              the rapid triaxial device for evaluating mixes during production, and portable
              computers with statistical software for analyzing real time quality control
              data. The undergraduate students will use the in-place measurements to gain
              experience in operation of equipment, understand techniques of proper
              interpretation of test results and making decisions based on test results.

