Title       : Improvement of Undergraduate Laboratory Experiences with UV-Vis
               Spectrophotometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9952641

Award Number: 9952641
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10511              (Estimated)
Investigator: Massimo D. Bezoari bezoari@huntingdon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randy Arnold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen K. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Huntingdon College
	      1500 East Fairview
	      Montgomery, AL  361062114    205/265-0511

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)  The Department of Chemistry is augmenting the current
              one-semester lecture-only Biochemistry course to a two-semester course with
              laboratories in both semesters. The long-term goal is to develop a Biochemistry
              major at the College.  Experiments from the educational literature are being
              extended and modified in order to introduce students to spectroscopic analysis
              in the basic physical science core courses.  A UV-Vis spectrophotometer is
              being used in experiments relating to nucleic acid structure analysis, protein
              analysis, and kinetics. The project is strengthening the chemistry curriculum
              by adding to the use of modern technology in lecture and laboratory courses for
              science and non-science majors. Students are engaged in learning about
              molecular structure by conducting analyses relating to electronic transitions
              and molecular orbitals, and studying the effects of structural features on
              these analyses. Hands-on use of the instrument begins in the Organic laboratory
              with the characterization of chlorophylls extracted from plants. Students study
              environmental and biochemical applications, such as thermal denaturation of
              DNA, and multicomponent analysis in the Analytical/Environmental Chemistry
              course. Novel forensic science applications are being developed. The instrument
              is supporting the growing interest of our students in undergraduate research
              projects, establishing further connections in learning how science is done and
              making them better prepared for graduate school and industrial employment in
              chemistry. The project will influence an outside audience with dissemination of
              project results through presentations, publications in international chemistry
              research and chemistry education journals, the World-Wide Web, and interactions
              with educators at scientific meetings. The success of the project will be
              determined by the establishment of the two-semester Biochemistry course with
              laboratories, student course evaluations, the number of majors taking
              undergraduate research projects, formal presentations, publications, and
              surveys.






PROJECT DATA FORM AND PROJECT SUMMARY

The Department
              of Chemistry plans to augment the current one-semester lecture-only
              Biochemistry course to a two-semester course with labs in both semesters. The
              long-term goal is to develop a Biochemistry major at the College. The
              acquisition of a UV-Vis spectrophotometer will permit inclusion of experiments
              relating to nucleic acid structure analysis, protein analysis, and kinetics.
              The project will strengthen the chemistry curriculum by adding to the use of
              modem technology in lecture and laboratory courses for science and non-science
              majors. Students will be engaged in learning about molecular structure by
              conducting analyses relating to electronic transitions and molecular orbitals,
              and studying the effects of structural features on these analyses. Hands-on use
              of the instrument will begin in the Organic laboratory with the
              characterization of chlorophylls extracted from plants. Students will study
              environmental and biochemical applications, such as thermal denaturation of
              DNA, and multicomponent analysis in the Analytical/Environmental Chemistry
              course. Novel forensic science applications will be developed. The instrument
              will increase the growing interest of our students in undergraduate research
              projects, establishing further connections in learning how science is done and
              making them better prepared for graduate school and industrial employment in
              chemistry. The project will influence an outside audience with dissemination of
              project results through presentations, publications in international chemistry
              research and chemistry education journals, the World-Wide Web, and interactions
              with educators at scientific meetings. The success of the project will be
              determined by the establishment of the two-semester Biochemistry course with
              laboratories, student course evaluations, the number of majors taking
              undergraduate research projects, formal presentations, publications, and
              surveys.

