Title       : Creating a Faculty Culture of Teaching Reform: Starting with the Freshman
               Biology Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9952610

Award Number: 9952610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49857              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis J. Opheim opheim@quinnipiac.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan Smits  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Borst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald P. Buckley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Martinez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Quinnipiac University
	      Mount Carmel Avenue
	      Hamden, CT  065181908    203/288-5251

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)  In its recent call to arms in Shaping the Future, the
              National Science Foundation articulates the need to strengthen the pedagogical
              quality of introductory courses for all undergraduates by fostering active
              learning experiences, promoting collaborative learning, and increasing the
              inquiry-orientation of science education, facilitating student experience in
              the process of science.  With this in mind, the Department of Biological
              Sciences is adapting the BioQUEST "3 Ps" philosophy and elements of the
              University of Hartford's NSF-funded program to renovate its freshman biology
              experience to reappraise and redesign Quinnipiac's undergraduate biology
              curriculum while promoting learner-centered and inquiry-oriented principles.
              Both lecture and laboratories are undergoing major overhauls regarding content,
              pedagogy, and the integration of advanced educational technology.  The
              laboratory experience is being redesigned to center on problem-based learning,
              with special attention to fostering student-originated research and peer
              persuasion experiences (mini-conferences in which students present their
              research) that force students to grapple with epistemological issues, exposing
              students to the process of science experientially.  Lecture content is being
              revised to focus on an evolution theme, with emphasis on molecular and cellular
              biology, ecology, evolutionary mechanisms, phylogeny, and the history of life. 
              More importantly, the phenomenological approach to the course content
              (description of biological phenomena) is being complemented by inquiry-oriented
              content and learning-centered pedagogies (e.g., problem-based learning
              exercises, case studies, and attention to the history of science to illustrate
              principles of scientific inquiry).  We are also developing educational
              technology learning modules that will assume the role of routine homework
              assignments. These web-based learning environments are interactive to foster
              active learning styles and incorporate powerful assessment tools that provide
              students with real-time feedback and incentive to strive for high proficiency,
              as well as collect diagnostic clues about individual learning needs and enhance
              student engagement with the learning process.  Our core learning principle is
              to intersperse the delivery of content with routine opportunities for students
              to use the new information and to test their understanding.


