Title       : Inquiry-Based Learning in a Multi-Scale Hydro-Mechanical Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1999   
File        : a9952403

Award Number: 9952403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore D. Thiede ted.thiede@murraystate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Cobb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall Crist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott R. Hickman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Murray State University
	      328 Wells Hall
	      Murray, KY  42071    270/762-3537

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering-Mechanical (56)
The most important purpose of a college education
              is to learn how to learn. To produce better scientists and engineers these
              skills need to be integrated into upper level courses and interdisciplinary
              studies. This project is adapting collaborative, inquiry-based learning
              developed at the Biology Department at the University of Portland and the
              Department of Biology and Wildlife at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks. 
              These techniques are being implemented in courses in Engineering Physics and in
              other departments on campus by allowing for exploratory and interdisciplinary
              experimentation using wind and water tunnels, and on a full-scale prototype
              crew shell. The objective is to improve learning in these courses by giving
              students more control in designing experimental activities. It is hoped that as
              a result of this experience students will have a higher degree of
              self-confidence and awareness of their own learning processes. Contemplation,
              questioning, listening, searching the literature, and team participation are
              used to develop the critical thinking skills that will serve students well in
              research and design careers.  This project involves the design of appropriate
              experiments using wind and water tunnels and developing an instrumented crew
              shell in order to reach its objective.  Project teams in the Senior Design
              course are developing innovations to rowing equipment and techniques. Students
              are involved in interdisciplinary groups to study biomechanical aspects.
              Collaborations with the University of Kentucky at Paducah Community College are
              allowing for further wind tunnel studies and project evaluation. Participation
              with women's crew and a "Physics at the Lake" program will promote careers in
              science and technology to women.  In addition, an experimental module is being
              developed by engineering and education majors which focuses on middle or
              secondary school audiences and is introduced in courses for education majors.
