Title       : Remotely Operated Laboratory for Undergraduate Engineering Courses in Control
               and Dynamic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a9952801

Award Number: 9952801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52901              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuri B. Shtessel shtessel@ece.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. D. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R.David Hampton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Frederick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Middleton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Mechanical (56)
This project is developing a remotely operated
              laboratory which allows students to initiate, conduct and conclude control and
              dynamic systems laboratory exercises involving physical hardware.  Using a
              computer interface, they can receive visual and auditory sensory feedback and
              obtain and respond to experimental data, just as they would if they were
              physically present in the laboratory with the equipment.  In this project, the
              student uses facilities which would otherwise be inaccessible for reasons of
              safety, time or environmental constraints, without requiring a laboratory
              monitor or physical access.   Students can also schedule and conduct laboratory
              exercises without requiring a lab monitor or physical access, remotely use
              expensive or unique equipment, and collaborate in real-time with remote
              co-experimenters.  Recent technological advances in networking, real-time
              control, data transfer, and graphical-user-interfacing have made a
              cost-effective remote laboratory possible.  The remotely operated laboratory is
              being developed for "hardware in the loop" control of ten physical domain
              systems.  There are three interdependent and interdisciplinary facilities: a
              Design and Simulation Facility and Basic- and Advanced- "hardware in the loop"
              Facilities.  Laboratory development, methodologies, procedures and a sample
              curriculum are being documented and disseminated.  The educational use of
              feedback laboratory equipment is adapted from several institutions, amongst
              which are the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, SUNY-Buffalo, and
              Tennessee State University.  The use of feedback equipment with MATLAB
              applications is also adapted from several institutions, amongst which are
              Auburn University, Boston University, and City College.
