Title       : Integration of GPS and Seismological Equipment with Inquiry Based Pedagogy for
               Geology and K-12 Preservice Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9952529

Award Number: 9952529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William C. Beston                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35665              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald W. Simila   (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert G. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  91330    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) To enhance undergraduate learning of science inquiry skills
              utilizing field equipment and laboratory exercises and to retain science
              content in geology, we have adapted several NSF-funded physics (SCAMPI) and
              seismology (IRIS, SCEC) curricula into an integrated lecture/laboratory format.
               This project integrates seismic refraction/ reflection, earthquake, and Global
              Positioning System (GPS) equipment with inquiry-based pedagogy into our
              programs for three categories of student population: 1)  geology majors
              (including pre-service secondary students), 2)  non-majors in general
              education, and 3)  pre-service (K-6) students.  The main applications of the
              equipment involve investigations of seismic-wave propagation associated with
              local earthquake recordings and seismic profiling of local faults and geologic
              structures, plate tectonic motions, and topographic and geologic mapping
              exercises. 
The equipment/curriculum objective includes the coordination of
              inquiry-based science instruction for the three categories of student
              populations, with a major emphasis on technical training for our undergraduate
              majors and a renovated science curriculum for the elementary education major. 
              The project results are assessed by a combination of qualitative and
              quantitative methods to evaluate the effect our program has on the student's
              conceptual understanding of geologic principles.  Approximately 400-425
              students per year are involved from introductory utilization of the equipment
              to extensive training for the geotechnical and environmental disciplines
              associated with industry-based employment. 
