Title       : Rigel: A Robotic Observatory for Undergraduate Astronomy Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9952594

Award Number: 9952594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Mutel robert-mutel@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Astronomy (11) This project is developing a prototype robotic observatory
              designed for use in undergraduate astronomy laboratories. The goal is to
              develop an integrated system complete with software and curriculum that can be
              purchased 'turn-key' at reasonable cost for use in undergraduate teaching
              laboratories. Torus Technologies, a manufacturer of research telescopes, is
              participating in the development and is marketing the telescope. The
              educational advantage of this approach is that it allows large numbers of
              students to design and analyze their own astronomical observations of a wide
              variety of celestial objects in a scientifically meaningful manner. This is
              crucial in conveying the excitement and sense of discovery central to all
              scientific research.

The Observatory hardware consists of a 37 cm reflecting
              telescope, imaging camera, filters, and spectrometer housed in a compact
              fiberglass dome with fail-safe closure in case of power failure or weather
              emergency. All hardware is controlled by a central computer that can be
              accessed through Web browser-based software. The data analysis software and
              curriculum descriptions are also largely Web-based, with some native binaries
              built for specific platforms. The software design is optimized for speed, ease
              of use, and compatibility with a variety of operating systems. Curriculum
              materials are based on the existing astronomy laboratory curriculum at the
              University of Iowa, at which the pioneering Automated Telescope Facility has
              been used successfully for over five years.



