Title       : Computer Aided Active Engagement Learning in an Introductory Physics Sequence
               for Secure Science Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1999   
File        : a9952297

Award Number: 9952297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56413              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth George egeorge@wittenberg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Voytas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Dollhopf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wittenberg University
	      PO BOX 720
	      Springfield, OH  455010720    513/327-6231

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics  (13)  This project is developing a new method for teaching introductory
              physics sequences for science majors by employing a process that promotes
              conceptual understanding, integrates theory and experiment more closely, and
              actively involves students in experiencing and building models of real-world
              phenomena. In addition, it is providing science majors with a stronger
              foundation in the skills of computer-aided data acquisition and
              analysis.

The project is providing a coherent, active engagement approach to
              several physics introductory courses, emphasizing guided discovery learning of
              concepts, the connection between real-world phenomena and models, and the use
              of computers as a tool.  Specifically, exemplary experiments involving active
              learning and the use of computer-based tools are being adapted for three
              introductory laboratory courses.  Many of these experiments are based on
              RealTime Physics.  The project is also introducing several digital video
              capture experiments and implementing Interactive Lecture Demonstrations in the
              corresponding lectures to complement the RealTime Physics experiments.  In
              addition, selected computer simulations are being adapted for demonstrations
              and as supplements to laboratory experiments.  RealTime Physics and Interactive
              Lecture Demonstrations have been used in large classes before, but this project
              adapts them to a situation in which lecture and laboratory are quite closely
              connected and small group work and projects are encouraged. 





