Title       : An Inquiry-Based Approach for Non-Majors' Introductory Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9952389

Award Number: 9952389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64163              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura M. Barden-Gabbei LM-Barden@wiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard V. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Illinois Univ
	      900 West Adams Street
	      Macomb, IL  614551396    309/295-1414

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)  As our society has continued to become more
              technologically oriented, the need for college graduates to understand the
              processes of science and to have experience using technological devices has
              become increasingly important.  This project is designed to restructure the
              introductory non-majors biology laboratories at Western Illinois University. 
              We are adapting components of the biology program developed at Oklahoma State
              University, including inquiry-based labs (e.g., labs that incorporate
              hypothesis testing, simulations, modeling, and case studies) and the use of
              pre-lab activities to ensure students are fully prepared for each lab.  This is
              the first of several projects designed to overhaul our introductory biology
              program in order to keep it aligned with current learning theory.  We are
              starting with the non-majors courses because they have the highest enrollments
              and they are taken primarily by women and most students majoring in education. 
              This project will help us better meet the needs of these students.  Our project
              is designed to enhance students' understanding of biological concepts and the
              processes of science and to provide students with experiences appropriate for a
              technological world.  This goal is being accomplished by developing new
              laboratory activities and incorporating use of computer technologies,
              electrophoresis, and other modern biological techniques.  Finally, because
              these courses are taken by most students seeking elementary teacher
              certification, this change is designed to enhance their understanding of the
              types of laboratory experiences supported by the National Science Education
              Standards.  The labs are also designed to serve as a model for future teachers
              as they implement the Standards in their own classrooms.    


