Title       : Integrating Spatial Analysis into an Environmental Studies Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9952417

Award Number: 9952417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21448              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana S. Sinton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michele M. Hluchy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon L. Godshalk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alfred University
	      1 Saxon Drive
	      Alfred, NY  148021205    607/871-2863

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)

This project develops a laboratory and revised
              environmental studies curricula in which spatial perspective and geographic
              analyses are integrated at all levels. It adapts materials from exemplary
              projects at West Chester University and Stockton State College. It provides
              resources at the Alfred University Hydrologic Field Site for students to
              collect, input, and interpret relevant spatial data and develop meaningful
              visual representations of the analyses they perform.

The Environmental
              Studies Program (ENS) offers a multidisciplinary approach to undergraduate
              education, emphasizing experiential learning, problem solving, and technology
              integration in its curriculum.  Incorporating a spatial perspective into the
              Environmental Studies (ENS) major substantially enriches the curriculum because
              spatial visualization skills are positively related to improved learning in
              environmental studies. Adaptations of GIS and GPS materials from other
              institutions are being incorporated into ENS courses, adding a spatial
              dimension to analytical and field exercises. Students at all levels use
              Geographic Information Systems (GIS) technology as a tool to improve their
              understanding of the local area. As the ENS faculty revise courses to
              incorporate spatial exercises or modules, they are taking advantage of new
              pieces of equipment that facilitate the collection of spatial data, including a
              large-format digitizer and a Global Positioning System (GPS). For class-based
              projects or independent research, coordinating this equipment with the existing
              GIS capabilities substantially enhances a student's ability to gather, analyze,
              interpret and display spatial data, leading to improved spatial and
              visualization skills.


