Title       : An Integrative Curriculum in Earth, Human, and Environmental Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1999  
File        : a9952822

Award Number: 9952822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lauret E. Savoy lsavoy@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Werner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jill L. Bubier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven R. Dunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melinda D. Dyar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Girma Kebbede  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. McMenamin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Millette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michelle J. Markley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)

The Department of Geography and Geology at Mount
              Holyoke College is redesigning and reorganizing several separate curricula into
              an integrated Earth and Environmental Sciences program.  This curricular
              revision responds to three major concerns: the need to improve the scientific
              and environmental literacies of student-citizens, the continued
              underrepresentation of women and people of color in science, and limited
              integration of the links between science and society; as well as, between
              natural and social systems in science curricula at all educational levels. The
              goal of this project is to provide students with a fundamental understanding of
              the dynamics and interdependency of Earth's system by placing their study in
              cultural and historical contexts and with investigative experiences doing
              science so that students can understand science as a process of inquiry.
              

The project goal is being achieved by 1) designing an integrative,
              place-based curriculum that emphasizes processes of science from the
              introductory to advanced levels, 2) focusing on investigative projects, group
              and individual learning, and peer teaching, 3) using interdisciplinary
              approaches to examining Earth systems to emphasize links between natural and
              social systems, 4) emphasizing important skills in communication, critical
              thinking, problem solving, 5) making interdisciplinary connections of ideas and
              knowledge, and 6) embedding diverse internal assessment strategies in the
              curriculum. This program will help to increase the diversity of scientifically
              and environmentally literate student-citizens who can critically evaluate
              issues on Earth's systems ranging from basic scientific knowledge and methods
              to cultural/societal contexts of environmental problems.

This project,
              addresses these concerns by adapting and implementing ideas and strategies from
              successful models to develop a program that better serves young women citizens
              and scientists.  The pedagogical models being adapted by this project come from
              a variety of other successful projects and include hands-on, inquiry based and
              experiential teaching approaches, student-student and student-faculty learning
              partnerships, and constructivist "learning cycle" sequences in the new
              curriculum.  

The project is being evaluated by a consultant who is
              developing a mixed method approach for both the formative and summative
              evaluations.  Dissemination of the new curriculum and the evaluation results is
              planned through conference presentations, workshops, including one for local
              K-12 teachers, and a website.  

