Title       : Integrating the Product Realization Process into a New Mechanical Engineering
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9952364

Award Number: 9952364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80322              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Wells rlwells@mail.uttyl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald L. Goddard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Mountain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Tyler
	      3900 University Boulevard
	      Tyler, TX  757990001    214/566-1471

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Mechanical (56)
This project is providing desktop manufacturing
              equipment to demonstrate key manufacturing technologies to Mechanical
              Engineering students in the context of an introductory Manufacturing Processes
              course. It is also
enabling the integration of Product Realization Process
              (PRP) topics into subsequent courses in the curriculum. This work is an
              adaptation of PRP curriculum development projects previously funded by NSF,
              especially DUE-9354772 "Mechanical Engineering Curriculum Development
              Initiative -
Integrating the Product Realization Process into the
              Undergraduate Curriculum." Often, students are introduced to manufacturing by
              way of a survey course alone, and do not get the chance to study the processes
              at close range. This makes it difficult to effectively teach how a product
              evolves from initial concept to final production. Since full-sized production
              machinery is expensive, access to portable, desktop equipment
that is still
              capable of producing real parts addresses this situation.  The equipment for
              the project, some of which is already on hand, is supporting the following
              Manufacturing course modules: Materials Selection,
Rapid Prototyping, Plastics
              Production, Composites Production, Computer Numerical Control (CNC) Machining,
              Welding Fabrication, Robotic Parts Handling and Metrology. The equipment also
              allows students to
experience the full cycle of the PRP through the addition
              of Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing (CAD/CAM), Computer Numerical
              Control (CNC), Design for Manufacturing (DFM), Rapid Prototyping and Computer
              Integrated Manufacturing (CIM) components to several courses in the
              curriculum,
especially in the design sequence. Industry has indicated that a
              hands-on understanding of basic manufacturing processes, and direct experience
              with the PRP, is of significant value for Mechanical Engineering graduates.  

