Title       : Infrastructure for Inquiry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9952421

Award Number: 9952421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62266              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlene M. Waggoner cwaggon@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia M. McArthur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)  The primary goal of this project is to address
              critical problems associated with the implementation of inquiry-based
              laboratory activities in courses taught by graduate teaching assistants.  This
              goal is being reached by first taking a comprehensive look at the
              infrastructure needed to support inquiry in this setting.  The principal
              investigators are adapting the best available laboratory activities, assessment
              strategies, and teaching assistant development tools to meet the specific needs
              of an investigative laboratory. Products of this project include a laboratory
              manual linked to a portfolio assessment tool, an instructor's manual containing
              pedagogical support, and a teaching assistant development program incorporating
              mentoring and supplemental pedagogical seminars.  This program is being
              formatively and summatively assessed by an internal evaluation team.  A
              dissemination program including publication of teaching materials and a course
              website is a major part of this project.  This project is applicable on a
              national level for non-major environmentally based biology courses.  The
              portfolio based assessment is useful to all science labs.  This program is also
              benefitting the preservice teachers who comprise 25% of the enrollment for the
              introductory course, Environment of Life.  Beyond the scope of this proposal,
              but fundamental to the comprehensive approach taken by the principal
              investigators, are longitudinal studies and linkages with the science methods
              courses taken by these students.





