Title       : Intergration of Undergraduate Research Activities in the Geology and Biology
               Environmental Science Curriculum Using an Inductively Coupled Plasma
               Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9952667

Award Number: 9952667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61325              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew L. Gorring gorringm@mail.montclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Duke U. Ophori  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory A. Pope  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Renata Bailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie K. Lustigman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montclair State University
	      Valley Road & Normal Avenue
	      Montclair, NJ  07043    201/893-4000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) We have implemented a hierarchical set of research exercises (e.g.,
              Johnson & Stahl, 1997, Central Michigan University; Videtich, 1997, Grand
              Valley State University; Niemitz, 1996, Dickinson College) that utilize the
              ICP-AES across sophomore to senior level courses in the environmental science
              concentration within the geology and biology majors at MSU.  1) Initial
              exercises in the sequence stress practical sample collection, preparation, and
              analysis techniques for air, water, and soil samples in sophomore level
              environmental analytical chemistry and soil science courses. These courses
              serve as the analytical foundation for future exercises that utilize the ICP
              and other existing analytical equipment (e.g. XRD, SEM, ion chromatography). 
              2) Junior-level students complete progressively more complex course-based
              guided research using the ICP for applications specific to upper-level courses
              in applied environmental microbiology, geohydrology, and environmental
              geochemistry. The exercises build on experimental design, implementation, and
              analysis skills and allow students the opportunity to utilize variable
              analytical strategies.  With each exercise students prepare a written, visual,
              and/or oral presentation of the results that includes data presentation and
              interpretation components.  Junior level students use the ICP for inquiry-based
              research projects involving the analysis of rocks and minerals in the petrology
              and mineralogy courses for geology majors.  3) As a capstone to the
              environmental science curriculum, senior-level students use the ICP-AES
              facility to design and implement an independent, semester-long research project
              in a senior seminar course in environmental science.  Research projects are
              either associated with on-going faculty research or completely of the students'
              own design.  Students are involved in all phases of the research from planning
              and implementation, to sample collection and analysis, to final data
              interpretation and presentation. The project culminates in a substantial
              written report and an oral presentation at a semester-end class symposium.  The
              ICP is also being used to complete more substantial, independent, senior
              projects (theses) in environmental science, geology, chemistry, and biology
              with the guidance of faculty mentors.  Many of these projects are presented at
              scientific conferences and result in formal publications. The ICP-AES has
              prepared students for employment in the environmental industry and for
              developing independent research skills for those attending graduate school.
