Title       : Network Oceanography, Moving Hands On Pedagogy to the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a9952491

Award Number: 9952491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100934             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Prothero prothero@magic.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory J. Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              (43)  Geological Sciences

This project, while building on a foundation of
              materials and pedagogy developed with prior NSF support, creates a modern,
              inquiry-oriented, internet-based general education oceanography class and
              provides an environment for conducting research on student learning. In this
              large class environment, students engage in realistic data-driven scientific
              investigations. Students pose a problem, collect data using Prothero's
              NSF-funded, CD-ROM, "Our Dynamic Planet", and write a scientific paper based on
              their work. This presents science as an interesting, dynamic, and socially
              relevant field by teaching science process as well as science content, and
              making connections between science, society, and the future well being of our
              planet. The focus of inquiry-based activities is broadened beyond the current
              focus on plate tectonics and will include the Earth's climate and oceans and
              the world fisheries. Incorporated into all the activities will be: a) a virtual
              science workshop where students interactively participate and contribute their
              own presentations, b) interactive online writing and critical-thinking
              software, and c) a web implementation of existing class management Software.
              Flexibility in the software tools allows for modification and/or expansion to
              fit a range of student, instructor, and institutional needs and emphases.
              Student access is increased by replacing local network connectivity with
              internet and browser based networking. Students on campus will have the option
              of taking the course completely online which also support access to students
              and instructors at other institutions. All client-side software will work on
              Macintosh and PC computers, and server-side software will operate on Unix,
              Macintosh, or PC servers. Evaluation of the course and materials will begin in
              Spring of 2001. This study focuses on: a) whether student learning differs in
              online versus face-to-face environments and b) how student motivation,
              background and other variables affect learning in these environments.
              Assessment of student learning will be based on analyses of student responses
              incorporated into a School of Education Ph.D. thesis.



