Title       : Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry Instrumentation in the Undergraduate
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1999   
File        : a9952717

Award Number: 9952717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Victoria M. Bragin                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Duane E. Bartak duane.bartak@uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk P. Manfredi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Curtiss D. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to provide students with gas chromatography/
              quadrupole mass spectrometry instrumentation to carry out inquiry-based
              laboratory experiments in a series of undergraduate analytical and organic
              chemistry courses.  Quadrupole mass spectrometry techniques with gas
              chromatograph (GC/MS) offer a simple but powerful technique for the
              identification and quantitation of organic compounds.  A number of experiments
              described in chemical education literature are being adapted for local use
              starting with an introductory analytical course at the freshman/ sophomore
              level.  Target courses also include a recently developed environmental
              chemistry for chemistry majors with an environmental science emphasis, and an
              applied instrumental analysis course taken by those intending to teach at the
              secondary school level as well as by non-chemistry majors.  More advanced mass
              spectrometry theory and applications via laboratory experiments are being
              presented in an instrumental analysis course.  In addition to analytical
              courses, hands-on GC/MS experiences are being obtained by students enrolled in
              organic chemistry laboratories and undergraduate research projects, where GC/MS
              can be a valuable tool.  The use of GC/MS instruments is very common in
              industrial laboratories where analysis is required of complex samples.   It is
              essential that students have the opportunity for significant hands-on
              experiences with GC/MS techniques.

