Title       : Environmental Studies Curriculum Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a9952448

Award Number: 9952448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45828              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Middendorf gmiddendorf@howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Muriel Poston  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)  This project involves the first of three phases to
              design and evaluate a unique non-majors general biology textbook, which
              integrates innovative multimedia materials and teaching strategies. 
              Specifically, this first stage of the project is focused on the development of
              the text-based material, which consists of a ten-chapter textbook including
              content material, critical thinking questions, and investigative activities. 
              Additionally, a Web page is being developed that focuses on the creation of a
              "virtual course community," encouraging students to interact outside of class. 
              In correlation with the text material, faculty development materials are being
              collected and created.  This material includes a collection of teaching
              strategy suggestions for each chapter and video vignettes of these teaching
              strategies when feasible.  A multidisciplinary team of on-campus faculty and
              students will be organized to develop a full CCLI-EMD grant proposal, which
              will seek funds for the development and production of these and other
              multimedia materials.  The material is being subjected to faculty and student
              formative and summative review to assess the pedagogical effectiveness of the
              following textual configuration:  (a) first person presentation of content; (b)
              parallel reading (first person story-telling paralleled with traditional
              telling, interactive graphics and integrated critical thinking questions); (c)
              icon reading cues (small graphics embedded in the text); (d) "take-home"
              investigations; and (e) integrated web-based community.  Additional science
              education and biology colleagues are also reviewing chapters as they are
              developed to enhance receptivity and effectiveness. 






