Title       : Creation of a Computation and Visualization Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2000   
File        : a9952392

Award Number: 9952392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53466              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin F. Morris morris2@carthage.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin M. Crosby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron K. Trautwein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick K. Pfaffle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine M. Renner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carthage College
	      2001 Alford Drive
	      Kenosha, WI  531401929    414/551-8500

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              nterdisciplinary (99)
This project is adapting and implementing visualization
              techniques and computational methods to enhance the undergraduate natural
              science and mathematics curriculum. The computation and visualization
              laboratory (CVL) is being constructed and used to incorporate inquiry-based
              classroom modules and laboratory experiments into existing courses in biology,
              chemistry, physics and mathematics.  Computational methods are the common
              thread that runs through the curriculum of each department.  In addition, two
              new courses in computational techniques and bioinformatics are being developed,
              addressing the increasing use of advanced computational methods in the physical
              and life sciences. 

Computer visualization techniques are capable of
              enhancing student understanding of abstract concepts in both introductory and
              advanced coursework.  This project is first concentrating on adapting these
              methods into introductory courses, where the greatest number of non-science
              majors and future elementary and secondary school teachers are being educated. 
              The following course areas are being modified with the listed software tools:
              
 o  In general chemistry:  "Periodic Table Live," and "Spartan."
 o  In
              organic chemistry:  "Spartan."
 o  In introductory biology:  "Genetics
              Computer Group Wisconsin Package."
 o  In introductory physics: "Physlets,"
              "EM Field," and "Electronics 
            Workbench."
 o  In introductory
              astronomy: "Hands-On Universe" and "Megastar."
 o  In introductory calculus: 
              "Mathematica."

During the later stages of this project, these tools will
              also be incorporated into more advanced undergraduate courses, such as physical
              chemistry and differential equations, and also will adapt additional software
              tools:
 o  In physics:  "CUPS" and "Mathematica."
 o  In biology:  "Rasmol,"
              "CN3D," "Alchemy 2000," and "SciProtein Module."
 o  In biochemistry: 
              "SciProtein Module."

The laboratory is being shared by high school teachers
              and students in the Kenosha Unified School District (KUSD) as part of a project
              in which Carthage College faculty and students work with KUSD to implement a
              new four-year math/science curriculum. 

Multiple qualitative and
              quantitative methods are being used to assess student learning outcomes at the
              high school and undergraduate levels. Implementation effectiveness for high
              school teachers are also being assessed. Finally, results are being
              disseminated through divisional poster sessions and Web-based publications.


