Title       : Facilitating the Comprehension of Biological Principles through the Creation of
               Modules Utilizing Interactive Computer Assisted Instruction and Hands-on
               Investigative Exercises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9952589

Award Number: 9952589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Sniezek jsniezek@mc.cc.md.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas Eke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ijeoma Otigbuo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montgomery Col Rockville
	      51 Mannakee Street
	      Rockville, MD  208501101    301/279-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)  Five instructional, interactive modules promoting
              critical thinking, problem-solving skills, understanding, and creativity are in
              development.  Each module consists of an introductory tutorial via computer,
              investigative laboratory exercises, and practical applications of learned
              material.  Module design is inspired by highly acclaimed and NSF-funded
              BioQUEST projects that give biology students the opportunity to engage in
              activities like those of practicing scientists.  This project builds on their
              philosophy but offers increased flexibility in terms of tailoring deliverables
              to meet specific curricular needs, provides an enhanced visual component
              incorporating multimedia technology, and correlates presented information with
              everyday situations with the help of outside professionals brought in to
              enlighten and/or evaluate students.  Collaborators include faculty and staff
              from the Biology Department and Math-Science Learning Center at Montgomery
              College and instructional computer design experts from Catonsville Community
              College and Digital Consulting and Training, Inc.  Success is being evaluated
              via short-term and long-term examination of student and faculty academic
              performance and satisfaction as assessed through a comprehensive evaluation
              plan.  Project success is being measured by comparing the retention rate of
              students, particularly those who are economically and educationally
              disadvantaged, exposed to the revised curriculum with those in the control
              group.  Furthermore, project success is being measured as behavioral and
              instructional modification of instructors reflected as active participation in
              course design and development, enthusiasm, and job satisfaction.  Positive
              results are being incorporated into undergraduate curricula at Montgomery
              College as part of the continuous restructuring of introductory science
              courses.  Project results are being disseminated at the local, regional, and
              national levels through summer teacher institutes, presentations at
              education-oriented meetings and five cross-platform interactive modules
              delivered via the Internet.


