Title       : Enhancement of the Undergraduate Physical Chemistry Laboratory: A Versatile and
               Novel Pulsed Laser-Based System for Nanosecond Time-Resolved Luminescence
               Studies in Molecular Phot
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2000   
File        : a9952604

Award Number: 9952604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35724              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramaswami Viswanathan ramav@beloit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beloit College
	      
	      Beloit, WI  53511    608/365-3391

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) Ultrashort laser pulse-based experiments have become ubiquitous
              in experimental physical chemistry.  In order for students to understand recent
              developments and obtain "hands on" experience with such techniques, access to a
              pulsed laser-based system with pump-probe capability for luminescence studies
              is important.  In this project, the instrumentation to do this is being
              incorporated into the undergraduate physical chemistry laboratory curriculum.
              The system consists of a Q-Switched YAG laser with harmonic generation in
              either the near-UV (355 nm) or mid-UV (266 nm) with a 3 ns (4-8 mJ) pulse, thus
              providing excitation in a variety of molecules. The fast luminescence is
              detected by a sensitive PIN photodiode detector with 400 ps response and
              digitized by an ultrahigh bandwidth (1 GHz) digital oscilloscope. The YAG laser
              is also used to pump an existing tunable dye laser, whose probe output is
              temporally delayed from 0 to 50 ns using an inexpensive and novel optical delay
              line based on a toy train track and engine. A set of experiments for the
              undergraduate physical chemistry laboratory that measure fluorescence lifetimes
              of a series of aromatic hydrocarbons and also directly monitor intersystem
              crossing processes on the nanosecond time scale using optically delayed
              triplet- triplet absorption are being adapted and implemented,  with
              enhancements. The adapted materials come from both the chemical education
              literature (J. Chemical Education) and from the research literature. The laser
              equipment is also being introduced into inorganic, organic and advanced organic
              courses, courses not normally associated with laser chemistry.  This
              considerably broadens the impact of this project.  Evaluation and assessment
              activities are being assisted by an external evaluator, experienced in laser
              chemistry, and by a chemical education specialist.  The results will be
              disseminated through dedicated Web pages and papers submitted to the Journal of
              Chemical Education.
