Title       : Partnerships in Computer Networking: Beyond Theory to Professional Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1999  
File        : a9952455

Award Number: 9952455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99981              (Estimated)
Investigator: Merry McDonald merry@mail.nwmissouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon Rickman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary McDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip J. Heeler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwest Missouri State U
	      800 University Drive
	      Maryville, MO  644686001    660/562-1440

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)  This project establishes a model for industry/academic
              collaboration that is suitable for small to medium sized institutions with few
              local major employers. It adapts and implements the NSF-funded ISCC '99,
              Educating the Next Generation of Information Systems Specialists in
              Collaboration with Industry. It scales the new information systems centric
              curriculum to fit the resources of small institutions.  It focuses on the
              development of a sequence of experiences, including both study of theoretical
              foundations and practical experience, that will enable graduates to be
              productive members of an IT development team in the area of networking. The
              content of both the formal coursework and all practical experiences will be
              determined in collaboration with campus computing services personnel and
              regional industrial representatives. 

The project implements a three-credit
              hour course covering basic concepts in networking, with hands-on laboratory
              work to reinforce the concepts covered in class; a campus networking internship
              program in computing services in which selected students will gain about 50
              hours of networking experience in an environment containing over 3000 networked
              computers and 30 servers; a one-credit hour course covering more advanced
              topics in networking that will be closely coordinated with the work experiences
              of the campus interns; an off-campus internship program in which selected
              students will work at industry partners; and a formal process for evaluating
              the preparation and performance of the interns.  By offering students a strong
              combination of theoretical concepts, supervised hands-on laboratories, and work
              experience, selected in collaboration with practitioners, students should be
              able to compete effectively in the marketplace for career opportunities in
              networking.



