Title       : Application of Hierarchical Cognitive Model to Education of Undergraduate
               Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9952348

Award Number: 9952348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. Hirt hirtd@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Bruce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Haile  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott M. Husson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Gooding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Chemical (53)

The problem we address in this project is this:
              How can critical thinking skills and engineering judgment be developed in
              engineering undergraduates before they reach their senior year? We adopt the
              hypothesis that mental growth constitutes a progression through a hierarchy of
              cognition, that the critical thinking required of engineers lies at an upper
              level in the hierarchy, and that, to reach high levels, each individual must
              master cognitive skills at lower levels. We believe that senior engineering
              students do not attain the necessary thinking skills because their low-level
              cognitive skills have been incompletely developed or largely neglected. We use
              a hierarchical model of mental growth as the basis for strengthening low-level
              cognitive skills in sophomores and juniors. With those skills in place, we then
              apply an ensemble of teaching and learning devices that promote rapid and
              effective development of critical thinking and engineering judgment.

This
              project incorporates these innovative features: it tests a new, integrative,
              hierarchical model for learning; it evaluates a substantial number of teaching
              and learning devices that are designed to propel students to higher levels of
              cognition; it results in new assessment instruments that help instructors
              monitor student growth. Our approach is being tested on chemical engineering
              undergraduates, but the results are broadly applicable to all engineering
              disciplines. Educational materials that are being developed as part of this
              research include teaching and learning devices (for example, hardware
              exercises, equipment explorations, web-based exercises, glossaries, equation
              interrogation, graph/equation equivalencies, pattern identification), guidance
              on how to best implement the hierarchical model, and new tools to assess the
              effectiveness of these activities. Broader outcomes from the work include
              professional presentations and publications and a project website for
              learning.

The project involves six Professors of Chemical Engineering at
              Clemson, a Professor of Education at Clemson, and a Professor of Education at
              Simon Fraser University (Canada). Off-site testing of our methods is being
              performed by chemical engineering professors at Rowan University, North
              Carolina Agricultural & Technical University, University of Virginia, and
              University of Michigan.

