Title       : Web-Based Multimedia Textbook in the Behavorial Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9952812

Award Number: 9952812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74932              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Lane lane@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randi C. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey Potts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Osherson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Pomerantz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
The goal of this project is to develop a World Wide
              Web-based electronic textbook in behavioral science integrating, standard
              text-based expositions of theory and data, and a multimedia database, and
              demonstrations of major experimental paradigms. The text-based expositions
              cover the same material expected in a standard behavioral neuroscience
              textbook. The advantage of putting it in electronic form is to facilitate its
              integration with the other components. The multimedia database includes
              streaming video to demonstrate a variety of behavioral phenomena such as
              aphasia and autism, brain imaging technology, and laboratory procedures in
              basic neuroscience. The video also demonstrates clips of influential
              neuroscientists in their laboratories describing the importance of their work,
              and numerous color static graphics of many kinds such as brain images, graphs
              of data, pictures of laboratory equipment, pictures of experimental stimuli,
              graphic depictions of theoretical models, etc.  Java programs demonstrate the
              major experimental paradigms. Students are able to experience the task from the
              subject's point of view and see what it was like to participate in the
              experiment. In many instances students are able to compare their own data to
              data from normal subjects and data from patients with particular deficits.  As
              a first step toward the goal of creating the electronic textbook and in
              accordance with the "proof of concept" status of this project, one chapter,
              "Language and the Brain" is being developed in full.  Only selected portions of
              the chapters on human reasoning, attention, perception, and autism is being
              developed. 

