Title       : The use of Complementary Instrumentation to Enhance Critical Thinking in
               Chemical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2000   
File        : a9952268

Award Number: 9952268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70507              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas G. Klarup cfdgk@eiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Blitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Illinois Univ
	      600 Lincoln Avenue
	      Charleston, IL  619203099    217/581-2921

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)  The teaching of undergraduate instrumental analysis is somewhat
              problematic.  Recent research in teaching and learning suggests that superior
              results are obtained using an active learning (problem based) approach. 
              However, a solely problem based approach may not allow time to adequately
              address the fundamental concepts of analytical chemistry. This project is
              introducing problem solving and critical thinking, primarily in instrumental
              analysis, without a significant sacrifice in fundamental course content.  The
              acquisition of selected equipment (EDXRF - energy dispersive x-ray
              fluorescence; spectrofluorometer; microwave digestion) to augment existing
              instrumentation will facilitate the incorporation of a problem based laboratory
              approach into the analytical curriculum.  Active-learning, inquiry-based
              projects are being used to solve analytical problems with complementary
              instrumentation.  The instrumental analysis laboratory is divided into four
              sections.  The first section involves fundamental concepts of data collection
              and manipulation, including signal-to-noise ratio, detection limits,
              resolution, spectrometer design and statistics.  Within the other three
              sections, students answer specific questions by analyzing real samples using
              complementary instruments.  Students are responsible for arriving at the most
              efficient procedure to answer the questions.  One section involves
              chromatographic analyses (GC, HPLC, GC/MS), a second section focuses on
              elemental analysis (XRF and AA with microwave digestion sample preparation),
              while a third section involves molecular spectroscopy using UV/Vis and
              molecular fluorescence spectroscopic analyses.  Students are required to
              complete two of the three latter sections.  For each completed section, each
              student generates a report.  Students also discuss how they solved their
              assigned problem, justify their procedure, and critically discuss the
              advantages and disadvantages of the instruments used for their analysis. 
              Students are thus being exposed to a variety of modern instrumental methods,
              and learn to think critically and fundamentally about those methods, and to
              solve real problems.  Many of the experiments are based on recent articles in
              the pedagogical literature (J. Chemical Education, texts) and are adapted from
              those sources for implementation into the local context. Other courses
              (non-analytical) affected by the introduction of this new instrumentation
              include physical chemistry, undergraduate research, and a general education
              chemistry course with a high population of elementary education majors.

