Title       : Instrumentation and Equipment for Air Chemistry/Meteorology Undergraduate
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2000  
File        : a9952428

Award Number: 9952428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62367              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Clark Richard.Clark@millersville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      PO Box 1002
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3820

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Atmospheric Science (41) Adapting an upgraded and expanded suite of instruments
              and equipment for a mobile atmospheric research unit and tethered balloon
              facility for undergraduate field studies in air chemistry and air pollution
              boundary layer meteorology has allowed us to implement new educational
              initiatives (McGinn, M.K. and W-M. Roth, 1999: Preparing Students for Competent
                 Scientific Practice: Implications of Recent Research in Science and   
              Technology Studies. EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER. Vol. 28, No. 3, 1999) . Students
              have engaged in the practice of science by pursuing investigations of their own
              interests (scientific inquiry), and collaborate with peers to solve problems,
              test algorithms, and develop synergistic insights and social interactions
              (scientific discourse). Gas-phase and particle samplers/analyzers, mounted for
              complete portability, are used to collect/measure CO, SO2, O3, NOx, VOCs, and
              PM2.5/10 in both lab and field settings. Students in Air Chemistry work in
              small groups, each responsible for the calibration and maintenance of
              instruments; collection, analysis, and quality assessment of measurements;
              visual representation of data; and dissemination of results. These tools are
              used to authenticate concepts in quantitative analysis such as filter
              correlation methods, pulsed fluorescence, chemiluminescence, UV photometry, KI
              oxidation, GC/MS analysis, and laser scatterometry (nephelometry).  Each group
              investigates inter-relationships among gas-phase species and correlations with
              the meteorological conditions and regional measurements.  Collaborative
              learning is stimulated through open discussion as information diffuses and
              discursive practices emerge within and between groups to the whole-class level.
               Students participate in the assessment of the project through content analysis
              of lab journals maintained while serving in control and experimental groups,
              and are expected to produce a joint-reflection paper based on interactive
              discourse.  Students in Statistical Meteorology, Boundary Layer Meteorology,
              Environmental Chemistry, Atmospheric Thermodynamics, and Meteorological
              Instruments, Measurement, and Observing Systems are benefitting by engaging in
              the scientific process and exploration of scientific concepts through the
              development of problem-solving skills, critical thinking, and collaboration. 
              The mobile air quality lab and ground station for tethered balloon operations
              produces vertical profiles of meteorological variables and ozone concentrations
              as part of three major multi-institutional field research programs (NARSTO-NE
              1995, 1996; NARSTONE-OPS 1998-2001).  Students participate as scientist
              apprentices responsible and accountable for research activities from logistics
              to data collection and publication.  Chemical analyzers and air samplers are
              deployed in conjunction with a tethered multi-sonde atmospheric profiler to
              study the relationship between boundary layer evolution and the variability of
              surface trace gas species.  The portability of instruments deployed in a mobile
              unit allows measurements to be obtained near sources of pollutants and at other
              locations representative of the regional background. Portability also enables
              outreach to K-12 and community groups. Concentrations of gas-phase criteria
              pollutants are available in real-time through a link to the meteorology Web
              site at www.atmos.millersv.edu.  Also available are project assessments and
              results of scientific investigations using these instruments. 
