Title       : Teaching Issues and Experiments in Ecology (TIEE):Developing Web-and CD-ROM
               Based Educational Material through the ESA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2000    
File        : a9952347

Award Number: 9952347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76720              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlene D'Avanzo cdavanzo@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce W. Grant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Musante  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)

A recent Ecological Society of America (ESA) survey
              shows that students are passive learners in most ecology courses. To address
              this problem, this project is developing a CD-ROM disseminated by ESA that
              helps faculty (1) integrate the teaching of ecological concepts with suitable
              student-active approaches and (2) reflect on changes with formative evaluation
              and possibly publish peer-reviewed innovations of their own suitable for
              Promotion and Tenure portfolios.  The project is building on ESA's foundation
              and expertise in ecological education nationwide. The project is creating a
              peer review structure for publishing, on the Web and CD-ROM, inquiry-based
              "Experiments" and "Issues" for lecture/ discussion that are integrated within
              innovative pedagogy. The "Experiments" component are field or lab activities
              for student-directed research inquiries that teach key concepts and knowledge
              construction. Ecological Content, Science Skills, and Pedagogical Methods key
              words are hot-linked. The "Issues" component has the same structure and
              includes topical issues based on ecological concepts and high quality,
              accessible data. "Issues" are being designed for large non-lab lecture-based
              courses.  The project will give a workshop at the ESA's August 2000 annual
              meeting to instruct faculty from diverse institutions about student-active
              teaching and use of the CD-ROM and web materials. They will evaluate these
              products in the workshop and over the academic year by using them in courses
              and communicating via the web. This workshop will be a prototype for a
              train-the trainer model of faculty professional development.




