Title       : Integrating Business and Ethics in Engineering Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2000   
File        : a9952765

Award Number: 9952765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marina Pantazidou mpanta@central.ntua.gr  (Principal Investigator current)
              Indira Nair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John N. Hooker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Madsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan A. Ambrose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Engineering - Other (59)

This project addresses the need to address
              business and ethics issues in mainstream engineering courses. In order to
              assist engineering faculty with developing skills to create suitable classroom
              and computer-based modules that incorporate the business and ethics components
              of technical problems, this project is compiling a resource guide, offering an
              intensive, "hands-on" workshop. The PIs have adapted the approach of short,
              focused faculty workshops on integrating ethics in technical courses from the
              Center for the Study of Ethics in the Professions at the Illinois Institute of
              Technology followed by ongoing support, which was developed by the project's
              external consultant. The implementation of the two models will produce
              educational materials that weave business and ethics into mainstream
              engineering courses.

This project is also providing ongoing support and
              conducting follow-up sessions. The main goal of the project is to help students
              become aware of the business and ethical dimensions of technical problems and
              use business and ethics frameworks in engineering decision making. To achieve
              this goal, engineering faculty will develop educational modules based on case
              studies, which are being incorporated into selected existing engineering
              courses. This project is targeting three introductory engineering courses, with
              an audience of about 180 students per academic year (for maximum impact), as
              well as engineering courses in later semesters (to reinforce the concepts),
              with an audience of about 20 students per academic year each. Ultimately, this
              effort is creating a model for educational material development and faculty
              enhancement, which is being applied to additional engineering courses. This
              project addresses educational material development, faculty development and
              integration of technology in education.


