Title       : Instrumentation for Instruction in Analytical Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9952272

Award Number: 9952272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53854              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle M. Bushey mbushey@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy S. Mills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Shinkle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Kurtin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78212    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) Although separation science is of fundamental importance in many
              areas of chemical investigations, it is an area which is often neglected or
              inadequately presented to undergraduate audiences.  Experimental endeavors
              often do not take full advantage of the features of modern high-performance
              liquid chromatography (HPLC) instrumentation.  Exposure to capillary
              electrophoresis instrumentation (CE) is extremely limited at the undergraduate
              level.  Frequently, these pieces of instrumentation are reserved for use in the
              upper division courses.  This project is addressing the shortcomings of typical
              undergraduate educational programs in terms of the experience with separations.
               Laboratories using HPLC and CE instrumentation are being introduced at both
              the lower and upper divisional levels.  Students are repeatedly encountering
              both instruments, and the unique capabilities and limitations of these
              instruments are being highlighted.  The project is taking experiments from the
              educational literature and from the research literature and is modifying these
              experiments so that students investigate the effects when they change
              experimental parameters.  As students gain in experience as they move from the
              lower to upper division, their decision making role in the experiments
              increases.  This is possible because with repeated exposure to the instruments,
              students are able to explore the different modes of operation of each
              separation technique.  At the junior and senior level, they choose the methods
              most appropriate to their particular and individualized samples.  Students are
              encouraged to collaborate with other student groups.  The expected overall
              outcome is that students will have a sophisticated understanding of the
              capabilities and limitations of HPLC and CE separations.  Lower division
              students who do not complete the full course sequence are gaining an
              appreciation for the techniques used to analyze mixtures.  Upper division
              students are able to make intelligent predictions of the effects of various
              experimental parameters on a given separation.  Perhaps most importantly, they
              are able to choose the most likely successful approach in terms of column type,
              mobile phase, and derivatization chemistry for a given analysis.  The
              evaluation plan includes a component that will track the impact of this
              repeated exposure by students to the instrumentation on the ability of the
              students to develop increasing sophistication in designing effective
              separations using HPLC and CE. 






