Title       : Using Design, Build, and Test Projects in a Wind Tunnel to Improve Engineering
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2000     
File        : a9952308

Award Number: 9952308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92289              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Elger delger@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph S. Budwig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven W. Beyerlein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Mechanical (56)

This project features a unique type of student
              project that has been evolving at the University of Idaho for the past eight
              years. This type of project, entitled the "Design Build and Test (DBT)
              Project," has a simple theme: the best way to learn engineering is by doing
              engineering. Our central idea is to evolve the DBT project to a higher level of
              quality. DBT project development will involve lower division courses, with
              emphasis on recruiting, retention and development of professional skills. A new
              wind tunnel is the focus of this synergistic effort combining laboratory
              improvement with course and curriculum improvement. Projects for the wind
              tunnel are adapted from several sources: Penn State Behrand (boundary layer
              experiment), Michigan State University (flow visualization, drag experiment,
              mini project), Washington State University (special projects), and the Intel
              Corporation (heat sinks for microprocessors).

Our specific aims are (i) to
              create a superb wind tunnel facility, (ii) to adapt wind tunnel experiments
              such as flow visualization and measuring drag to DBT projects, (iii) to develop
              curriculum materials that support the adaptation, and (vi) to assess and
              disseminate results.

DBT projects feature math modeling, design, prototype
              construction, followed by testing. Each project involves the proposed wind
              tunnel. DBT projects are designed using a common format, and the resulting
              projects, though small in scale, contain many of the elements typical of a
              capstone design project. While working on a DBT project, students are immersed
              in a mentoring environment that creates ownership and pride of workmanship. At
              the end of a project, students display their work at a design show.

At the
              completion of this work, we envision an outstanding educational practice (the
              DBT project), quality assessment data, and detailed project resources that are
              organized into a book. In the long-term, this work provides a design pedagogy
              that is meaningful and integrated throughout the curriculum, allowing students
              to learn design in the most natural way--by repetition of experience.
