Title       : SimEcon: Economics Issues and Principles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9952757

Award Number: 9952757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $496266             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne E. Bresnock aebresnock@csupomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil Garston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly Pomona Fdn, Inc
	      
	      Pomona, CA  91768    /   -

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Economics (82) This project entails the design, development, dissemination, and
              assessment of "SimEcon," a CD-ROM package of 16 interactive economic computer
              simulation modules for use with a standard economics text in principles of
              economics courses. SimEcon provides students with a set of topic-specific
              modules in which they are expected to put the introductory economic course
              material to work and "learn by doing." Each module attempts to capture the
              complexities of an aspect of the economic system that cannot easily be conveyed
              with more static teaching tools, i.e. blackboards or workbooks. Each module
              allows the student to make decisions about different economic variables, view
              the results of their actions, and improve their decisions based on their
              results. The project's primary objective is to add value to economic education
              by producing a technological tool, SimEcon, that will allow students to develop
              deep cognitive learning, problem-solving, and analytical skills based on
              active, dynamic involvement with the lessons contained in each economic
              simulation. The second goal is to evaluate the impact of using the modules in a
              variety of learning environments. The modules may be used as the basis for
              class activity or lab sessions, writing assignments, distance learning, on-line
              courses, and outcomes assessments. The third objective is to broadly
              demonstrate and distribute SimEcon to instructors who will use the modules in
              their principles courses. We are currently working with several instructors at
              regional community colleges, and 4-year colleges and universities, and will
              actively recruit additional instructors to beta test and use SimEcon throughout
              the project period.
Module topics include: economic growth, market analysis,
              benefit-cost analysis, open and closed macroeconomics, utility maximization,
              cost minimization, competitive markets, monopoly, oligopoly, labor markets,
              exchange rates, income distribution, trade negotiations, externalities, and
              banking. Modules contain student instructions, term definition pop-up windows,
              tabular quantitative results and/or graphical output displays. The breadth of
              the package allows instructors to select a subset of modules that is suitable
              for their course coverage, student audience, and available time. The modules
              enable students to learn by making decisions in repetitive economic
              experiments, evaluate the results of their choices, revise decisions over
              designated time periods, and write conclusions based on their outcomes. The
              project is a collaboration between professors at two universities. Both
              professors have used 4 modules in their courses (E-Growth, Markets, DrugWars,
              and Macro1) and have revised them based on trial use.



