Title       : A New Laboratory Course in the Chemistry and Physics of Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2000    
File        : a9952296

Award Number: 9952296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65358              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie Lessinger llessinger@barnard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Halpin-Healy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)  Physics (13)  This project involves a new two-semester
              laboratory course for undergraduates in the chemistry and physics of materials,
              developed and taught jointly by the Departments of Chemistry and Physics. 
              Neither the solid state nor materials in general were well covered in the
              existing offerings of either department, so it makes sense to mount a joint
              effort to educate students in this area of immense and growing importance in
              science and technology, one that cuts across traditional disciplinary
              boundaries.  The project focuses on laboratory work in a course suitable for
              majors in chemistry, physics, or chemical physics, and blends the approaches of
              both chemists and physicists.  Special attention is paid to the synthesis of
              materials; both inorganic and organic substances are considered together and
              used as examples in laboratory work, and emphasis is placed on useful
              properties and technical applications.

Experiments are being developed in
              synthesis (e.g. high Tc superconductors; V204; MoS2); purification (e.g. zone
              refining); crystal growth; structure description and analysis; identification
              and structure determination of substances by X-ray powder diffraction; surface
              imaging (e.g. scanning tunneling microscopy); the mechanical, electrical,
              magnetic, and optical properties of solids (e.g. cleavage; piezoelectricity;
              semi-conduction; organic conductors; ferroelectricity; magnetic susceptibility;
              anti-ferromagnetism; superconductivity; birefringence; nonlinear optical
              properties); and various properties of soft condensed matter (e.g. liquid
              crystals).  A number of experiments are being adapted from ones which have been
              published in the chemical or physics education literature, and some new
              experiments are being developed, in order to create an appropriate overall
              introduction to materials science.  Students perform short individual and/or
              group research projects, and present talks on selected topics.  Chemistry and
              Physics faculty members at Barnard College are combining and sharing their
              expertise, and the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center of
              Columbia University also is providing assistance.


