Title       : Concurrent Programming Java Using CSP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2000    
File        : a9952260

Award Number: 9952260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74918              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher H. Nevison chris@cs.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31) 

This proof-of-concept project is developing materials
              and laboratory exercises for teaching concurrent program design and
              implementation using the theory of Communicating Sequential Processes (CSP) and
              Java with CSP libraries. CSP provides a sound theoretical foundation for
              designing concurrent programs and for proving their correctness.  Concurrent
              programs are important in many areas of computer science including operating
              systems, parallel computing, and applications of real-time embedded computing.
              In addition, concurrent modules are especially appropriate for the design and
              implementation of many network applications. The concurrent threads in Java
              provide a ubiquitous environment for such programming.   

A quad-processor
              server is being installed in the lab at Colgate for use in development and
              teaching with true parallel execution of concurrent threads. This project
              builds upon work done in the UK and the Netherlands to implement the CSP
              constructs in Java.  It will develop content units and laboratory exercises for
              teaching the principles of concurrent program design and implementation, as
              well as applications of concurrency to such areas as parallel computing,
              simulation, and network computing. The teaching units and laboratories
              developed for this project are being made available electronically.  Evaluation
              of the new materials is being done by outside experts who will evaluate the
              appropriateness of the new units, laboratory exercises, and syllabus in the
              context of the computer science curriculum.  Student evaluations are being
              conducted to assess the effectiveness of the materials in promoting learning. 
              During the second year of the project, other schools are going to use and
              assess the materials with their students.  Sites are being selected to
              encourage use of the materials by diverse student populations.

The project
              includes a faculty workshop to disseminate the materials developed and to
              engage interested faculty from other institutions in ongoing development of
              materials using this approach. The methodology developed is being presented at
              tutorials and workshops at national conferences such as the SIGCSE Symposium. 
              It is also being developed into a textbook format for publication.
