Title       : Development of Inquiry-Based Instructional Videos for Teachers in Undergraduate
               Geoscience Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a9952843

Award Number: 9952843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33757              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy J. Merritts d_Merritts@acad.fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      Office of the Provost
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) To meet the need of alternative teaching strategies to the
              traditional lecture, we have prepared and improved materials that provide
              explicit guidance on how to incorporate inquiry-based learning, hands-on
              activities, and action-oriented scientific investigation in the classroom,
              particularly for introductory classes in the Earth sciences.   We have
              developed and tested a series of video modules that illustrate sound practices
              in inquiry-based instructional methodology.  Module topics include leading
              discussions, posing questions (Socratic approach), guiding inquiry during
              instructor-led demonstrations, and using peer learning techniques during
              lecture.  Each module of less than 15 minute duration includes: 1)  video
              footage of experienced faculty discussing ways to encourage and guide
              discussions in the classroom,  2)  real classroom activities in which students
              are involved in group and peer learning, and  3) both instructor- and
              student-led demonstrations..  The video resource enables the teacher to see
              actual examples in action in the classroom.  Preliminary testing of two video
              modules demonstrates that faculty appreciate this aspect of the videos more
              than any other.  Users of the modules may be new to teaching or more
              experienced in the traditional lecture yet open to trying new approaches.  The
              modules are tested at different types of institutions, including 2-year and
              4-year colleges and universities.  An advisory board assists in editing of the
              videos.  With full development the modules will be disseminated widely, along
              with a short document that provides guidance on how to use the videos.  In
              addition to use by individual faculty, the suite of seven final video modules
              could be used in training of teaching assistants, or they could be the focus of
              departmental discussions on teaching.  
