Title       : Photon Quantum Mechanics for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9952626

Award Number: 9952626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74862              (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrique J. Galvez egalvez@center.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary E. Parks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Holbrow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) Superposition lies at the heart of quantum mechanics and is a
              difficult concept for students. Non-local "spooky action at a distance," as
              Einstein called it, occurs as a consequence of what are called "entangled
              states." Recently there have been significant advances in the experimental
              production and study of entangled states. There are exciting prospects that
              such states can be used for unbreakable cryptography, innovative parallel
              computation, and for transferring the properties of a quantum state from one
              object to another some distance away - so called "quantum teleportation."
              Advances in single photon detection and the development of bright sources of
              entangled photons make this an opportune time to prepare students to understand
              these remarkable developments. The project is implementing five undergraduate
              laboratory experiments that clearly exhibit the quantum nature of the photon,
              the existence of single-photon interference, the nature of two-photon
              interference and the so-called quantum erasers, and an experiment that
              demonstrates nonlocality by the violation of Bell's inequalities. The goal is
              to create experiments and supporting textual materials that help students to
              better understand the ramifications of the superposition principle in quantum
              mechanics and that also serve as a model for making significant changes in the
              syllabus of undergraduate quantum mechanics.

