Title       : A Versatile Laser-Based Experimental Setup for the Chemistry and Physics
               Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a9952506

Award Number: 9952506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86333              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew F. Tuchler tuchlerm@wlu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Sukow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Thomas Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington & Lee Univ
	      
	      Lexington, VA  24450    540/458-8400

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) The Departments of Chemistry and Physics are actively pursuing
              curricular reform and modernization of their teaching laboratories. The goal of
              this project is the introduction of a versatile Nd:YAG-pumped dye laser system
              and supporting equipment into three courses: a capstone course to the general
              chemistry sequence that is designed to develop fundamental concepts introduced
              briefly in this sequence (e.g., atomic structure), a modern physics course
              available to students in their sophomore year who have completed the
              introductory sequence, and a new, two-term modern physical chemistry lab course
              that will complement the associated lecture. The laser's versatility,
              robustness, and attractiveness to students make it ideally suited to serve as
              the cornerstone apparatus for a focused series of experiments. These
              experiments allow students to develop an intuitive understanding of difficult,
              fundamental concepts that are at the heart of chemistry and physics. Portions
              of many of the proposed experiments are adapted from established experiments
              from the educational or research literature. Representative examples include
              the photoelectric effect, laser induced fluorescence, transient emission
              spectroscopy for fast kinetics measurement, and high resolution atomic and
              molecular absorption spectroscopy using multi-photon and cavity ring-down laser
              absorption spectroscopy (CRLAS). Introduction of the simple, powerful
              absorption technique, CRLAS, into the undergraduate curriculum is a novel
              element of this project and requires the adaption of experiments from the
              research literature. Finally, because students are exposed to the laser and
              data acquisition during their first year, they are well prepared early in their
              college careers to participate in an active research program that applies the
              laser to studies of gas phase photochemistry and reaction dynamics. In
              addition, students in advanced courses have the opportunity to propose and
              develop new experiments that are pedagogically relevant and whose results will
              be disseminated both at conferences and in the chemical literature.

