Title       : Geoscience Curriculum Model: An Integrated, Project-Centered Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2000   
File        : a9952319

Award Number: 9952319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113678             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis M. Brown lbrown@lakers.lssu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Kelso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Superior State Univ
	      650 West Easterday Ave.
	      Sault Ste. Marie, MI  49783    906/632-6841

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) We have implemented and adapted modern constructivist
              teaching/learning theories and previously developed alternative teaching
              strategies and activities (e.g., Tewksbury, B.J., ed., 1997, Innovative and
              Effective Teaching in the Geosciences, National Association of Geoscience
              Teachers) in designing and delivering a new, non-traditional undergraduate
              geoscience curriculum that integrates geoscience sub-disciplines. The results
              of a nationwide questionnaire (Brown and Kelso, in progress) distributed among
              geology faculty identified core concepts for a comprehensive, quality,
              undergraduate geology program. Core concepts focused on specific geologic
              problems in a variety of geologic settings  has generated an applied model for
              students simulating practices by researchers, exploration geologists, and other
              geology professionals.
Instruction throughout the program progressively
              integrates increasingly more complex projects and active learning strategies. 
              Students develop basic skills and concepts in lower division physical and
              historical geology courses, such as clastic classification, identification and
              description of Quaternary units in field exposures, and construction of maps
              and cross sections. Students expand their studies in the upper division classes
              by planning EM and resistivity geophysical studies, gathering and interpreting
              this geophysical data, and examining water well logs to determine the potential
              contamination of a local project area's drinking water supply from waste in a
              quarry site and from farming practices. Upper division courses feature student
              teams working together to solve a series of progressively more complex
              real-world problems, such as groundwater flow and contamination and mineral and
              hydrocarbon resource exploration, that are drawn from a variety of classic
              geologic settings including the Canadian Shield, Michigan Basin, Black Hills,
              and Mid-Continent. A lower and upper division field experience, and significant
              field components in lower division physical, historical, and structural geology
              courses and upper division integrated courses, has provided students with the
              opportunity to solve actual geologic problems. Our integrated curriculum
              emphasizes use of technology and computers by incorporating their use in all
              courses. Implementation of GeoGraphix mapping software begins in physical
              geology, with more sophisticated usage progressing throughout the curriculum.
              Students will use the geophysical and laboratory equipment made available by
              this CCLI - Adaptation and Implementation grant in all aspects of geologic
              studies from project design, to data collection, data analysis and
              interpretation, and formal project presentation. Science assessment strategies,
              including concept mapping, conceptual diagnostic tests, and performance
              assessment were adapted to evaluate our curriculum and courses (e.g., see NSF
              sponsored National Institute for Science Education web page
              http://www.wcer.wisc.edu/nise/cl1/flag/flaghome.asp).


