Title       : Ecology Curriculum Reform: Integrating Innovative Teaching and Global Change
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a9952816

Award Number: 9952816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79839              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy S. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter C. Oechel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas H. Deutschman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)  Our plan to reform curriculum in the Ecology Program
              Area within the Biology Department at San Diego State University (SDSU) focuses
              on providing biology majors and non-majors with a greater understanding of
              ecological concepts by fusing innovative teaching with cutting-edge technology.
               Three Ecology faculty are collaborating to bring real-time global change
              technology, scientific inquiry, and field studies into a non-majors' ecology
              course and six biology-majors' core and advanced ecology courses.  Two
              dedicated teaching towers are being placed at two field stations, and one
              portable tower is being set up on campus.  Our goals include enhancing the use
              of field stations in education, enhancing students' higher order thinking
              skills for understanding ecological concepts, and increasing students'
              understanding of Mediterranean ecosystems.  This project adapts science
              educational methods that enable students to acquire and use atmospheric and
              related integrated data in classes, such as those used by the GLOBE Program
              (http://www.globe.gov) and the Unidata Program (http://unidata.ucar.edu), to
              take advantage of unique resources available at SDSU.  The adaptation at SDSU
              involves using:  (a) state-of-the-art technology established at SDSU for global
              change research, and (b) our two field stations located across an elevational
              gradient of Mediterranean habitats.  With this instrumentation, students can
              measure atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations, as well as microclimate, net
              radiation, and energy balance.  As a result of this exciting innovation, we
              expect our students to understand the process of scientific inquiry, including
              hypothesis construction and data acquisition and analysis, and to make
              scientific inferences from their results and communicate information, both
              orally and in writing.  This educational enhancement reaches about 650 students
              per year, including members of underrepresented minorities (about 50%
              campus-wide) and prospective teachers. 



