Title       : A New Approach to College Algebra and Precalculus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a9952821

Award Number: 9952821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Davida Fischman   (Principal Investigator former)
              Danny C. Rinne  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Joan T. Hallett  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Peter D. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      5500 University Parkway
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    909/880-5929

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)
This project at California State University - San
              Bernardino (CSUB) is addressing low retention and success rates often
              encountered in lower division mathematics courses typically labeled College
              Algebra and/or Pre-calculus. Both science and non-science majors enroll in such
              courses, with some students seeking to satisfy General Education requirements
              and others pursuing major requirements. To confront this mix of backgrounds and
              goals, courses are being restructured in two ways. First, the introduction of
              projects applicable to the students' major is helping students see the
              relevance of the material and encouraging them to write about mathematics.
              Second, the use of a prototype software package allows the instructor
              flexibility in terms of class structure and involves the student as an active
              participant. Using HTML, Java and JavaScript, the software application offers
              information, demonstrations and exercises that cover the topics in an engaging
              manner. The software use ranges from simply supplying follow-along examples, to
              individualized concentration on particular areas. Its flexibility permits it to
              either accompany a text or become the primary source of course material. The
              package can be offered through a WWW server or run on individual machines using
              only a web browser. A small computer software package for the College Algebra
              course has already been created and tested. Class use of this software
              indicates increased retention rates among students. In this project the current
              package is being polished, as well as expanded, and topics from Pre-calculus
              are being added. The resulting software is forming a cohesive unit that can be
              easily adapted by other institutions. Evaluation efforts include measuring
              students' attitudes towards mathematics and its relevance both in the
              restructured sections as well as traditionally taught sections. The software
              package is being tested both here and at other sites, not only for factual
              information and appropriateness of exercises, but also for a measure of the
              student learning and instructor reaction to this mode of presentation. Finally,
              retention and success rates are being compared across different
              institutions.



