Title       : Development of a 3-D Interactive Mineralogy Textbook
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9952377

Award Number: 9952377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melinda D. Dyar mddyar@amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) This Proof-of-Concept project develops the first three chapters of
              a Mineralogy textbook that is accessible and relevant to students by presenting
              the material in accord with modern learning theory.  The chapters are
              thoroughly integrated with a CD-ROM focused on active learning by students. 
              Every text illustration is reproduced in color 3-D and includes animations,
              interactive exercises, and narration by the authors.   The textbook reflects
              the industrial experience of both authors' in industry and their years of
              teaching science education, geoscience, planetary science, and materials
              science.  The textbook addresses a diversity of student perspectives ranging
              from science teachers to geologists, across the broader earth sciences, to
              connections with cognate disciplines like chemistry, physics, mathematics, and
              biology.  This project involves collaboration among authors at Mount Holyoke
              College and the University of Idaho.  Educators at the University of Idaho are
              performing evaluations.  Tasa Graphic Arts, Inc.,  is producing the
              illustrations and the CD.  The initial three chapters are the basis for a 
              low-cost textbook that incorporates state-of-the-art pedagogy and computer
              animation that may be used by students in the geosciences as well as science
              education programs.  Funding for preparation of these initial chapters
              demonstrates the innovative ideas proposed for the full text illustrating the
              potential for improving the quality of science teacher preparation, adding
              diversity to the textbooks in this field, and providing for integration of
              technology into earth science and related curricula.

