Title       : File, Database and I/O Systems Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9117028

Award Number: 9117028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174537             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              There are two technology trends strongly impacting the design and              
              performance of I/O systems.  First, processor power, especially for            
              single (or few) chip designs, is increasing very rapidly, leading to:          
              (a) (almost) corresponding increases in I/O load, (b) distributed              
              systems with workstations (w/wo local disks), file servers and                 
              computation nodes, and (c) multiprocessors with enormous                       
              cost/performance advantages over uniprocessors providing the same              
              aggregate performance.  Second, disk storage densities are increasing          
              rapidly without any comparable increase in disk performance.  A number         
              of design and optimization problems have become extremely important            
              due to these trends: (a) Systems are becoming increasingly susceptible         
              to I/O bottlenecks due to increasing I/O rates and the less quickly in         
              creasing ability of the I/O system to respond to them.  (b)                    
              Multiprocessor systems with shared I/O devices and/or databases are            
              increasingly susceptible to I/O bottlenecks in referencing, locking            
              and updating shared data.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This project continues research on a number of topics relating to              
              file, I/O and database system performance.  These include: (a)                 
              Development and analysis of algorithms for disk caching in distributed         
              and hierarchical systems, taking into account both consistency and             
              performance.  (b) Studies of the effect of disk caching in conjunction         
              with disk striping and log structured file systems.  (c) Analysis and          
              development of locking algorithms for shared, distributed database             
              systems.  (d) Design, optimization and implementation of hierarchical          
              and distributed file migration in a very large mass storage systems            
              using optical disks to be built at UC Berkeley.  The work relies               
              heavily on actual system measurement and trace driven simulation.
