Title       : Organic Free Radical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9117929

Award Number: 9117929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Newcomb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor Martin E. Newcomb at Wayne State                  
              University.  A number of very fast organic radical reactions will              
              be studied including second order radical trapping reactions that              
              approach the rate of diffusion in low viscosity solvents and first             
              order rearrangements of highly reactive radicals that have                     
              lifetimes at room temperature as short as several picoseconds.  An             
              indirect kinetic method for determining rate constants of carbon-              
              centered radical rearrangements which has been reported will be                
              further developed such that it will have an ultimate kinetic                   
              resolution at room temperature of about one picosecond and will be             
              useful even when direct kinetic studies are not possible.  The                 
              indirect method will be extended to decarboxylations of acyloxy                
              radicals and reactions of nitrogen-centered radicals.  Fast                    
              rearrangements of aryl-substituted cyclopropyl-carbinyl radicals,              
              substituted 5-hexenyl radicals and the cubylcarbinyl radical will              
              be fully characterized.  Applications of radical rearrangements in             
              mechanistic studies of iron-containing enzymes and their models                
              will be initiated.  A direct laser-flash kinetic method will also              
              be utilized to study decarboxylations of acyloxy radicals as well              
              as rearrangements of carbon- and nitrogen-centered radicals.                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Organic radicals, neutral species with an odd number of electrons,             
              will be studied.  These reactive species will be generated by                  
              thermolysis of stable precursor molecules.  An indirect method of              
              determining the rates of reactions of the radicals will be                     
              developed.  This new rate measurement method will allow                        
              examinations of reactions of carbon and nitrogen containing                    
              radicals which were previously too rapid to study conveniently.                
              Application of this new technology to examine iron-containing                  
              enzymes and their models will be initiated.  The results are                   
              expected to provide valuable information that can be used in a wide            
              variety of organic and biological reactions that involve radical               
              intermediates.
