Title       : Metabolism of Flagellar Protein mRNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1994  
File        : a9117835

Award Number: 9117835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen J. Baker ejb@med.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Regeneration of detached flagella by Chlamydomonas reinhardtii,                
              requires the coordinate induction of synthesis of a large number               
              of flagellar proteins.  Following induction, flagellar protein                 
              mRNAs are specifically destroyed in a translation-dependent manner.            
              This proposal addresses the mechanism and specificity of the                   
              regulated degradation.  Chimeric mRNAs, composed of parts of the               
              regulated alpha-tubulin mRNA, and an unregulated stable mRNA will              
              be expressed from an alpha-tubulin promotor to determine the                   
              sequence specificity of degradation.  An in vitro degradation                  
              extract, which reproduces degradation specificity observed in vivo,            
              will be expoited to localize and characterize the trans-acting                 
              factors involved in degradation.  The translation dependence of                
              poly(A) metabolism and the effect of altered poly(A) metabolism on             
              flagellar mRNA function and stability will be investigated by                  
              identifying the sequences which direct the rate of poly(A) loss,               
              and altering those sequences.  The finding that a probable poly(A)-            
              binding protein (PABP) is coinduced by deflagellation suggests this            
              protein may be involved in regulation of the coinduced mRNAs.  The             
              sequence for the Chlamydomonas PABP will be isolated from a lambda-            
              library.  Elimination of induction of this protein will be                     
              attempted by coinducing an antisense version, and the effect on                
              coinduced mRNA stability and translation evaluated.
