Title       : U.S.-Poland Joint Fund Research on New Electrophoretic Detection and Capillary
               Modification Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9117339

Award Number: 9117339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : August 15,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrzej Stolyhwo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Gdansk
	      
	      Gdansk, PL  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5933      US-POLAND MARIE CURRIE JNT FND
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this US-Poland cooperative                            
              research project between Dr. Joseph Pesek of San Jose                          
              State University and Dr. Andrzej Stolyhwo of the                               
              Technical University of Gdansk is to further the                               
              development of the analytical capabilities of high                             
              performance capillary electrophoresis (HPCE).  Furthering                      
              the development of HPCE should enable analysis of                              
              complex mixtures of biologically important compounds.                          
              The researchers intend to apply a parallel effort in two                       
              aspects of HPCE technology:  detector design and chemical                      
              modification of the separation capillary.  Their efforts                       
              to modify the laser light scattering detector (LLSD) to                        
              accommodate the conditions of the HPCE method could                            
              provide for universal detection of HPCE.  Because it is                        
              thought that some modified capillaries will be based on                        
              direct silicon-carbon bonds at the surface, the                                
              researchers plan to use several reaction schemes. The                          
              more stable modified capillaries will be used for                              
              deactivation when electrophoretic mobility is the prime                        
              separation mechanism and to provide a partitioning                             
              medium when electrophoretic mobility cannot be used to                         
              achieve separation.  The results of this research should                       
              produce a high performance capillary electrophoresis                           
              technique with the versatility and reliability of gas                          
              chromatography.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Funds for this project to further high performance                             
              capillary electrophoresis development are awarded                              
              through the Maria Sklodowska-Curie Joint Fund II,                              
              Warsaw, in accordance with established guidelines.
