Title       : Microtuble Organization and Dynamics During Amphibian Oogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1995   
File        : a9117477

Award Number: 9117477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Gard gard@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                Amphibian eggs are polarized along an animal-vegetal (A-V) axis             
              defined by the asymmetric distribution of pigment and yolk, and by             
              the location of the meiotic spindles.  The A-V axis formed during              
              oogenesis plays an important role in the establishment of the germ             
              layers during later embryonic development.  Microtubules and                   
              microtubule organizing centers have often been implicated in                   
              specification of the A-V axis, though the precise mechanism remains            
              unknown.  The proposed experiments are designed to determine the               
              organization and dynamics of microtubules and microtubule                      
              organizing centers during oogenesis and A-V axis formation in                  
              Xenopus laevis.  Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy will be                
              used to examine the organization of total and acetylated (non-                 
              dynamic) microtubules during oogenesis.  Microinjection of                     
              biotinylated-tubulin will be used to characterize the microtubule              
              assembly sites and dynamics in stage I oocytes, during A-V axis                
              formation in stages III-IV, and during oocyte maturation.                      
              Microinjection of fluorescein-labeled tubulin and time-lapse                   
              confocal microscopy will be used to examine microtubule dynamics in            
              living stage I oocytes and during assembly and alignment of the                
              meiotic spindles.  %%%                                                         
                                                                                             
              The oocyte of Xenopus laevis is a large spherical cell that                    
              exhibits a nonrandom distribution of cytoplasmic components early              
              in its development.  The mechanism that controls this                          
              redistribution is not known, but is significant because it                     
              underlies polarized growth of the embryo.  This project will                   
              provide important information on the roles of microtubules and                 
              microtubule organizing centers on the formation of the animal-                 
              vegetal axis of this cell.
