Title       : Workshop for Project PANGEA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1992   
File        : a9117687

Award Number: 9117687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Klein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Global Sedimentary Geology Program (GSGP) , established               
              as a Commission of the International Union of Geological Sciences,             
              is now initiating its second research project dealing with a study             
              of the global sedimentary record of PANGEA, a supercontinent which             
              existed during a time interval ranging from the base of the                    
              Pennsylvanian (Middle  Carboniferous) through the early Jurassic.              
              This time interval offers special opportunities to understand                  
              global processes and both their magnitude and temporal variations              
              during a time of accretion, zenith and breakup of a major                      
              supercontinent.  Its sediments preserve evidence of a broad range              
              of climatic changes including glacial to desert.  Milankovitch                 
              rhythms, development and demise of carbonate platforms and reefs,              
              evaporites, and phosphorites, and includes two major extinction                
              events at the boundaries between the Permian and Triassic and the              
              Triassic and Jurassic.  Its deposits include large quantities of               
              natural resources including petroleum, salt, phosphorites and coal.            
                   To implement this new project, an integrated workshop                     
              involving five working groups, is planned in Lawrence, Kansas,                 
              between May 24 and May 29, 1992.  Each of the working Groups are               
              based with Project PANGEA and include (1) Paleogeography,                      
              Paleoclimatic modelling and Plate Tectonics, (2) Global Sedimentary            
              Record, (3) Global Synchroniety and Stratigraphic Constraints, (4)             
              Resources, and (5) Synthesis.  A general summary will close the                
              workshop to provide overall project coordination.                              
                   A U.S. National Group for Project PANGEA was established also.            
              This working group has the dual responsibility of coordinating the             
              U.S. research effort and insure adequate participation of U. S.                
              Scientists.  On behalf of this U .S. National Working Group, this              
              proposal is made for funding to support the travel of key U.S.                 
              personnel to the planned workshop in Lawrence Kansas, as well as               
              funding for U.S. based Keynote speakers, and five scientist from               
              the USSR, People's Republic of China and Eastern Europe.
