Title       : Rock Magnetic Studies of Soils and Pedogenic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9117790

Award Number: 9117790
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Verosub verosub@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Singer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Our recent studies of the magnetic properties of soil                     
              chronosequences has shown that rock magnetic studies are a powerful            
              tool for studying soils and identifying soil inhomogeneities.                  
              Magnetic susceptibility, frequency dependent susceptibility, loss              
              of susceptibility upon treatment with the buffered strong reductant            
              citrate-bicarbonate-dithionite, anhysteretic remanent                          
              magnetization, and other rock magnetic properties indicate that                
              pedogenic processes convert non- or weakly-magnetic minerals to                
              strongly magnetic minerals and that the particle size of these                 
              magnetic minerals are smaller than the size of the inherited suite             
              of magnetic minerals.  The time variation of indices of rock                   
              magnetic properties are nearly linear for pedons within three                  
              California chronosequences, indicating that rock magnetic                      
              properties may be useful in studies of soil chronosequences,                   
              indicating that rock magnetic properties may be useful in studies              
              of soil chronosequences.  The goal of the research that we propose             
              to undertake is to further the understanding of the processes and              
              relationships discovered in the initial work.  In particular, we               
              will further explore the interdependence of rock magnetic                      
              properties and particle size, mineralogy, profile location, and                
              soil forming process.  In addition, we will test the relationship              
              between the presumed ages of pedons and rock magnetic indices by               
              sampling and measuring rock magnetic properties on a wider range               
              of soils.
