Title       : Physiology of Photoperiodic Time Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1992   
File        : a9117963

Award Number: 9117963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198913             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Page Terry.L.Page@Vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Seasonal cycles of reproduction and development are very common in             
              a wide variety of animals that utlize the length of the day as a               
              cue to asses the time of year. The research proposed is directed               
              toward understanding the mechanism by which daylength (or                      
              photoperiod) is measured. Previous studies have led to the                     
              hypothesis regulates the biological clock that regulates daily                 
              (i.e., circadian) rhythms of behavior and metabolism is involved               
              in photoperiodic time measurement. We plan to directly test that               
              hypothesis utilizing and insect, the cricket, Gryllus firmus, as               
              a model system. There are two specific goals of the research                   
              program. The first is to confirm that the "circadian clock" is in              
              fact a component of the "photoperiodic clock" that regulates                   
              seasonal rhythms. The second is to initiate studies to determine               
              the precise role of the circadian clock in carrying otu the                    
              measurement of daylength. Gryllus Firmus females lay eggs that                 
              either develop immediately or enter a state of developmental                   
              arrest. If the adult female is maintained in long, summer-like days            
              (e.g., 14 h of light per day) then the egge develop, but if the                
              females ismaintained in short, winter-like days the eggs undergo               
              developmentyal arrest for over-wintering. We plan to characterize              
              the anatomical and physiological organization of the circadian                 
              system thaty regualtes daily rhythms of locomototr activity, and               
              examine the specific role played  by the circadian system in                   
              photoperiodic time measurement.
