Title       : Genetics and Biochemistry of Xanthan Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1993   
File        : a9117748

Award Number: 9117748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Spencer A. Benson sbenson@microb.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Xanthan gum (xanthan) is an exopolysaccharide that is produced by              
              the gram-negative pseudomonad, Xanthomonas campestris.  Xanthan is             
              composed of repeating penta-saccharide subunits that are                       
              polymerized through B-1-4 linkages between  adjacent glucose                   
              residues to create a polymer with a glucose backbone, having the               
              same structure as cellulose; alternate glucose molecules contain               
              trisaccharide side-chains composed of one molecule of glucuronate              
              plus two molecules of mannose substituted with an acetyl or                    
              pyruvate group.  This project will study xanthan production in                 
              X.campestris as a model system to obtain an understanding of the               
              genetics and biochemistry that determine the ability of bacteria to            
              synthesize and export exopolysaccharides.  The study of xanthan                
              production is important for two reasons:  the ability of bacteria              
              to colonize hosts is often associated with polysaccharide                      
              production; thus investigations into the production of                         
              polysaccharides should contribute significant new knowledge about              
              bacterial-host relationships.  Also, these studies of xanthan                  
              biosynthesis will contribute to our understanding of macromolecules            
              cross the molecularly complex cellular envelope.  A cluster of 12              
              gum genes codes for proteins that function in the assembly and                 
              polymerization of the xanthan repeat units.  The expression of this            
              gum gene cluster will be delineated, and the presence of                       
              additional, as yet, undiscovered gum genes that function in the                
              cellular export of xanthan will be investigated.  A collection lacZ            
              and phoA fusions to each of the clustered gum genes will be                    
              isolated using a combination of in vivo and in vitro procedures.               
              These fusions will be used to: (i) characterized the cellular                  
              location of the gum proteins, (ii) determine the level of in vivo              
              expression of each gum gene, and (iii) define the transcriptional              
              director gum transcripton unit.  The region of DNA that contains               
              the gum cluster promoter will be fused to lacZ; the effect of                  
              deletion and spontaneous "leaky" mutations on the expression of                
              lacZ will be used to clearly define and characterized the gum                  
              promoter.  Gene products that are needed to export xanthan from the            
              cell are virtually certain to be envelope proteins.  Since alkaline            
              phosphatase (product of phoA) activity is restricted to the                    
              periplasm, putative export mutants will be isolated as TnphoA                  
              insertions that are Gum-PhoA+.  These mutants will be characterized            
              to begin to define the genes involved in the export process.
