Title       : Plant and Insect Thermal Hysteresis Antifreeze Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1993    
File        : a9117903

Award Number: 9117903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Duman john.g.duman.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis J. Castellino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Thermal hysteresis producing antifreeze proteins lower the freezing            
              point, but not the melting point, of water by a special mechanism              
              which makes them extremely effective antifreezes. These antifreeze             
              proteins (AFPs) have been reported in many cold blooded animals                
              (polar marine fishes, insects, spiders, centipedes), but they have             
              been best studied in fish where the biochemistry of the AFPs are               
              well understood and certain of the AFP genes have cloned and                   
              transferred to other organisms (salmon, plants, bacteria).                     
              The AFPs from the overwintering larvae of the beetle Dendroides                
              canadensis are by far the most active AFPs known. The studies                  
              outlined in this proposal will allow us to continue our work on                
              these interesting AFPs. Biochemical characterization of the AFP                
              will continue and in addition we will clone the Dendroides AFP                 
              gene. The gene will be sequenced, providing the amino acid sequence            
              of the protein and allowing comparisons to the fish AFPs. Also, the            
              function of the AFPs in the membranes of epidermal cells located               
              just under the cuticle of the larvae will be investigated. These               
              studies will further our understanding of the role of AFPs in                  
              insect cold tolerance. Because of the high activity of this AFP the            
              results could have applications in cryopreservation, agriculture               
              and frozen food technology.
