Title       : Doctoral Dissertation in Law and Social Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9117466

Award Number: 9117466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm M. Feeley mmf@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              While "rights" are a central element of the American legal                     
              tradition, they have been largely ignored in Japan.  The social                
              science literature about Japan is dominated by the assumption that             
              rights are an alien transplant incompatible with Japanese culture.             
              Japanese culture is seen as inhospitable to the "Western" notion               
              of rights which are perceived as pervading and controlling the                 
              political and legal dispositions of citizens and rulers alike.                 
              Japan's political culture is thought to include such                           
              characteristics as an avoidance of direct conflict, a deep-seated              
              respect for authority, and a strong desire for compromise and                  
              consensus.  These assumptions have been accepted by most scholars              
              of Japanese law and politics and, thus, a rigorous study of rights             
              in Japan has not been undertaken.                                              
                                                                                             
              This dissertation research rejects the notion that rights are                  
              unimportant in Japan and hypothesizes that rights are a critical               
              element of the process and substance of Japanese policymaking in               
              the courts and the legislature.  The study examines the role and               
              importance of individual rights in Japan in the context of                     
              contemporary health care conflicts.  The research will focus on                
              legislation, litigation, and mediation involving AIDS, the                     
              definition of death (organ transplantation/brain death), and                   
              contraception.  Each of these areas has been the subject of intense            
              conflict and debate about individual rights and the limits of                  
              justifiable state interference.  The methodology will consist of               
              an analysis of several case studies and interviews with parties to             
              the disputes.  Among the major issues to be addressed are                      
              circumstances under which individual rights are invoked, the extent            
              to which lawmakers are responsive to such appeals, whether and how             
              rights are ultimately reconciled with community welfare, and the               
              similarities and differences between legislative, litigative, and              
              mediated visions of rights.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This study will be the first to explore the relationship between               
              individual rights, state power, and health policy in Japan,                    
              incorporating legal, political, and sociological perspectvies.  It             
              will offer new insight into the workings of Japanese law and                   
              politics, add to the debate on Japanese policymaking, enrich the               
              study of dispute resolution in Japan, and provide a new perspective            
              to the analysis of Japanese conflict.  It will also suggest                    
              comparative approaches to the study of rights at a time when there             
              is deep questioning in the U.S. about whether America's sense of               
              community has been eroded because of an overemphasis on rights and             
              the neglect of a sense of duty.
