Title       : Theoretical Description of Charge Transfer Processes Near Metal Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1993  
File        : a9117479

Award Number: 9117479
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Nordlander nordland@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical Description of Charge Transfer Processes Near Metal                
              Surfaces - This project has the goal of increasing our                         
              understanding of charge transfer phenomena between atoms or simple             
              molecules and metal surfaces.  In the first part, the complex                  
              scaling technique will be used to calculate the electron tunneling             
              probabilities between excited atomic (or molecular) states and a               
              model metal surface.  In particular, the effects of impurity                   
              coadsorption and of lateral corrugation (model lattice structure)              
              of the surface potential on these tunneling rates will be                      
              investigated.  These transition rates will then be combined with a             
              time-dependent scattering model to allow description of charge                 
              transfer processes in collisions taking place between an atom (or              
              molecule) and a metal surface.  Again, influences specific to real             
              metallic surfaces will be included into the model.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The energy and lifetime of excited states of atoms and molecules at            
              or near metal surfaces are controlling factors in many dynamical               
              phenomena taking place near surfaces.  For example, atoms bound to             
              the surface can be desorbed through the action of light or                     
              energetic electrons if an electronically excited antibonding state             
              has a long enough lifetime.  This lifetime, however, depends                   
              strongly on the interaction between the atom and the metal surface.            
                                                                                             
              Similarly, the lifetime of excited states generated in atom-surface            
              scattering help to determine the dispersion of the scattered beam.             
              The goal of this project is to develop methods for evaluating the              
              effect of a metal surface on a nearby atom, and to predict the                 
              ultimate result of this influence on the atom-surface scattering               
              problem.
