Title       : Collaborative Research: Modern Geochronologic Geochemical Techniques Applied to
               a Young Volcanic Field: The Potrillo Volcanic Field, New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9117407

Award Number: 9117407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71359              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Y. Anthony eanthony@geo.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Whitelaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
                   This project combines geochronologic, paleomagnetic and                   
              geochemical studies of this Potrillo Volcanic Field of southern New            
              Mexico.  This young (<Ma) field is located within the active Rio               
              Grande Rift and is composed of a series of maare and several                   
              hundred mafic flows.  Geochronologic methods will include 40AR/39Ar,           
              U-series disequilibria, and surface exposure (3He) dating.  The age            
              limits of these three methods overlap, thus allowing an excellent              
              opportunity to develop a robust chronology for the field while also            
              testing the internal consistency of each method.  The series of                
              flows preserve a large population of high fidelity records of the              
              geomagnetic field.   An intensive paleomagnetic sampling regime,               
              in conjunction with the chronologic studies, will be used to                   
              identify and date high amplitude geomagnetic excursions of the                 
              Earth's magnetic field and to examine to axial dipole hypothesis,              
              a tenet of paleomagnetism which assumes that the geomagnetic field             
              averages to a geocentric axial dipole over time.  These studies,               
              combined with trace element and petrological characterization of               
              the flows, will provide insight into the rates of physical and                 
              chemical evolution and the eruptive cyclicity within is very young             
              field and serve as a paradigm for currently active explosive                   
              volcanism contributing atmospheric aerosols on a global basis.
