Title       : Collaborative Research: The Role of the Intermediate Form in Data Translation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1992 
File        : a9117095

Award Number: 9117095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ron Ashany                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Barnes jbarnes@cs.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In the data translation arena, there is considerable speculation               
              about the relative merits of the pairwise model of data                        
              translation versus the intermediate-form model.  If translation                
              is desired between some number of specific encoding schemes, the               
              pairwise model of translation requires that translators be                     
              written between every combination of the encoding schemes, taken               
              two at a time.  The intermediate-form model requires that a new,               
              generic encoding scheme be used as an intermediate vehicle.                    
              Then, for each encoding scheme, two translators need to be                     
              written, one to and one from the intermediate encoding                         
              scheme.  These can then be composed to form a translation bridge               
              between any two specific encoding schemes.  This project proposes              
              two experiments to evaluate these models of data translation.                  
              The first experiment is designed to compare the quality of the                 
              translators in each case.  The second experiment is designed to                
              compare the effort required to generate the translators in each                
              case.  The ultimate goal of the work is to provide general,                    
              definitive guidelines for choosing a model of data translation.                
              These guidelines will allow the myriad practitioners who do data               
              translation to optimize their efforts by choosing the model that               
              best supports their individual translation environment.
