Title       : U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research: Population Structure and Zoogeography of
               Commercially Important Fishes of the Parana-Paraguay River Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1994      
File        : a9117104

Award Number: 9117104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tomas E. Gergely                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9900               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Bell mabell@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5911      ARGENTINA
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
Program Ref : 1127,
Abstract    :
              This award from the U.S.-Argentina Cooperative                                 
              Science Program supports research in ecology  to be                            
              conducted by Drs. Michael A. Bell and Axel Meyer of                            
              the State University of New York, Stonybrook and Dr.                           
              Alberto Espinach Ros of the Instituto Nacional de                              
              Investigaciones y Desarrollo Pesesquero (INIDEP) at                            
              Buenos Aires, Argentina.  The project focuses on the                           
              study of the commercially important characiform                                
              fishes of the genera Prochilodus and Salminus that                             
              inhabit the Paraguay-Parana-Uruguay basin..  The                               
              main objective will be to assess the phylogenetic                              
              relationships and geographic structure of their                                
              populations in order to understand the evolutionary                            
              processes that have affected them.                                             
                                                                                             
              The aim of the project will be to use mitochondrial                            
              DNA sequences to identify different populations of                             
              characiform fish in the Paraguay-Parana-Uruguay                                
              river basin, to quantify the amount of intraspecific                           
              differentiation and gene flow.  Further, the                                   
              geographic population of the two taxa Prochilodus                              
              and Salminus will be related to resource management.                           
              The data will also be used to formulate historical                             
              biogeographical hypotheses based on the phylogenetic                           
              analyses and distribution patterns observed for both                           
              taxa.  The expertise in field work possessed by the                            
              INIDEP team will be synergistic with the expertise                             
              in genetics residing in the group at Stonybrook.
