Title       : Molecular Basis of Phytopathogenicity of Pseudomonas solanacearum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9117544

Award Number: 9117544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Schell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy P. Denny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Pseudomonas solanacearum is an ecologically and economically                   
              important phytopathogen causing a lethal wilt disease of over 200              
              solanaceous plants worldwide.  The research proposed investigates              
              biochemical and genetic basis of its pathogenicity, focusing on                
              major extracellular macromolecules.  A greater than 10-kb segment              
              (Region I) of the P. solanacearum genome in which insertions                   
              simultaneously cause a major decrease in virulence, production of              
              extracellular polysaccharide slime (EPS), and synthesis of two                 
              major extracellular proteins (EXPs) has been identified.  One                  
              objective of the proposed research is to characterize Region I gene            
              products and investigate their involvement in virulence and                    
              synthesis of extracellular virulence molecules.  This will be                  
              accomplished by E. coli maxicell analysis of Region I subclones,               
              TnphoA mutagenesis, and in vitro biochemical and in planta studies             
              of nonpolar isertion mutants of Region I.  The gene encoding a                 
              major 28-kDa EXP, whose level correlates with EPS levels, will be              
              cloned and similarly analyzed.  For the biochemical studies we will            
              first develop methods to detect accumulation of intermediates in               
              EPS synthesis.  Expression of Region I depends on two distinct,                
              unlinked loci that encode exported (membrane) proteins, and a locus            
              located 6 kb downstream of Region I; other studies suggest that all            
              these loci control other virulence genes unlinked to Region I.                 
              Additional project objectives are characterization of the                      
              regulatory proteins by DNA sequence and gene product analysis,                 
              exploring crosstalk between them by analysis of Region I expression            
              in multiple mutant background, and investigation of signals                    
              affecting virulence gene regulation.
