Title       : U.S.-Denmark Collaborative Research on Collisions of Ions with Circular-State
               Atoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1995    
File        : a9117374

Award Number: 9117374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith B. MacAdam   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1241,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Keith MacAdam and others of                      
              his research group at the University of Kentucky to                            
              collaborate in physics research with Professor E. Horsdal-                     
              Pedersen of the Institute of Physics, University of Aarhus,                    
              Denmark. They will investigate the collisions of singly                        
              charged ions on a target of highly excited Rydberg atoms in                    
              states of maximum angular momentum, called circular-states.                    
              Methods for creating these states have recently been                           
              developed, but there has been virtually no investigation                       
              yet of their collisional properties.  This proposed ground                     
              breaking work requires the combination of expertise found                      
              in the two collaborating groups and the unique facilities                      
              of the Institute of Physics at Aarhus.  The U.S. group                         
              contributes substantial expertise in ion-Rydberg atom                          
              collisions and various analytical techniques.  The Danish                      
              investigator is a first class researcher in electron                           
              capture processes and circular state production.  The                          
              collision measurements will be carried out using lasers and                    
              low energy ion beams at the Danish Institute, where the                        
              necessary circular-state collision target is being                             
              installed in a dedicated scattering apparatus.                                 
                                                                                             
              This project will elucidate new phenomena in electron                          
              capture and angular-momentum changing collisions at                            
              intermediate velocities.  No collision studies of high                         
              angular momentum or circular state Rydberg atoms with                          
              incident ions have ever been done.  The observation of an                      
              alignment dependence in charge transfer is very new, even                      
              for the lowest non-isotropic state of a target, and it is                      
              expected to stimulate new interactions between theory and                      
              experiment.  The opportunity to bring together the newest                      
              techniques and researchers uniquely accomplished in the                        
              required areas for a study of the "Three Body Problem" at                      
              the boundary of quantum and classical mechanics is an                          
              outstanding opportunity for scientific progress.
