Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Model-Assisted Comparative Sequence Stratigraphy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1992   
File        : a9117513

Award Number: 9117513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne Bourgeois                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124105             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cliff Frohlich   (Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Galloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
                   One of the most intriguing aspects of the geologic record of              
              global change is the role of orbital forcing in ice volume                     
              fluctuations.  While the variation in solar insolation resulting               
              from perturbations in the Earth's orbit are relatively small and               
              average out over the year, their effect on global ice volume is                
              quite large.  The Miocene is an especially interesting period of               
              global change.  Early Miocene oceanic deep water temperatures were             
              much warmer than today.  The middle to late Miocene encompasses a              
              major transition toward conditions more like today.  Recent studies            
              indicate the mechanism linking Miocene deep water temperatures and             
              global ice volume were quite different from the late Pleistocene.              
              Collaborative research shall achieve an integrated, internally                 
              consistent interpretation regarding orbital forcing of Miocene                 
              eustasy and resulting sequence stratigraphy of the Baltimore Canyon            
              Trough and the Northwest Gulf of Mexico Basin.  Central to this                
              undertaking is the STRATA-various computer program, which has been             
              developed specifically to perform two- and three-dimensional                   
              forward modeling of clastic sedimentation within the context of                
              high-frequency glacioeustatic sea level fluctuations.  The Miocene             
              sequences of the Baltimore Canyon Trough and the Northwest Gulf of             
              Mexico Basin offer differing and complementary challenges and                  
              opportunities.  The former is a thinner section, offering better               
              resolution in higher frequency seismic data whereas the latter is              
              thicker, more complete, and has a higher density of well log                   
              information available.  Both sequences must be affected by the same            
              Miocene glacioeustasy.  Can stratigraphy be resolved down to the               
              10,000 year event level predicted by orbital forcing?  More precise            
              and quantitative solutions to stratigraphic problems shall create              
              the framework within which to document the geologic record of                  
              global change.
