Title       : Climate Forcing, Ocean Circulation, and the Geologic Record of Global Change
               Across the Cenomanian/Turonian Boundary, Western Interior Seaway of North
               America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1992  
File        : a9117398

Award Number: 9117398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudy L. Slingerland sling@geosc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee R. Kump  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Barron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Arthur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,1577,
Abstract    :
                   Strata deposited during the globally warm, equable, Cretaceous            
              period preserve the record of a unique natural experiment which                
              will help us better understand the dynamical behavior of the                   
              integrated earth system.  The stratigraphic record of the Western              
              Interior Cretaceous Seaway (WIKS) provides an unparalleled                     
              opportunity for study because of the availability of substantial               
              data sets that are ripe for synthesis and analysis.  Using the WIKS            
              as a working "laboratory" we propose to:  (1) understand the global            
              climate system and its variability during a period of extreme                  
              warmth; (2) validate climate models for conditions substantially               
              different from the present day; (3) determine the oceanographic,               
              biological, and chemical responses of the WIKS across the C/T                  
              boundary to both global and regional forcing factors; and (4)                  
              better define the links between these seaway responses and the                 
              geologic record of the Western Interior Basin.                                 
                   In this study a series of hierarchical atmospheric and ocean              
              model simulations constrained by the diverse WIKS dataset will be              
              performed for three times slices representing different stages of              
              a major second order sea level cycle (Greenhorn cyclothem).  For               
              each time slice we will:  (1) determine the global paleogeography,             
              paleotopography, sea level, and atmospheric pCO2 from the                      
              literature; (2) perform baseline numerical experiments of global               
              climate using the NCAR Community Climate Model (CCM); (3) perform              
              a series of CCM sensitivity experiments to sealevel changes, low               
              versus high topography, variable orbital parameters, and variable              
              pCO2; (4) investigate the sensitivity of the WIKS to CCM variation             
              by using daily wind stresses and evaporation minus precipitation               
              from the CCM runs to drive a three-dimensional, turbulent flow,                
              coastal ocean model; (5) investigate the influence these                       
              circulation changes might have on organic carbon production, and               
              carbon and oxygen isotopes by following chemical tracers in the                
              circulation model and developing box models of nutrients, oxygen,              
              and salinity; and (6) test these predictions by assembling                     
              lithofacies maps, benthic biofacies/oxygen gradient maps, and maps             
              of inferred temperature, paleosalinity and organic carbon                      
              distribution.
