Title       : Energetics of the Adults and Larvae of the Antarctic Krill Euphausia superba
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9117633

Award Number: 9117633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341186             (Estimated)
Investigator: Langdon B. Quetin langdon@icess.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin M. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research on the energetics of the adults and larvae of the                
              Antarctic krill, Euphausia superba, is focused on quantification               
              of the role of ice biota in winter-over survival of krill larvae.              
              Observed interannual differences in physiological condition of                 
              the larvae during the winter could lead to differences in                      
              survival of the young-of-the-year, and thus in the strength of                 
              any one year class.  Processes underlying such differences during              
              early and late winter will be studied.  Low food availability in               
              the fall after the summer phytoplankton blooms suggests that                   
              larvae in early winter will have experienced several months of                 
              near starvation conditions.  Without an additional food source                 
              such as ice biota in the underside of the sea ice these larvae                 
              may not survive the winter.  However, larvae under the ice in                  
              late winter of a heavy ice year will have had this additional                  
              food source, and may be in better physiological condition than                 
              the beginning of the winter.  Environmental conditions in open                 
              water and under ice will be compared and will be sampled to                    
              determine their physiological condition.  The nutritional                      
              contribution of the ice biota to total energy demand of the                    
              larvae on two month-long cruises to the Southern Ocean will be                 
              quantified.  The proposed research will address several                        
              significant questions about the winter-over energetics of larval               
              krill, in particular the role of ice biota in winter-over                      
              survival and subsequent recruitment.
