Title       : U.S.-Belgium Cooperative Research: Dynamics and Energetics of Electrons and
               Nuclei in Molecular Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1992     
File        : a9117130

Award Number: 9117130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yngve Ohrn ohrn@qtp.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erik Deumens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5947      BELGIUM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1954,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award will support collaborative research involving            
              Yngve Ohrn and Erik Deumens of the University of Florida, Lucas                
              Lathouwers of the University of Antwerp, and Jean-Marie Andre of               
              the University of Our Lady of Peace in Namur, Belgium.  The                    
              proposed research deals with time-dependent studies of electron and            
              nuclear dynamics in molecular systems.  In order to predict                    
              electron transfer rates and to distinguish between various transfer            
              mechanisms, the investigators propose to use time-dependent                    
              variational principles and model wavefunctions for electrons.                  
              Electron transfer as a general phenomenon affects our thinking in              
              virtually all areas of chemistry and in many areas of biology.                 
                                                                                             
              Prior collaboration between Yngve Ohrn and Dr. Lathouwer's                     
              group at Antwerp has been highly productive and covered the                    
              development of theory and computational methods for the study of               
              these processes at the submolecular level.  The investigators                  
              propose to continue their theoretical work and modeling and apply              
              the time-dependent methodology to extended polymeric systems.                  
              Dr. Andre's group provides the necessary expertise on polymer                  
              codes and polymeric systems.  The project will continue to benefit             
              from Dr. Lathouwer's expertise on model wavefunctions.  These                  
              combined efforts will advance our understanding of the dynamics                
              of electron transfer and contribute significantly to modern concepts           
              in theoretical chemistry.
