Title       : Correlated Electron Transport in One-dimensional Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1994  
File        : a9117341

Award Number: 9117341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid I. Glazman glazman@physics.spa.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Boris I. Shklovskii  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Correlated Electron Transport in One-Dimensional Channels - The                
              object of this project is to build a theoretical structure within              
              which to treat quantum transport for a system with interacting                 
              electrons, in particular for narrow channels formed in gated                   
              semiconductor heterostructures.  Coulomb repulsion between                     
              electrons becomes crucially important at low electron density,                 
              resulting in long-range interactions and correlated states.  Two               
              models for a strongly correlated system of electrons will be                   
              investigated.  In the first model fluctuations of the electrostatic            
              potential that forms the channel within the inversion layer is                 
              taken as much smaller than the electron-electron interaction.  The             
              second model will take account of strong fluctuations in the                   
              potential and the resulting formation of almost isolated quantum               
              dots.  These models will be compared with experimental results.                
              %%%                                                                            
              Recent progress in fabrication of semiconductor structures,                    
              including electron beam lithography and MBE growth on vicinal                  
              surfaces, has allowed the systematic experimental study of quantum             
              transport on submicron length scales.  Existing theories accurately            
              describe the case where the electrons in a narrow channel move with            
              very little scattering, and the opposite case where the electrons              
              are frozen tightly in place.  There is, however and intermediate               
              regime where a single sample can be changed from a metal to an                 
              insulator simply by changing the electron density.  This much more             
              interesting regime cannot be treated using conventional models,                
              because they do not include electron-electron interactions                     
              properly.  This research project proposes to develop models for                
              this intermediate transition regime.  Such understanding is quite              
              important, as this class of effects have been proposed as the basis            
              for the next generation of ultra-small electronic devices.
