Title       : Japan Long-Term Research Visit: Bifurcation and Instabilityin Condensing Systems
               with Noncondensable Gases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1992       
File        : a9117928

Award Number: 9117928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26239              (Estimated)
Investigator: Per Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5959      JAPAN INITIATIVE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1406,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a long-term visit by Professor Per                     
              Peterson, Department of Nuclear Engineering, University of                     
              California, Berkeley to Japan for a cooperative research project               
              with Professor Kunio Hijikata, Department of Mechanical                        
              Engineering Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology.  The                      
              researchers plan to undertake a study of instability and                       
              bifurcation in vertical condensing systems.  The study will focus              
              on instabilities which occur when lower molecular weight vapor                 
              condenses beneath higher molecular weight noncondensable gas, and              
              also on the inverse condition of high molecular weight vapor                   
              above low molecular weight noncondensable gas.  The research is                
              of fundamental importance because as higher Rayleigh numbers are               
              encountered in industrial applications, no experimental,                       
              numerical or theoretical information is available even though the              
              unstable gas vapor interface is known to cause large temperature               
              and pressure fluctuations in condensing systems.                               
                                                                                             
              The research should result in significant advances in our                      
              understanding of heat transfer mechanisms in the heat pipe or                  
              other high efficiency thermal energy transport systems.                        
              Additional areas that will be impacted by this research include                
              electronics, cooling, satellite thermal control, and surface                   
              condenser efficiency.  The Department of Mechanical Engineering                
              Sciences at Tokyo Institute of Technology has excellent                        
              facilities for laser holographic and shadow-graph investigations               
              of condensation.  Professor Hijikata has extensive research                    
              experience in condensation problems and in numerical                           
              investigation of condensation in stable systems with                           
              noncondensable gases.  This complements Professor Peterson's work              
              in stable systems which should insure a fruitful collaboration                 
              resulting in benefits to both countries.  It is expected that                  
              this collaboration will continue after the formal agreement has                
              terminated.
