Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RUI: Biogeography of Latest Devonianand Carboniferous
               Echinoderms From the Peoples Republic of China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9117673

Award Number: 9117673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marvin E. Kauffman                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60197              (Estimated)
Investigator: Johnny A. Waters   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : State Univ of West Georgia
	      
	      Carrollton, GA  30118    404/834-1311

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   The Carboniferous is the Age of Echinoderms, especially                   
              stemmed echinoderms.  Faunas are commonly abundant and diverse, but            
              many genera are high endemic.  Crinoid endemism can make                       
              biogeographic analysis difficult, but could play a positive role               
              in assessing the proximity of continental blocks during the                    
              Carboniferous.  In this study, we will focus on echinoderms from               
              the latest Devonian and Carboniferous of China that could provide              
              constraints to paleogeographic reconstructions of the closure of               
              Paleo-Tethys.  Sparse collections of crinoids from the latest                  
              Devonian of northwestern China indicate the presence of a fauna                
              that may be intermediate in nature between older (Devonian)                    
              European echinoderm communities and younger (Early Carboniferous)              
              North American echinoderm communities.  Camerate crinoids decreased            
              in diversity and abundance, becoming virtually "extinct" in North              
              America and Europe.  However, some Carboniferous camerates survived            
              elsewhere in the world and eventually made a dramatic, although                
              short-lived, comeback during the Permian in the Tethyan realm                  
              (e.g., Australia, Timor, and the USSR).  Collections of crinoids               
              from the mid-Carboniferous of southeastern China indicate the                  
              presence of a fauna that may have set the stage for this Tethyan               
              re-radiation of camerate-rich assemblages.  We will test the                   
              hypothesis that certain elements of the Carboniferous echinoderm               
              community radiated through Asia during the latest Devonian and                 
              earliest Carboniferous, expanded globally in the Carboniferous,                
              then contracted back to the Tethyan realm during the latest                    
              Carboniferous.
