Title       : Structural and Biological Characterization of Elasmobranch Urotensins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1994      
File        : a9117387

Award Number: 9117387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157117             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Conlon jmconlon@creighton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Creighton University
	      2500 California Plaza
	      Omaha, NE  68178    402/280-2360

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The term "neurosecretion" refers to the fact that certain nerve                
              fibers release biologically active substances into the blood stream            
              which are then able to influence the activities of distant target              
              organs.  The lower portion of the spinal cord of fishes contains               
              such a neurosecretory system.  The nerves synthesize two peptides              
              (small proteins) known as urotensin I and urotensin II.  The                   
              urotensins were first isolated from bony fishes (teleosts) but                 
              despite intensive study, their importance in the physiology of                 
              these fish is not understood.  The laboratories of Dr. Conlon and              
              Hazon are proposing a new animal model in which to investigate the             
              physiological roles of the urotensins.  We will purify urotensin               
              I and II from an extract of the spinal cord of a cartilaginous                 
              fish, the European common dogfish and determine their chemical                 
              structures.  We will then synthesize several milligrams of the                 
              peptides in order to determine their biological actions in the                 
              dogfish.  Using free swimming fish that have been fitted with a                
              cannula in an artery, we will investigate the effects of the                   
              dogfish urotensins on blood pressure and on the production of                  
              steroids.  The blood of the dogfish, like other members of the                 
              shark family, contains a very high concentration of urea which is              
              important in  maintaining an equilibrium between the fish's body               
              fluids and the surrounding sea water.  We will investigate the                 
              effects of the urotensins upon the levels of urea and other blood              
              constituents in the dogfish.  We will prepare strips of smooth                 
              muscle from the various organs and blood vessels of the dogfish and            
              study the abilities of the urotensins either to relax or contract              
              these muscles.  Finally, we hope to gain insight into the sites of             
              action of the urotensins by tagging the molecules with a                       
              radioactive label and determining which organs in the dogfish                  
              recognize and bind the peptides.  In this way, we hope to build up             
              an overall picture of the roles of  the urotensins in regulating               
              the physiology of a cartilaginous fish.  This knowledge will be                
              valuable in future investigations that will assess the roles of the            
              urotensins in other classes of vertebrate.
