Title       : A Bacolovirus-induced RNA Polymerase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1994  
File        : a9117186

Award Number: 9117186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309654             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Weaver 9138643399  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Early transcription in the nuclear polyhedrosis virus of Autographa            
              californica is directed by the host RNA polymerase II, while late              
              transcription depends on an a-amanitin-resistant, virus-induced                
              polymerase.  The baculoviruses are increasingly important as                   
              expression vectors for producing large quantities of useful                    
              proteins.  An understanding of baculovirus gene expression will                
              probably lead to better vectors.  In particular, an understanding              
              of the unique, a-amanitin-resistant, virus-induced RNA polymerase              
              would be especially valuable, since this is the enzyme that                    
              transcribes the cloned genes in baculovirus expression vectors.                
              The immediate goal of this project is to map and characterize the              
              genes encoding this enzyme.  The specific aims are:  1. Isolating              
              viral mutants with lesions in the genes encoding the late-specific             
              viral RNA polymerase.  This will be accomplished in three steps:               
              a. Obtaining temperature sensitive (ts) viral mutants that are                 
              deficient in late gene expression, as evidenced by failure to form             
              non-occluded virions.  b. Screening these ts mutants for the                   
              inability to carry out a-amanitin-resistnt late transcription at               
              the non-permissive temperature in isolated nuclei.  c. Screening               
              the positive mutants from specific aim 1b for a ts virus-induced               
              polymerase by purifying the enzyme and showing that it is ts in                
              vitro.  This would also demonstrate conclusively that this is                  
              indeed the polymerase responsible for late viral transcription.  2.            
              Mapping the mutant genes from specific aim 1c.  This will be done              
              by rescue of the wild-type phenotype with cloned fragments of the              
              viral genome.  3. Sequencing the mutant genes and their wild-type              
              counterparts to locate open reading frames and the lesions                     
              responsible for the ts phenotype.  In the unlikely event that we               
              cannot find mutants in the genes for the virus-induced RNA                     
              polymerase itself, the ts mutants we do isolate should be in the               
              genes for late-specific transcription factors.  These are also of              
              great interest, and will be mapped and sequenced.
