Title       : Molecular Architecture of Light-Energy Transducing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1992       
File        : a9117221

Award Number: 9117221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander N. Glazer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1166,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of this proposal is to:  (1) Complete the                
              characterization of the process whereby the phycocyanobilin                    
              prosthetic group is attached to the alpha subunit of C-phycocyanin.            
              Genetic evidence indicates that the products of genes cpcE and cpcF            
              play a role in the addition of bilin to the alpha subunit                      
              apopolypeptide.  We have expressed the two proteins encoded by                 
              these genes, CpcE and CpcF, in E. coli and are now in a position to            
              examine the biochemical role of these proteins in the bilin                    
              attachment process.  (2) Complete the characterization of bilin-               
              bearing linker polypeptide associated with the major phycoerythrin             
              of marine synechococcus sp.  WH8020.  No previous complete                     
              structure of bilin-bearing linker polypeptide has been elucidated.             
              This information on the number, type and location of bilins                    
              attached to such linker polypeptides is central to the                         
              understanding of the pathways of energy transfer in the                        
              phycobilisome.                                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              Cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) are a widely distributed group                
              of bacteria which carry out oxygen-evolving photosynthesis                     
              similar to that characteristic of higher plants.  Recently,                    
              marine unicellular cyanobacteria were discovered to contribute                 
              ten to twenty percent of the primary productivity in the                       
              oceans.  The studies to be performed are directed at achieving                 
              a detailed understanding at the molecular level of the                         
              structure and biosynthesis of the photosynthetic apparatus in                  
              these organisms which are adapted for optimum utilization of                   
              the blue-green light which predominates below the surface of                   
              the open ocean.
