Title       : Mathematical Sciences: A US - Soviet Exchange for High School Students of High
               Mathematical Ability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1991       
File        : a9110020

Award Number: 9110020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Saul   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Regions Math League
	      711 Amsterdam Ave
	      New York, NY  10025    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   American and Soviet experiences with developing talent in                 
              young mathematicians contrast with and complement each other.                  
              American competitions usually emphasize speedy response to many                
              short-answer questions.  Soviet competitions call for more                     
              carefully written longer answers to fewer problems.  American                  
              extra-curricular programs most frequently provide advanced training            
              in mathematical subject matter, taught by university staff.  Soviet            
              experiences outside the classroom are often led by high school                 
              teachers or by the students themselves, and more frequently involve            
              deeper exploration of problems which need no background beyond the             
              students' own.  American students need practice in developing                  
              mathematical proofs and discussions.  Because of this, they do not             
              compete well on Olympiad-style questions.                                      
                   This grant will support 25 high school students and 5 high                
              school teachers to travel to the Soviet Union in July, 1991, in                
              order to participate in an international summer camp for high                  
              school students of high mathematical ability in the USSR.  It is               
              important for Americans to learn what has been done in the Soviet              
              Union, especially since in the rapidly changing Soviet society,                
              some of the traditions that have produced their excellent young                
              mathematicians may disappear.  A plan for permitting Americans to              
              learn about these traditions and borrow what can be easily                     
              transported is very timely.
