Title       : Molecular Fragmentation Studies Utilizing Ion-Ion Coincidence Techniques and
               Synchrotron Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1991      
File        : a9110614

Award Number: 9110614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tricia A. Ferrett tferrett¦carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              Small halogenated methane, ethylene, and phosphorous compounds                 
              in the gas-phase will be illuminated with tunable vacuum                       
              ultraviolet radiation and X-rays at several synchrotron                        
              radiation facilities.  X-ray absorption excites and/or ionizes                 
              core electrons, eventually producing unstable doubly charged                   
              ions which readily fragment into ion pairs.  Ion-ion                           
              coincidence experiments will detect ion pairs resulting from                   
              single and multiple bond rupture of the doubly charged species.                
              Results will help elucidate variations in molecular fragment-                  
              ation patterns induced by site-selective core electron excita-                 
              tion as a function of molecule size, halogen substitution, and                 
              excitation wavelength.  This planning grant will provide funds                 
              for equipment, faculty and undergraduate research salaries,                    
              travel to synchrotron radiation facilities for collaborative                   
              experiments, and publication costs.  During the grant period,                  
              setup and construction of the experimental apparatus at                        
              Carleton College will be nearly completed and will involve                     
              undergraduate research students.  An in-lab electron gun used                  
              to simulate x-rays will be purchased and utilized to assemble                  
              and test the time-of-flight ion mass spectrometer.  Collabo-                   
              ration with a colleague on experiments similar to those listed                 
              above will keep Dr. Ferrett involved with new experiments in                   
              her field while providing needed expertise in ion coincidence                  
              techniques.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Research Planning Grants enable women who have not had prior                   
              independent Federal research support to develop a competitive                  
              research project.  This project involves the simultaneous                      
              detection of ions resulting from decomposition of larger doubly                
              charged ions thus providing critical information about the                     
              nature of events taking place after site selective core                        
              electron excitation.
