Title       : An Empirical Analysis of Saving Behavior and Automobile Expenditure Based on the
               Consumer Expenditure Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1991     
File        : a9110515

Award Number: 9110515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Orazio Attanasio   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project uses the Consumer Expenditure Survey to analyze two               
              important problems:  the determinants of saving behavior in the                
              1980's and the influence of durability and transaction costs on                
              consumer choices.  The Consumer Expenditure (CEX) Survey is a                  
              large survey carried out by the Bureau of Labor Statistics to                  
              collect the information used to compute the weights of the                     
              consumer price indexes.  Since 1980 the Survey has been conducted              
              on a regular basis and has the nature of a rotating panel.  The                
              data set is unique in the sense that it is the only US micro data              
              set which has detailed and complete information on consumer                    
              expenditure.  This information is complemented by data on a large              
              number of household characteristics.  The data set, therefore,                 
              provides the investigator with a wealth of economic information                
              which has heretofore been only partially analyzed.                             
                                                                                             
              The availability of detailed data on consumption expenditure,                  
              income and household characteristics permits a detailed analysis               
              of saving behavior.  The first aim of the project is to determine              
              the most likely causes of the decline in aggregate savings in the              
              1980s.  Particular attention will be paid to cohort and life                   
              cycle effects as well as to changes in the level and distribution              
              of income.  The quantitative significance of other factors, like               
              education, housing tenure decisions, family composition, etc.                  
              will also be considered.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The second aim of the project, the analysis of vehicle                         
              expenditure by US households, will be framed within a structural               
              model of intertemporal choice.  Two elements will be at the                    
              center of the analysis: the implications for intertemporal                     
              choices of preferences which are non-separable between durable                 
              services and non-durable expenditure, and of the presence of                   
              transaction costs in changing the stock of durables.  The                      
              consideration of these issues constitutes a substantial                        
              improvement over most of the existing literature on durable                    
              expenditures and, more generally, on intertemporal allocation of               
              consumption.
