Title       : Heterogeneous Agents Economies with Capital: Model Development and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1991    
File        : a9110991

Award Number: 9110991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63195              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose-Victor Rios-Rull   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Previously developed methods to compute equilibria for stochastic              
              overlapping generations economies where agents live a large number             
              of periods will be applied to address several questions.  Among                
              them are the behavior of asset prices and the distribution of risks            
              across agents in these type of economies.  Another application is              
              to investigate the implications of changes in the age structure of             
              the population on intertemporal prices, and on the rate of capital             
              accumulation.  Finally, a quantitative assessment of the patterns              
              of international borrowing and lending due to differences in the               
              demographic structure of nations will allow an evaluation of the               
              nature of the external deficit.                                                
                                                                                             
              The study will also develop a method suitable to quantitatively                
              address heterogeneous, infinitely lived agents economies with                  
              capital, ideosyncratic and economy-wide shocks to productivity, and            
              liquidity constraints.  The development of this method will allow              
              explicit consideration of many issues.  Among them are: checking               
              the robustness of the findings of real business cycle research to              
              environments with pervasive liquidity constraints, and studying the            
              behavior of different wealth and income groups during the business             
              cycle, and the differential volatility of hours worked across skill            
              groups.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project addresses many important issues regarding computable              
              general equilibrium models that need to be better understood.  The             
              methods developed can be used to explore issues related to aging               
              and savings, and the distribution of workers.  This work will                  
              provide the crucial base upon which important policy issues can be             
              addressed in the future.
