Title       : Support for the SSRC Committee for Research on Global Environmental Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1992    
File        : a9110703

Award Number: 9110703
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207529             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Featherman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc Sci Res Council
	      605 Third Avenue
	      New York, NY  101580001    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              85        Political Sciences                      
              86        Sociology                               
              88        Geography                               
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                 Increased concern about global environmental change in recent years         
              has highlighted the need for social scientific research on the human           
              dimensions of global environmental change in addition to analyses by           
              natural and physical scientists.  A number of organizations have               
              addressed issues related to research needs and opportunities with              
              respect to this topic; foremost among those groups has been the Social         
              Science Research Council (SSRC).  Since its establishment in 1989, the         
              SSRC's Committee for Research on Global Environmental Change has               
              organized interdisciplinary consortiums to conduct research on critical        
              problems, sponsored workshops and conferences to bring together                
              scientists, developed plans for dissertation, fellowship, and summer           
              study programs, and coordinated U.S. research activities with those of         
              other organizations, including the International Social Science Council        
              (ISSC), the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), the            
              International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), and the          
              Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN).       
              This award will continue core support for the SSRC Committee for               
              Research on Global Environmental Change for two additional years.  The         
              committee expects to continue establishment of interdisciplinary               
              research consortiums.  Among the research topics under current                 
              consideration are comparative examinations of landed property rights and       
              the adoption of technological innovations.  The committee also will            
              continue to develop plans for and to implement innovative new forms of         
              support for education, including doctoral dissertation and post-doctoral       
              fellowship programs.  These and other specific efforts of the committee        
              will be supported with funds raised from other sources.                        
                 Through its ongoing work, the SSRC Committee for Research on Global         
              Environmental Change will continue to identify important research              
              problems related to the human dimensions of global environmental change        
              that require analyses by social scientists.  It will help bring together       
              scientists from many different disciplines to address important                
              conceptual and methodological issues, and it will help organize                
              interdisciplinary collaboratives to conduct research.  Through                 
              workshops, conferences, and other forums, the committee will continue to       
              attract attention to these important issues, and through new educational       
              programs, it will enable more social scientists to develop necessary           
              research skills and expertise.
