Title       : The Molecular Systematics of the Tribe Anthemidae (Asteraceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9110375

Award Number: 9110375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda E. Watson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              The evolutionary and systematic relationships of the Tribe                     
              Anthemideae (Asteraceae, sunflower family) will be examined with               
              molecular techniques.  Using representative species, variation in              
              the chloroplast genome will be assessed using :  1) comparative                
              restriction site mapping, and 2) sequencing of the gene ORFk (open             
              reading frame k).  The data will be analyzed phylogenetically using            
              available software packages (including PAUP, Phylogenetic Analyses             
              Using Parsimony; PHYLIP, Phylogenetic Inference Package; among                 
              others).  This research will test hypotheses of evolutionary                   
              relationships, and will provide an independent assessment of                   
              character evolution (including morphology, breeding systems, and               
              chromosome numbers) in an important group of flowering plants.                 
                                                                                             
              The Anthemideae is an important tribe in the Asteraceae, being the             
              fifth largest tribe in terms of number of genera, and the seventh              
              largest in terms of number of species.  It is important                        
              economically with numerous species used for sources of                         
              insecticides, malaria medicines, cultivated plants, and herbs.  And            
              it is important ecologically with sagebrush a dominant species in              
              the Great Basin of North America.  Evolutionary relationships of               
              this important tribe remain obscure, with extensive diversity and              
              convergence being contributing factors.  Additionally, the                     
              sunflower family is one of the largest, most diverse, and                      
              successful families of flowering plants, and has long provided a               
              model for systematic studies at all taxonomic levels.  This                    
              tradition has continued with pioneering studies of molecular                   
              systematics using this family.  This study will provide a greater              
              understanding of the evolutionary and systematic relationships in              
              an important family and tribe of flowering plants.
