Title       : Randomized Algorithms for the Dictionary Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1991      
File        : a9110255

Award Number: 9110255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dana S. Richards                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40799              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanette Schmidt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              This project will study randomized algorithms to solve information             
              storage and retrieval problems.  Specifically, the project will focus          
              on randomized hashing schemes, which enable the quick retrieval of any         
              item stored in a table.  In the hashing shcemes considered, a hashing          
              function is randomly chosen from a small universal class of hashing            
              functions, and good average performance is guaranteed for arbitrary            
              data.  Such classes of universal functions provide important progress          
              in closing the gap between idealized models and the situations that            
              one is faced with in practice.  Various closed hashing schemes, in             
              which all items are placed in a table and no pointers are available,           
              will be investigated.  The techniques developed for analyzing the              
              interactions which occur in a closed hash table are likely to be               
              extendible to the analysis of other randomized constructions.  A key           
              problem that arises in a randomized algorithm is that its performance          
              depends on the generation of random variables.  Since pseudo-random            
              variables are used in practice, it is very important to analyze how            
              independent the generated variables need to be in order to ensure the          
              predicted performance.  Such analysis provides a measure of how robust         
              the randomized algorithm is.  Several randomized schemes will be               
              investigated to determine whether, in exchange for some degradation in         
              performance and some changes in the algorithm, functions with very             
              limited independence may be used as well.
