Title       : Research Initiation Awards: Screening Vs. Hydrogen Bondin in Chain Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1993      
File        : a9110285

Award Number: 9110285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74900              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Richard Elliott dickelliott@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This program will convert an extremely complicated problem                     
              into two more tractable problems and provide initial results                   
              which point the way for future developments.  The major                        
              complexity which develops when considering ways that                           
              associating chains interact with themselves and solvents is                    
              the coupling between the ways that atoms on the same chain                     
              screen each other vs. the ways association sites seek to                       
              overcome this screening.  Screening by itself is complicated                   
              by considerations of chain length, position on the chain, and                  
              flexibility of the chain.  Hydrogen bonding is complicated by                  
              its short-range nature, orientational dependence, the need to                  
              match donors with acceptors, and the possibilities of forming                  
              rings or multiple branches.  When these phenomena occur                        
              together as in many systems of interest to chemical engineers,                 
              polymer scientists, and molecular biologists, approaches to a                  
              molecular-based description can become either too cumbersome                   
              too limited.  To resolve this coupling into the two separate                   
              components, molecular dynamics computer simulations of hard                    
              chain molecules with square-well hydrogen bonding sites are                    
              proposed in conjunction with an integral equation theory of                    
              chain molecules.  Coordinating these two complementary methods                 
              will provide a firm basis for making predictions of properties                 
              like solution viscosity, chain conformation, polymer blending                  
              miscibility, and solubilities of organic contaminants in                       
              groundwater.
