Title       : RIA: Investigating the Exact Behavior of Helmholtz Equationin a Collinear
               Degenerate Four-Wave Mixing Arrangement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9110907

Award Number: 9110907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Demetrios N. Christodoulides DNCO@LEHIGH.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The one-dimensional vectorial Helmholtz equation in                            
              nonlinear isotropic Kerr media is one of the most                              
              fundamental equations in nonlinear optics.  By                                 
              nature, this equation is capable of describing any one-                        
              dimensional optical field configuration in X(3)                                
              materials.  As a result, it plays a central role in a                          
              number of very important and potentially useful                                
              nonlinear interactions, such as that of collinear                              
              degenerate four-wave mixing and that of optical                                
              bistability.  However so far, the nonlinear Helmholtz                          
              equation in such configurations has been treated                               
              approximately.  At this stage, it is by no means clear                         
              that these approximate techniques provide an                                   
              accurate enough picture (or even the whole picture)                            
              associated with this problem.  The exact solution of                           
              this problem is very important, first as a matter of                           
              principle, then as a way to test already existing                              
              theories and finally it may lead to new significant                            
              results.  It is the purpose of this research proposal to                       
              investigate the exact behavior of Helmholtz equation                           
              in isotropic nonlinear Kerr media in a comprehensive                           
              program, that will involve both analytical and                                 
              computer simulations.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Specific goals in this Research Initiation Award are:                          
              a) to identify integrable cases of this equation using                         
              Hamiltonian techniques and in turn use them to test                            
              previously obtained approximate results.  b) to                                
              discover totally new phenomena, such as spatial chaos                          
              in isotropic Kerr media that may have been                                     
              overlooked by previous approximate procedures.  c)                             
              to improve our understanding of wave propagation in                            
              X(3) media, which will in turn benefit other associated                        
              areas of research.
