Title       : Research Initiation Award: Synthesis of Robust Controllers for Systems with
               Structured Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1991  
File        : a9110764

Award Number: 9110764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mustafa H. Khammash khammash@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project concerns the development of new theory                            
              and techniques dealing with the analysis and synthesis                         
              of control systems in the presence of uncertainty.  The                        
              main outcome of this project is a theory that provides a                       
              systematic means for designing controllers which lead                          
              to systems possessing optimal stability and performance                        
              properties despite the presence of plant and signal                            
              uncertainty.  This theory is based on the structured                           
              uncertainty model which allows the inclusion of                                
              information about the sources of modelling uncertainty                         
              thus minimizing conservatism in the analysis and design                        
              procedures.  In addition, by adopting the l-infinity                           
              signal norm, time domain objectives can be included in                         
              the design in a natural way.  The use of this norm                             
              distinguishes this approach from other approaches and                          
              provides a novel way for addressing the issues involved                        
              in controlling uncertain systems.  The methods                                 
              employed in the project will take advantage of recently                        
              developed theory which makes possible the analysis of                          
              system stability and performance robustness.                                   
              Numerical algorithms implementing the developed                                
              controller synthesis techniques will also be developed                         
              and applied to practical examples.  In addition, the                           
              theory for robustness analysis will be extended to                             
              incorporate a larger class of systems and to allow a                           
              better representation of disturbances and uncertainty.
