Title       : RUI: Surface Roughness Studies Using the Scanning Tunnel Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1991      
File        : a9110746

Award Number: 9110746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia E. Allen allenpe@appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is to establish a Scanning                                        
              Tunnel/Atomic Force Microscopy (STM/AFM)                                       
              program at Appalachian State University.  This                                 
              program will be used as a teaching tool for                                    
              undergraduates and will provide research                                       
              opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate                              
              students in Applied Physics.                                                   
              The research projects will focus on the surface                                
              characterization of materials provided by Dr. Phil                             
              Russell as a collaborative effort between ASU and                              
              the Precision Engineering Center at North Carolina                             
              State University.  The STM will be used to study                               
              three specific areas:  surface roughness of metal                              
              overlayers, optical component quality, and                                     
              nanometer metallization.                                                       
              The STM is a surface analysis tool which is limited                            
              to the study of conducting samples.  The surface                               
              roughness of thin metal overlayers on insulators will                          
              be examined in an attempt to find materials which:                             
              form a uniform overlayer; can be studied with the                              
              STM; and preserve the insulator surface                                        
              topography. Surface roughness studies can also be                              
              used to provide insight into the processing of high                            
              quality optical insight into the processing of high                            
              quality optical components, which often requires                               
              surface features to be less than a few atomic units.                           
              Lastly, nanometer metallization of silicon will be                             
              explored by using a low energy (-10eV) beam from                               
              the STM to dissociate PD from Pd-Ac thin films.
