Title       : Information Processing in Firms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1991      
File        : a9110973

Award Number: 9110973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39671              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Van Zandt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy Radner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This project investigates how information processing within firms              
              influences their internal organization and their economies of                  
              scale.  Information processing in a firm takes time; delay is                  
              costly because old information is not as valuable as new                       
              information.  It is possible, up to a point, to reduce the delay               
              in information processing by using more resources.  This project               
              will determine what delay is attainable for given resources.  It               
              will be done by modelling the managers of a firm as processing                 
              elements in a parallel processing computer.                                    
                                                                                             
              The investigators have obtained results for non-stochastic arrivals            
              of data, and these indicate that the hierarchial organization of               
              information processing is effective.  They will consider explicitly            
              the firm's decision problems in which the processed information is             
              used, in order to calculate the cost of delay.  The researchers                
              will next determine how the need to process information affects                
              returns to scale, given that the amount of information that must               
              be processed in a firm increases with the size of the firm.  Then              
              they will study information processing when data arrives                       
              stochastically, as is most commonly the case except for periodic               
              accounting data.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This pioneering research promises to provide new insights                      
              concerning the role of information in the organization of firms.               
              It will also fill an important void in our understanding of                    
              organizations and markets.
