Title       : Global Change: International Negotiations on Emissions Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1992     
File        : a9110460

Award Number: 9110460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67335              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey M. Heal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to analyze the strategic aspects                
              of international agreement on the abatement of emissions that                  
              cause transboundary pollution.  Some researchers have suggested                
              that the problem of obtaining international cooperation has the                
              structure of a prisoners' dilemma game in that all parties would               
              be better off if they cooperated, but any one of them has an                   
              incentive to cheat or break the rules.  Two important questions                
              are raised about the appropriateness of using the this framework               
              for analyzing international agreements related to pollution                    
              problems.  One is whether the prisoners' dilemma construct is                  
              appropriate in this context.  And the second is whether, even if               
              it is, a cooperative solution will not be forthcoming.                         
              Cooperation is more likely to occur in a repeated game                         
              situations, where the same parties face each other time after                  
              time as is often the case with international relations.                        
                                                                                             
              This research will develop a theoretical framework for analyzing               
              the evolution of cooperation between countries in the area of                  
              international abatement control.  Such cooperation can emerge via              
              coalitions in a cooperative framework, or by tacit agreements                  
              that emerge via trigger strategies in repeated games.  Both                    
              approaches will be pursued in this project.  The notion of a                   
              critical coalition is introduced into the theoretical framework                
              which is a coalition of countries agreeing to implement an                     
              abatement agreement that has certain stability properties.  This               
              project is important because it will produce useful insights into              
              the process of international negotiation on global change, and                 
              provide a basis for choosing negotiating frameworks and                        
              strategies that will lead to stable and positive outcomes.
