Title       : Dissertation Research: Environmental Causes and Behavioral Tactics Determining
               Variation in Vertical Migration: Midday Stratification in a Pelagic Zooplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1991  
File        : a9110394

Award Number: 9110394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Gray Stirling  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Diel vertical migration (DVM) is the daily up and down                    
              movement of diverse populations in both freshwater lakes and                   
              oceans.  These long migrations cause daily, local fluctuations in              
              zooplankton density, therefore directly affecting grazing rates                
              on phytoplankton and energy transfer to fish populations.  Field               
              research and numerical simulations have identified both the                    
              ecological conditions under which zooplankton production can be                
              maximized, along with the constraints on survival, growth and                  
              reproduction imposed on alternative DVM behaviors.  Accordingly,               
              it appears that variation in DVM, observed in the field, is                    
              adaptive.  However, mechanisms causing such variation in DVM are               
              unknown, largely because little is known about the importance of               
              genetic variation relative to environmental change.                            
                   The objectives of this study are:  (1) to determine whether               
              genetically different individuals in a population have different               
              DVM distributions in the field (2) the laboratory,                             
              determine whether genetically different individuals respond in                 
              the same way to experimental environments designed to simulate                 
              field conditions, and whether those responses are similar in                   
              different environments.  The study objectives will provide an                  
              understanding of the causes of variability in stratification                   
              behavior of the zooplankter Daphnia galeata mendotae.  Since                   
              stratification behavior largely determines habitat range, this                 
              study offers insight into not only mechanisms of DVM but also                  
              data on basic zooplankton ecology, determinants of habitat                     
              choice, along with maintenance of polymorphisms.  Finally,                     
              understanding mechanisms of zooplankton DVM means a better                     
              understanding of behaviors influencing food availability for fish              
              and grazing rates on phytoplankton.
