Title       : Instrumentation for Iowa State University Nucleic Acid Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1991   
File        : a9110258

Award Number: 9110258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric R. Henderson eric@bioforcelab.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Drena L. Dobbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip G. Haydon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Benbow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to aid in the purchase of a variety of               
              equipment items to be used for biotechnology research by members               
              of the zoology and biochemistry departments at Iowa State                      
              University.  Equipment includes a state of the art imaging device              
              for detection and analysis of radioactively-labelled nucleic                   
              acids and proteins, a device for densitometry of stained-gels and              
              autoradiograms, equipment for synthesis and separation of DNA                  
              oligomers, a computer workstation for data analysis and several                
              other items.  The equipment will be housed in the nucleic acid                 
              facility of the new Biotechnology Center.                                      
              Advances in basic research in Biotechnology, including studies in              
              molecular biology and cell biology, have depended heavily on the               
              development of instrumentation such as DNA synthesizers and                    
              sequencers that permit what had been time-consuming and difficult              
              experimentation to be accomplished rapidly and with little                     
              effort.  New devices have now increased the speed and sensitivity              
              of detection and analysis of proteins and nucleic acids by orders              
              of magnitude.  Typically such equipment is placed in a central                 
              location where it is available to a large number of investigators              
              who can benefit from its use.  Precisely such an arrangement is                
              proposed for the equipment to be purchased through this award.
