Title       : US-Poland MSC Joint Fund Research on Quantum-Classical Dynamics Studies for
               Proton Transfer Process in Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9110019

Award Number: 9110019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : April 1,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Bogdan Lesyng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Warsaw U of Tech
	      
	      Warsaw, PL  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5933      US-POLAND MARIE CURRIE JNT FND
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In this project, Dr. Bogdan Lesyng of the Warsaw University of                 
              Technology, will cooperate with Dr. Andrew J. McCammon of the                  
              University of Houston under the U.S.-Poland Marie Sklodowska-                  
              Curie Joint Fund to research "Quantum-Classical Dynamics Studies               
              for Proton Transfer Process in Enzymes (MSC)."  The researchers                
              will study phospholipase A2 and either a serine proteinase or                  
              carbonic anhydrase.  They will treat the enzymes as mixed                      
              quantum-classical dynamical systems.  The time-dependent                       
              Schroedinger equation will be used to describe the proton                      
              dynamics.  The researchers will describe the dynamics of heavy                 
              atoms by the Newtonian equations of motion with the inclusion of               
              Hellmann-Feynman forces generated by the quantum particles.                    
              They will also simulate other quantum events in the enzyme active              
              sites, like a nucleophilic substitution at the substrate carbonyl              
              carbon.  They plan to use a well-documented thermodynamic cycle-               
              perturbation technique to simulate mutations of selected hydrogen              
              bond network groups into neutral or hydrophobic groups, which                  
              they will then analyze.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project in biophysics fulfills the program objectives of                  
              advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the              
              U.S. and Poland to combine complementary efforts and capabilities              
              in areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of              
              equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.
