Title       : Distributed Simulation: New Performance Results and New Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1992       
File        : a9110347

Award Number: 9110347
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Devendra Kumar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              The objective is to study how good or bad distributed simulation is            
              for the simulation of a few specific systems; these systems are                
              queuing networks, timed petri nets, and logic circuits.  Regarding             
              queuing networks and logic circuits, the performance of three well             
              known distributed simulation schemes will be studied.  Regarding timed         
              petri nets, new distributed simulation algorithms will be developed            
              and their performance studied.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This approach aims to answer several questions that have remained              
              unanswered previously - relationship between overhead and performance,         
              ideal speedups that one can expect, and relationship between the               
              simulator parameters (such as delays on communication lines) and               
              performance.  The essential elements of the approach are (i) simulate          
              the distributed simulator instead of directly implementing it on a             
              machine, which makes it easy to vary parameters such as communication          
              delays, computation times etc.  (ii) study the relationship between            
              overhead and performance by varying computation and communication              
              times for overhead messages, and (iii) define and measure certain              
              notions of ideal speedup that are more realistic than simply the               
              number of processors.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The immediate benefit of this research would be to provide a better            
              understanding of several performance issues, e.g., what is the cause           
              of low performance -- too many overhead messages or lack of potential          
              parallelism in the system?  It is commonly believed that overhead is           
              the main problem.  This is not true in many cases.  In the long term           
              this will lead to high performance distributed simulators custom               
              designed for specific classes of systems.
