Title       : Research Initiation Award: Further Development of a UnifiedLinear System Theory
               and its Applications in Control and Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1991 
File        : a9110248

Award Number: 9110248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianchao J. Zhu zhu@rsip.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              It is well known that the analysis of Time-Varying                             
              Linear (TVL) and Nonlinear (TVNL) dynamical                                    
              systems has been an elusive mathematical problem                               
              since the beginning of the studies of differential                             
              equations.  Consequently, control, communication and                           
              signal processing systems with time-varying parameters                         
              are difficult to deal with.  Recently (1987-1989) a new                        
              and Unified Linear System Theory (ULST) has been                               
              established for the class of scalar TVL systems of the                         
              form.  Based on the theory, a novel stabilization control                      
              technique, called Extended-Mean Assignment (EMA)                               
              control, for TVL and TVNL dynamical systems has                                
              been developed (1990).  The new theory and control                             
              technique is gaining an increasing interest in the                             
              control and systems community, and has found                                   
              potential applications in aerospace, manufacturing and                         
              defense industries.  The goals of this research project is                     
              to extend those results to the more general class of                           
              Multi-Input-Multi-Output (MIMO) TVL system                                     
              x = A(t)+B(t)u; and to promote industrial applications                         
              of the ULST and EMA control technique in control,                              
              communications and signal processing.  The proposed                            
              research will employ a differential-algebraic approach.                        
              The anticipated research results will establish a spectral                     
              characterization, precise stability criteria and solution                      
              techniques for the general class of TVL dynamical                              
              systems (differential equations) x = A(t)x+B(t)u, which                        
              will enable scientists/engineers to effectively deal with                      
              otherwise intractable scientific/engineering problems.                         
              It is believed that achievements in the proposed                               
              research areas will constitute a revolutionary                                 
              breakthrough in modern systems science and control                             
              engineering.
