Title       : RIA: High Power Active Optical Pulse Compression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9110678

Award Number: 9110678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian H. Kolner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Research Initiation Award                                
              project is to develop an optical pulse compressor that                         
              can be used with high power lasers, does not add to                            
              amplitude noise or timing jitter, and has very high                            
              throughput efficiency while providing pulse                                    
              compression ratios in the range of 10 to 100.  Current                         
              optical pulse compression technology is based on                               
              chirping pulses in single mode optical fibers by the                           
              nonlinear effect of self-phase modulation.  Although                           
              high pulse compression ratios have been                                        
              demonstrated, the utility of the technique is limited                          
              because of inherent tradeoffs between input power,                             
              pulsewidth, and fiber length.  In addition, fiber                              
              coupling losses, induced polarization wandering, and                           
              thermal and acoustical interference all combine to                             
              create amplitude noise and long term power drift.                              
              We propose to impart the chirp on the pulses actively                          
              with high modulation index electro-optic phase                                 
              modulators.  The advantages to this approach are                               
              that the chirping mechanism does not depend on the                             
              nature of the input optical pulse, only the quality of                         
              the electrical drive signal to the modulator, which can                        
              be extremely good.  We envision the pulse                                      
              compressor to take the form of dielectric loaded                               
              microwave or millimeter wave resonators driven by                              
              highly stable synthesizers and clean power amplifiers                          
              and followed by grating-pair or prism dispersive delay                         
              lines.  The efforts of the research will be directed at                        
              determination the optimum microwave cavity                                     
              geometries and electro-optic dielectric materials for                          
              the particular input optical pulse characteristics.  This                      
              device should have a major impact on the research                              
              efforts in ultrafast phenomena since it can be                                 
              universally applied to all modelocked laser sources,                           
              independent of their power.  Since large frame, high                           
              average power lasers are frequently used as pump                               
              sources for other lasers or nonlinear frequency                                
              converters, their performance will be similarly                                
              enhanced.
