Title       : Research Initiation Award: Development of a Systematic Approach to Uncertainty
               Modeling for Robust Control Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1991  
File        : a9110254

Award Number: 9110254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Balas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to develop a                                 
              systematic approach to uncertainty modeling from                               
              experimental data for robust control.  In the past                             
              decade, theoretical developments in robust control have                        
              lead to more rigorous and applicable design techniques                         
              which allow the explicit incorporation of plant                                
              uncertainty into the problem formulation ?1,2,3,4!.                            
              These developments provide a fresh approach that can                           
              be exploited to control complex systems and achieve                            
              performance specifications which were unthinkable                              
              several years ago.  The key link currently missing                             
              between these theoretical developments and their                               
              application in industry is a systematic approach to the                        
              generation of performance and uncertainty                                      
              descriptions.  The importance of accurate                                      
              characterizations of uncertainty descriptions was vividly                      
              shown in the design of controllers for an experimental                         
              flexible structure ?5!.  Controllers synthesized for                           
              "accurate" descriptions of the plant uncertainty yielded                       
              significant improvements in system performance when                            
              compared with other less accurate uncertainty                                  
              descriptions.                                                                  
              The proposed research will develop a methodology for                           
              attributing the error between theoretical system model                         
              and experimental data to uncertainty and noise model                           
              in a linear fractional framework which is compatible                           
              with the structure value mu-methodology.  These same                           
              techniques can also be employed to develop                                     
              performance descriptions in for this framework.  The                           
              mu-framework will then be used to analyze and                                  
              synthesize complex system controllers with these new                           
              performance and uncertainty descriptions.  The                                 
              improved modeling of a physical system for the                                 
              purpose of control design will provide a two fold                              
              benefit: improved robustness properties and closed-loop                        
              system performance of the controller.
