Title       : Research In Disjunctive Logic Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1991      
File        : a9110721

Award Number: 9110721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arcot Rajasekar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on research in disjunctive logic programming.             
              There are two main themes:  extend the procedural semantics of                 
              disjunctive logic programming to make it a viable programming                  
              language, and build a programming environment similar to PROLOG based          
              on the above semantics.  The work uses the procedural semantics of             
              disjunctive logic programs using SLO-resolution.  It is planned to             
              extend the definition of SLO-resolution to answer positive and                 
              negative queries from normal disjunctive logic programs and to                 
              provide indefinite answer substitutions for variables in a query.  It          
              is planned to study the properties of disjunctive logic programs and           
              identify classes of programs for which ancestry-resolution checking            
              can be restricted without compromising completeness.  The study will           
              increase the efficiency of executing disjunctive logic programs.  The          
              intent is to augment SLO-resolution with these techniques.  It is              
              intended to build upon the theoretical studies and implement a                 
              programming system, called DISLOG, using SLO-resolution.  DISLOG will          
              be an extension of PROLOG, inheriting its stack-based environment,             
              control structure and backtracking feature.  The significance of the           
              research will be to extend the use of logic as a programming language          
              to a larger subset of predicate calculus.  Due to its capability to            
              solve problems with multiple extensions and indefinite information,            
              DISLOG will provide an enhanced representation and reasoning                   
              environment for solving problems in artificial intelligence.
