Title       : RIA: High-Speed Switching Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1995   
File        : a9110075

Award Number: 9110075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chin-Tau A. Lea   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  With the fast deployment of fiber optics as a transmission                
              medium, a speed mismatch problem has been created between                      
              transmission and switching.  In recent years, the speed of                     
              transmission facilities has been improved by several orders of                 
              magnitude.  In comparison, the progress made in switching seems to             
              be relatively slow.  To meet the challenges posed by the                       
              increasing transmission speed, laboratories around the world are               
              working on new photonic and fast electronic switching devices.                 
              These recent developments will heavily influence the future                    
              direction of switching research.  But it is universally recognized             
              that advances in switching devices are not enough; new                         
              architectures are needed.  The component-by-component approach                 
              simply cannot make the best use of the new technology.                         
                   The purpose of this research is to explore novel                          
              architectures and design paradigms for constructing high-speed                 
              switching systems which can harness the recent advances in the                 
              switching technology.  Specifically, a new class of switching                  
              networks has been identified which possess the following                       
              characteristics:  self-routing, fault-tolerance, easy path hunt,               
              easy fault-diagnosis and low crosstalk for the directionalcouplers             
              implementation.  They are very promising for high speed switching.             
              The research is expected to lead to development of new                         
              multicast-multirate electronic and photonic switching                          
              architectures and performance models based on this new class of                
              networks.
