Title       : Research Initiation Awards: Characterization of Interdiffusion Between Layers of
               Langmuir-Blodgett Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1992     
File        : a9110110

Award Number: 9110110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69740              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Foster foster@polymer.uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this program is a quantitative                                
              characterization of the degree of interdiffusion between                       
              layers of a Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) multilayer as well as an                    
              understanding of the interdiffusion mechanism and                              
              identification of important parameters.  The study will focus                  
                                                                                             
              on a model system containing two well characterized materials,                 
                                                                                             
              cadmium arachidate (CdA) and a substituted polyglutamate (PG).                 
                                                                                             
              The polyglutamate material has a demonstrated low mode loss                    
              when used as an optical medium, and the system is chosen to                    
              suggest certain characteristics of a potential organic optical                 
                                                                                             
              device.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Interdiffusion between CdA layers separated by a PG bilayer                    
              barrier will be followed using neutron reflectometry (NR)                      
              complemented with x-ray reflectometry (XR).  Interface                         
              profiles before and after diffusion will be inferred by                        
              reconciling experimental reflectivities with simulated curves                  
                                                                                             
              calculated using an established matrix formalism.  Potential                   
              ambiguities in interpretation will be minimized by the                         
              combination of two complementary experimental probes,                          
              variation of contrast with deuteration, and the use of system                  
                                                                                             
              components which are well characterized.                                       
                                                                                             
              The expected results will add greatly to the meager existing                   
              data on interdiffusion between two-dimensional ordered layers.                 
              New insight into the mechanism and controlling parameters of                   
              interdiffusion will potentially impact the design of molecular                 
                                                                                             
              scale organic devices and the study of transport in model                      
              biological membranes.  Specifically it will be shown if a                      
              novel liquid-crystalline-like polymer acts as an effective                     
              diffusion barrier.
