Title       : Research Initiation Award: Protein Separation Utilizing Utilizing
               Temperature-Sensitive Mecroemulsions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1993      
File        : a9110757

Award Number: 9110757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Wiencek   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1417,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposal research is directed at developing an extraction                  
              technique to recover proteins from an aqueous solution                         
              utilizing a temperature-sensitive microemulsion phase.  The                    
              technique may be utilized as a primary recovery step for                       
              large-scale bioseparations.  By utilizing liquid phase mass                    
              transfer, residence times for primary isolation can be                         
              minimized and protease action eliminated.  Microemulsions                      
              possess several processing advantages over two-phase aqueous                   
              systems for such and extraction technique, including ease of                   
              phase disengagement (eliminating the need for capital-                         
              intensive centrifuges) and low viscosity materials (allowing                   
              for faster mass transfer).  By utilizing a nonionic                            
              surfactant, an mild temperature increase can be utilized to                    
              recover the protein in a concentrated form instead of                          
              utilizing chemical addition as currently practiced for ionic                   
              surfactant reverse micellar systems.  Nonionic temperature-                    
              sensitive microemulsions require the incorporation of an                       
              affinity ligand to obtain the high degree of specificity                       
              desired.  A reversible inhibitor of a model enzyme, -                         
              galactosidase, will be chemically attached to the ethylene                     
              oxide adduct of the nonionic surfactant employed to form the                   
              temperature-sensitive microemulsion.  The partitioning of -                   
              galactosidase into the formulated microemulsion will be                        
              investigated as a function of temperature.  Solubilization of                  
              the enzyme is expected to occur at a low temperature (4C),                    
              while demulsification and enzyme recovery will occur at a                      
              higher temperature (35C) which is well below the denaturation                 
              temperature for -galactosidase (50% denaturation occurs at                    
              57C).  This microemulsion system will then be utilized to                     
              study the processing advantages of a temperature-sensitive                     
              microemulsion on a bench-scale continuous separation unit.
