Title       : Development of GaInP/GaAs and A1GaInP/GaAs HEMT, Quantum- Well and MIS/MISFET
               Structures for High-Frequency and Optoelectronic Device Applications (Research
               Planning Grant)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1991 
File        : a9110697

Award Number: 9110697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Hwu-Sadwick hwu@ee.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              Increased interest in the millimeter region has                                
              stimulated the development of receiver                                         
              technology for a wide range of applications                                    
              including radio astronomy, atmospheric                                         
              radiometry, plasma diagnostics, millimeter wave                                
              imaging, nondestructive testing, radar, and high-                              
              density, high-directivity communications and data                              
              transmission.  To date, most of the flight-                                    
              qualified production III-V compound                                            
              semiconductor high-speed electronics have used                                 
              GaAs- or AlGaAs/GaAs-based devices.                                            
              Recently high electron mobility (HEMT) and                                     
              heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT) systems                                
              based on AlGaAs/InGaAs/GaAs,                                                   
              AllnAs/InGaAs, and InGaAs/InP have                                             
              demonstrated excellent device performance at                                   
              frequencies far exceeding those possible with the                              
              AlGaAs/GaAs system.                                                            
              In this Research Planning Grant award, both                                    
              two- and three-terminal GaInP/GaAs and                                         
              AlGaInP/GaAs devices will be fabricated and                                    
              tested.  The material will be grown by organo-                                 
              metallic vapor phase epitaxy at the University of                              
              Utah and complete device characterization (dc                                  
              to 60 GHz) will be carried out under this                                      
              research.  Device concepts to be implemented                                   
              in this work will include discrete HEMT,                                       
              insulated gate field effect transistors, and                                   
              quantum well devices along with prototype                                      
              varactor frequency multipliers and converters.                                 
              After the completion of the planning research,                                 
              optical control of microwave and millimeter                                    
              wave devices of GaInP/GaAs and                                                 
              AlGaInP/GaAs heterosystems will also be                                        
              investigated.  The device concepts for high-                                   
              frequency electronic and optoelectronic circuit                                
              applications will then be used for designing and                               
              fabricating a monolithic millimeter wave                                       
              integrated circuit.  In addition, two-dimensional                              
              array of high frequency devices of GaInP/GaAs                                  
              and AlGaInP/GaAs will be fabricated to                                         
              produce high output power (i.e., Watt level) at                                
              frequencies in the range of 94 to 147 GHz.
