Title       : The Role of Genotypic Diversity in the Regulation of Honeybee Foraging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9110561

Award Number: 9110561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer H. Fewell j.fewell@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   A key requirement of division of labor in social insect                   
              colonies is the ability to respond flexibly to environmental                   
              change.  This ability is crucial to survival in variable                       
              environments.  Recent evidence suggests a significant part of                  
              observed behavioral variation in social insect colonies is                     
              genetically based.  In the research, the role of genetic                       
              variation in colony flexibility and task regulation by the honey               
              bee, Apis mellifera will be examined.                                          
                   Dr. Fewell will examine stimulus threshold model which                    
              describes how genotypic diversity may function as a mechanism for              
              regulating division of labor in social insects.  This model                    
              proposes that individual workers have genetically linked                       
              thresholds to perform a given task, and that a range of genotypic              
              within a colony provides a range of  tendencies to perform that                
              task.  From this model, one can predict that the genotypic                     
              composition of the population performing a task will change as                 
              environmental conditions and, therefore, stimulus environments                 
              change.  Dr. Fewell will test this prediction by changing colony               
              need for pollen and measuring associated changes in the genetic                
              composition of the pollen and nectar foraging populations.  This               
              will be the first experimental test of the role of genotypic                   
              variation in social insect foraging regulation.  These studies                 
              will address the important question of whether current hypotheses              
              on the role of genotype in honey bee foraging apply to naturally               
              mated colonies.  They also will involve the application of a new               
              set of molecular genetic techniques, PCR and RAPD analysis, to                 
              behavioral questions in social insects.
