Title       : An Intelligent System for Automated Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1993   
File        : a9110125

Award Number: 9110125
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank A. Settle   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Y. Pharr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Pleva  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Military Inst
	      
	      Lexington, VA  24450    703/463-6311

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In research supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry                  
              Program in the Analytical Division, Prof. Settle, his                          
              co-workers, and students continue the development of robotic                   
              systems for automation of the analytical chemistry laboratory.                 
              Combining an expert system shell, statistical analysis                         
              routines, and robots, they will strive to package classical wet                
              chemistry analysis techniques in a flexible, transferable                      
              manner so that any robot-equipped laboratory can employ                        
              identical procedures and good laboratory practices.  This                      
              promises to do for titrimetric, spectrophotometric, and                        
              gravimetric methods what has already occurred for more                         
              automated elemental analysis and mass spectrometric methods:                   
              standardize procedures and quality control methods between                     
              laboratories.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              Settle and coworkers will continue their efforts to employ                     
              laboratory robots and expert systems software to automate the                  
              analytical chemistry laboratory.  By taking the tedium out of                  
              measurements and putting repeatability in, they will develop                   
              analytical methods with improved reliability and                               
              transferability between laboratories.  This will reduce the                    
              amount of repetitious method development that will be needed in                
              different laboratories attempting the same measurements.  In                   
              the long run, it will also reduce the cost of performing wet                   
              chemical determinations while improving precision.
