Title       : Dissertation Research: Genetic Structure of Parasitic Helminth Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1991   
File        : a9110393

Award Number: 9110393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J.C. Anderson  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Our understanding of the genetic population structure and                 
              evolution of free-living organisms has been greatly advanced by                
              the application of molecular techniques.  However, the genetic                 
              structure of parasitic species has been almost completely                      
              ignored.  It is proposed to initiate studies of the genetic                    
              structure of populations of the human-parasitic nematode Ascaris               
              lumbricoides.  Because so much is known about the biology of this              
              A. lumbricoides and its host, Homo sapiens, these species could                
              serve as a model system for studies relating host and parasite                 
              population structures.  The following scientific questions will                
              be addressed:                                                                  
                   1.  Are genetically similar or geographically close                       
              populations of humans parasitized by genetically similar                       
              populations of Ascaris?  Or is there genetic evidence for                      
              transfer of parasites among geographically separated human                     
              populations?  Answers to these questions will provide evidence on              
              how long particular host-parasite associations have persisted at               
              the population level.                                                          
                   2.  What is the local (within villages) genetic structure of              
              Ascaris populations?  For instance, are the worms harbored by a                
              single family representative of a random sample of worms present               
              throughout the village, or do host families harbor their own                   
              genetic subpopulations of parasites?  Such information will                    
              provide clues about major routes of parasite transmission within               
              a population, and thus indicate ways that people could reduce                  
              their worm burdens.                                                            
                   3.  What are the genetic relationships among parasites                    
              derived from different host species (humans and pigs)?                         
              Specifically, do these worms represent different species?  This                
              information will shed light on the evolution of host                           
              specialization in parasitic species.  If the worms in pigs and                 
              humans are indeed the same species, as we suspect, our results                 
              will be of significance for animal husbandry and for reducing                  
              rates of infection of humans that live in association with pigs.
