Title       : Biochemistry of DNA-Protein Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1991       
File        : a9110704

Award Number: 9110704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Edwards   (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis A. Silks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Ratliff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford J. Unkefer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Los Alamos National Lab
	      
	      Los Alamos, NM  87545    /   -

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a new method to map DNA-protein                      
              interactions using 15N NMR in combination with specific labeling.              
              The Cro protein-operator system of bacteriophage Lambda will be                
              used to establish the method.  Cro is the smallest repressor                   
              molecule of known structure.  The affinity of Cro for a specific               
              operator nucleotide sequence has been documented by chemical and               
              nuclease protection experiments.  Double stranded oligomers of DNA             
              will be prepared from 15N labeled nucleotides.  NMR resonances of              
              15N are very sensitive to hydrogen bonding.  Thus, when the protein            
              binds to the DNA with formation of H-bonds between the Nitrogen                
              atoms of the bases and the amino acid side chains, the resonance               
              from individual nitrogen atoms will undergo shifts.  In this way,              
              the specific atoms of the bases in the DNA which are interacting               
              with the protein will be mapped.  After mapping the H-bonds of the             
              Cro-operator complex, the method will be applied to the Lambda Mnt-            
              protein which has significant sequence homology to the Cro protein             
              Once the method has been established and tested on Cro and Mnt it              
              will be ready to be used to investigate eukaryotic regulation                  
              systems and to develop a database correlating 15N NMR shifts with              
              various types of DNA-protein interactions.
