Title       : Confidentiality Issues in Research and Policy Access to Microdata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9110512

Award Number: 9110512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117660             (Estimated)
Investigator: George T. Duncan gd17@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Statistical agencies are pivotal in collecting and                        
              disseminating the data that guide the health and wealth of                     
              our nation.  In their mediation between respondents and                        
              users,  statistical agencies hold two mandates in tension:                     
              provide research and policy access to data and assure                          
              confidentiality.  If an agency fails to properly disseminate                   
              data,  its data collection is fruitless and wastes taxpayers'                  
              money.  If the agency fails to protect privacy of                              
              respondents, it cannot collect quality data - because of                       
              increased nonresponse and evasive response -- and it                           
              violates ethical norms.                                                        
                   The objective of this research is to develop and                          
              evaluate statistical and institutional procedures that better                  
              provide confidentiality and data access.  The work will build                  
              on accomplishments,  evidenced by published work,  conference                  
              presentations,  and interactions with statistical agencies,                    
              under a current NSF grant.  The expansion entails                              
              constructing a conceptual model for research and policy                        
              access to data,  developing and evaluating options for                         
              informed consent in data sharing and record linkage,                           
              deriving and assessing statistical disclosure limitation                       
              procedures based on the concept of matrix masks for public                     
              use files,  evaluating other restricted access procedures                      
              such as licensing agreements,  and improving privacy control                   
              methods for sequential access to computer databases.                           
              Establishment data will receive special attention.                             
                   The proposed research will effect a significant                           
              extension of ethical guidelines,  administrative rules,  and                   
              legal specifications with respect to confidentiality and data                  
              access.  The issues addressed are becoming increasingly                        
              important not only for the individual but for society as a                     
              whole.
