Title       : The Ethics of Computerized Decision Procedures: Uncovering Biases and Value
               Assumptions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1994    
File        : a9110939

Award Number: 9110939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60492              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Mulvey mulvey@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to explore the ethical issues that arise            
              when computer decision procedures (which can also be thought of as             
              computer models) are applied in decisions affecting the public                 
              interest.  These systems have become pervasive; examples include               
              air-traffic control, forest service planning, military conflict                
              simulations, and so forth.  The development and use of these models            
              raise ethical issues, but these issues are often hidden by the                 
              technical nature of the models.  In this project, the investigators            
              will examine two real world cases; one will be computer decision               
              procedures (CDPs) used in pension plan decision making.  This                  
              investigation will identify, classify, and analyse ethical issues              
              in the development and use of these models.  It will search for                
              generic issues that are likely to be common to many models, and                
              explore ways to ensure that the ethical issues are addressed in the            
              future.  The analysis will examine ethical issues that arise for               
              the designers, the decision makers, and the public.  With respect              
              to each group, analyses will be developed from the standpoint of               
              different ethical theories and frameworks, and their implications              
              for action will be identified.  This process can lead to                       
              suggestions for change in policy or procedure for modellers and                
              modelling.  For example, a concern for paternalism and consent                 
              would lead to the recommendation that CDPs be developed in ways                
              that are transparent to clients or users.  Results will include                
              presentations at professional society meetings and publications in             
              appropriate journals.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The topic of this proposal is of highest priority for Ethics and               
              Values Studies.  The qualifications and track record of these                  
              investigators are excellent.  The project provides an important                
              test for theories and methodologies to study ethical issues in                 
              development and applications of computer models.  Results will be              
              useful for a wide range of individuals and groups.  The budget is              
              modest.  The proposal is recommended for support.
