Title       : Estimating Conditional Variances and Covariances: Measurement Accuracy and
               Implications for Asset Pricing and Portfolio Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1992        
File        : a9110131

Award Number: 9110131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Nelson (312)702-3231  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean P. Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most asset pricing theories relate expected returns on assets to               
              their conditional variances and covariances.  An enormous                      
              literature in empirical finance has documented that these                      
              conditional moments change over time.  Practical experience as in              
              the 1929 and 1987 stock market crashes reinforces this                         
              conclusion.  Unfortunately, conditional covariances are not                    
              directly observable.  In tests of asset pricing theories,                      
              researchers must use estimates of conditional second moments.                  
              Similarly, market participants use estimates of conditional                    
              variances and covariances in hedging, option pricing, and in many              
              other aspects of portfolio selection.  This projects addresses                 
              the following important questions:  How accurate are the                       
              estimated variances and covariances?  How can they be estimated                
              more accurately?  How severely do the inevitable measurement                   
              errors affect portfolio selection and tests of asset pricing                   
              theories?                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Researchers doing empirical work in finance have adopted many                  
              strategies for accommodating changes in conditional variances and              
              covariances.  Among the popular strategies are: (1) chopping the               
              available data into short blocks of time and assuming                          
              homoskedasticity within the blocks, (b) one-sided rolling                      
              regressions, in which only data from, say, the preceding five                  
              year period is used to estimate the conditional covariance of                  
              returns at a given date, (c) two-sided rolling regressions, in                 
              which covariances are estimated for each date using, say, five                 
              years of lags and five years of leads, and (d) Autoregressive                  
              Conditional Heteroscedatic (ARCH) models.  The choice between                  
              these methods has traditionally been ad hoc, since no theory has               
              been available to compare their relative efficiency in settings.               
              This project addresses this problem by developing continuous                   
              record asymptotic approximations for the measurement errors when               
              methods (a) through (d) are used.
