Title       : Variations in Oak Litter Quality Along an Urban-Rural Gradient and Effect on
               Leaf Litter Decomposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1991    
File        : a9110068

Award Number: 9110068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. Carreiro   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   Although air pollution and soil heavy metals are higher in                
              New York than in rural sites, litter decomposition rates in oak                
              forests located along an urban-rural gradient were surprisingly                
              faster in urban sites.  To determine whether differences in leaf               
              quality contribute to faster decay rates of urban litter, Dr.                  
              Carriero will conduct a decomposition experiment on newly fallen               
              oak leaves collected along the gradient and incubated in the                   
              laboratory.  Since temperature, moisture, and microbial inoculum               
              will be standardized, the experiment will directly assay whether               
              the quality of living oak leaves has been changed enough in cities             
              to result in more rapid decay after leaf fall.  Dry weight loss of             
              laboratory-incubated litter will be measured at intervals over a               
              4-month period.  Growth and respiratory activity of fungi and                  
              bacteria colonizing litter will also be measured as decay                      
              progresses to determine responses to possible differences in leaf              
              quality.  An understanding of mechanisms behind the different                  
              litter decay rates in urban and rural forests is important since               
              decomposition rates regulate nutrient flows within these ecosystems            
              and influences nutrient availability to plants.  The facilities                
              available for conducting this research are first-rate.  ***
