Title       : Automated Experimentation and Analysis for Robust Producv Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1992     
File        : a9110573

Award Number: 9110573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Office Automation Assistant             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : January 4,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41596              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Sanchez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9222,
Abstract    :
                   Frequency-domain experiments (FDEs) have been considered for              
              experiments when errors are correlated and time-lagged responses               
              may exist.  Although to date the application of FDEs has been                  
              largely restricted to simulation meta-model identification, this               
              approach is appropriate in many manufacturing settings.  In much               
              industrial experimentation, limited equipment or operator                      
              availability may mandate the use of sequential data collection.                
              Analysis techniques which deal with correlated errors translate                
              into shorter required data collection times, as do those which                 
              allow for the study of time-lagged responses.                                  
                   This research effort will combine the philosophy of robust                
              product design with the methodology of frequency-domain                        
              experiments.  Selection approaches will then be used to identify               
              desirable product design configurations.  The resulting                        
              experimental design and analysis methodology should be highly                  
              suited to the automated manufacturing environment, where the                   
              assumptions required for traditional experimental design and                   
              analysis may not be applicable.  Additionally, in order to ensure              
              the applicability of the work and facilitate the technological                 
              transfer, visits will be conducted to manufacturing firms currently            
              employing off-line quality design or those with automated data                 
              collection capabilities.  These plant visits will allow the                    
              investigators to ascertain the issues most critical to the                     
              implementation of this research.
