Title       : Chemical and Spectroscopic Studies of Radical Cation Reactivity and Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1993       
File        : a9110487

Award Number: 9110487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinz D. Roth roth@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The structures and reactions of unusual radical cations will be                
              investigated. A variety of organic radical cations will be                     
              generated in a range of media, including fluid solutions, frozen               
              glasses, and solid supports, e.g., zeolites, by appropriate                    
              methods, including photo-induced electron transfer, chemical                   
              oxidation, and radiolysis. Their structures and reactions will be              
              examined by a variety of modern spectroscopic methods, including               
              steady-state and time-resolved optical and electron spin resonance             
              spectroscopy. In addition, CIDNP and two-photon (radical cation                
              photochemistry) will be used to monitor these reactions. The                   
              intermediates will be probed by a range of reagents designed to                
              intercept the unpaired spin (free radical addition), the charge                
              (nucleophilic capture), or both functions (cycloaddition of                    
              superoxide or semiquinone anion). The influence of surface                     
              interactions and external constraints on the three-dimensional                 
              structures of radical cations and their rearrangements will be                 
              probed by adsorbing the substrate on the microscopic surfaces of               
              solid supports or sequestering in the three-dimensional enclaves               
              of zeolites.                                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work of              
              Professor Heinz D. Roth at Rutgers University. Radical cations are             
              derived from neutral molecules by the loss of an electron to give              
              a reactive intermediate with one unit of positive charge and one               
              unpaired electron. Electrons in stable molecules are paired, while             
              the reactive intermediates with unpaired electrons are referred to             
              as free radicals. In this research, structures of unusual radical              
              cations will be determined by modern instrumental methods and the              
              reactions of these intermediates will be studied as well. Various              
              chemical reactions will be used to intercept these reactive                    
              intermediates, and thereby determine their structures. The                     
              influence of surface interactions and external constraints on the              
              reactions of these radical cations will also be investigated.
