Title       : Theoretical and Empirical Study of Reasonable Doubt in Law
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1991     
File        : a9110821

Award Number: 9110821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80471              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Andreoni   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Over the past number of years there has been considerable work in              
              law and economics on optimal law enforcement.  Overall this                    
              research has emphasized theoretical modelling focusing on the                  
              effects of penalties on criminal behavior, the effects of plea                 
              bargaining on convictions, and the effects of expenditures by                  
              defendants to avoid prosecution and conviction.  While the models              
              that have developed have made important contributions, they all                
              have emphasized that, at least over some range of crimes, uniformly            
              maximal penalties are most efficient.                                          
                                                                                             
              Dr. Andreoni questions this assumption and takes the view that much            
              more can be learned about penalties if more explicit account were              
              taken of the process by which society determines that an accused               
              person deserves to be punished.  He focuses explicitly on the role             
              of reasonable doubt since this standard (i.e., whether evidence is             
              convincing "beyond a reasonable doubt") influences judges, juries,             
              and prosecutors engaged in plea bargaining.  The work is especially            
              noteworthy in combining theoretical modelling, field study, and                
              experimental research.  His empirical efforts will range from a                
              reanalysis of the Ehrlich data on the deterrent effects of                     
              punishment taking into consideration reasonable doubt to role                  
              playing studies of criminal behavior and experimental jury                     
              simulations under varying penalty conditions.                                  
                                                                                             
              The potenial yield from this research is considerable.  Since                  
              standard models of optimal penalty do not take reasonable doubt                
              into account, by taking this step (under the straightforward model             
              of reasonable doubt and under a model that also considers                      
              institutional features of the legal system), this work offers a                
              welcome new approach to modelling crime and punishment.  Such work             
              is of pathbreaking importance because it promises to bring theory              
              and reality much closer together.
