Title       : Digital Control of Nonlinear Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1998      
File        : a9403432

Award Number: 9403432
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231442             (Estimated)
Investigator: Costas Kravaris costas@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Kravaris - 9403432      The chemical industry is dominated by
              processes that exhibit nonlinearities.  For example, polymerization reactors,
              high-purity distillation columns, bioprocesses, etc. are highly nonlinear
              processes.  The digital computer-based implementation of nonlinear control laws
              in industry has motivated the development of nonlinear, discrete-time process
              control methods.  The cornerstone of all the discrete-time control algorithms
              is the inevitable time-discretization of a continuous-time, nonlinear dynamic
              system, which is an open problem.  The development of a reliable discretization
              procedure for nonlinear, continuous-time systems, especially when the sampling
              period becomes large, based on the fact that in many industrial control
              problems, certain measurements are performed at low sampling rates.  For
              example, chemical composition measurements are usually performed under a much
              lower sampling rate (e.g. gas chromatography) compared to temperature
              measurements.    The overall objective of this research is the development of
              methods for analyzing the behavior of nonlinear chemical processes subject to
              slow sampling and synthesizing stable and robust, digital control systems that
              meet design specifications.  The conceptual framework of differential geometry
              will be use to:  1.  Develop a time-discretization procedure for nonlinear,
              continuous-time systems, especially where the sampling period becomes large. 
              2.  Study the effect of sampling and the particular discretization procedure
              upon the nonminimum-phase characteristics of a nonlinear, discrete-time process
              model.  3.  Develop nonlinear multirate control algorithms which use the
              infrequent and frequent measurements effectively in order to induce a desirable
              closed-loop behavior for the process under consideration.  4.  Design
              discrete-time, nonlinear state estimators which will be used to reconstruct the
              unmeasurable state variables.  5.  Experimentally verify these control
              strategies by application to polymerizat ion reactors.
