Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis of Fluid Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9403402

Award Number: 9403402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83500              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Thomas Beale beale@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1324,9216,9263,EGCH,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Beale       The investigator undertakes four projects related to  incompressible
              fluid flow.  The first continues work on numerical  methods for the motion of
              inviscid fluid interfaces, such as water  waves.  In previous work, convergent
              methods of boundary integral  type have been developed, using a new approach
              for the analysis of  fluid interfaces.  In this project, methods of more
              general  applicability are designed that still maintain full numerical 
              stability.  In a related project, improved analytical understanding  is sought
              for existence and regularity in exact solutions of the  fully nonlinear
              equations of water waves.  Instabilities in exact  vortex rings with swirl are
              studied, comparing predictions from a  short-wave asymptotic analysis with
              direct simulation using vortex  methods, in which computational elements of
              vorticity move with  the flow.  These two very different approaches should
              allow  detailed treatment of this test case for time-dependent, inviscid 
              three-dimensional flow.  Finally, the approximation of the  Navier-Stokes
              equations of viscous flow by fractional time steps  are investigated, in which
              inviscid flow alternates with linear  viscosity, and artificial boundary layers
              are generated.       Fluid flow is important in diverse applications, including
               aircraft design, industrial processes, and the motion of the  oceans and
              atmosphere.  Often quantitative prediction is difficult  because of the
              development of small scales in the flows -- for  instance, local disturbances
              in the general behavior of the flows.  One role for mathematical analysis is
              the design of improved  numerical methods.  For complicated equations, such as
              those of  inviscid fluid interfaces, numerical instabilities have been 
              difficult to avoid.  Carefully designed methods, such as those  developed here,
              could be used for better predictions of the  behavior of water waves.  Basic
              analytical understanding of  solutions is often closely related to the analysis
              of numerical  approximations.  The com parison of two methods for predicting 
              instabilities in fluid flow, short-wave analysis and direct  simulation by
              vortex methods, should help to establish the realm  of validity of each
              approach.  The use of the two together for a  quantitative study of exact
              solutions, such as vortex rings with  swirl, is advantageous for better
              understanding of nonlinear  dynamics in realistic three-dimensional flow.  The
              fractional step  approximation of the Navier-Stokes equations replaces the full
               evolution by two parts of more special character.  Some numerical  methods
              take advantage of this dual structure.  Better  understanding of such
              approximations, especially the boundary  behavior, could suggest more accurate
              versions of these numerical  schemes.
