Title       : Logical Methods Applied to Complexity Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9403447

Award Number: 9403447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 15,  1994  
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $423737             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Weinstein weinstein@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria L. Bonet-Carbonell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9232,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This project's goal is the development of a logical approach to   the study of
              computational complexity.  The approach will exploit   two of the  main
              traditions in mathematical logic, namely, (a) model theory and   (b) proof
              theory.  Model theory  studies the relation between logical  languages and
              their interpretations and  has developed powerful  techniques to answer
              questions about the expressive  power of a  variety of logical languages. 
              Proof theory studies the notion of  logical inference and elevates mathematical
              study.  In so doing,  proof theory  makes it possible to undertake a rigorous 
              examination of the complexity of  establishing conclusions within  a given
              system of inference.    A significant  feature of this logical approach is that
              it  forgoes, to a large extent, the use  of machine models of  computation in
              the study of complexity.  Much valuable  work in  complexity theory has
              involved careful analysis of the resource  requirements of various algorithms
              on the specified abstract  machines.  This  project seeks to obtain new
              insights into the  complexity of combinatorial  problems by analyzing these
              problems  in machine-independent, logical terms.  Among the questions 
              considered are whether the polynomial time decidable  properties  of finite
              graphs are recursively enumerable and whether   NP = co-NP.  Negative answers
              to either of these questions would imply   that  P is not equal to NP.  Though 
              these implications are certainly significant, the  focus of the project is to 
              achieve a deeper understanding of the  problems themselves by the use of
              logical  techniques.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
