Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Scaling Limits of Nongradient Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9403462

Award Number: 9403462
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Horng-Tzer Yau yau@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The very first question concerning stochastic dynamics is the  rate of
              relaxation to the equilibrium. One can roughly divide  these rates into two
              categories: the exponential relaxation and  the power law relaxation. The main
              objective of this research is  to study dynamics with the power law decay. The
              first goal is to  derive the macroscopic scaling limiting equations rigorously
              and  then to study various corrections to these equations. In the past  few
              years, several methods have been developed for these  problems. One of the
              major restrictions to these methods is a  technical condition called the
              gradient condition. The  investigator will study several nongradient models, in
               particular, the hydrodynamical limit and the rate of relaxation  to
              equilibrium of lattice gas at finite temperature. A related  problem for
              lattice gas with random field will also be  considered. Finally, the
              investigator will study problems related  to a time scale longer than the
              hydrodynamical scale. These are  particularly important because the
              incompressible Navier-Stokes  equation is believed to be the long time
              (diffusive) scaling  limit of Hamiltonian systems.       A basic problem
              concerning dynamical system is to determine  the rate of approach to the
              equilibrium. In this research the  investigator will study dynamics with slow
              relaxation to  equilibrium, which most natural processes follow. Major goals
              are  to determine the precise rate of relaxation to the equilibrium of  these
              processes and to derive macroscopic equations governing the  macroscopic
              behavior of relaxations and then to study various  corrections to these
              equations. In the past few years, several  methods  have been developed for
              these problems for several types  of models. But some major restrictions of
              these methods prohibit  the study of more realistic models. The investigator
              will study  several models to extend the current technology and to address 
              some key technical difficulties. Models of interest include: the  lattice gases
              at finite  temperature, the effect of random  impurities in a lattice gas, and
              the discrete velocity model  which simulates the  incompressible Navier-Stokes
              equation.
