Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Operator Theory and Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9403785

Award Number: 9403785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gisele R. Goldstein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome A. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9403785  Goldstein       This award supports mathematical research in the
              generalarea  of operator-theoretic functional analysis, differential equations 
              and mathematical physics.  The work focuses on problems from  three overlapping
              areas.  The first area, quantum theory,  involves Thomas-Fermi theory with the
              Fermi-Amaldi correction for  spin polarized systems, scattering theory
              (including obstacle  scattering for elastic waves), nonrelativisitic limits and
               mHartree-Fock theory.  The second area, nonlinear partial  differential
              equations, involves the anisotropic porous  medium equation, degenerate
              parabolic equations (including  the Kompaneets equations of plasma physics),
              the Wentzell  boundary condition, reaction-diffusion systems, the 
              Korteweg-deVreiss equation and higher dimensional dispersive  equations,
              singular conservation laws and factored equations of  Euler-Poisson-Darboux
              type.  The final area, semigroups of  operators, involves Favard classes and
              degenerate parabolic  problems, extremal characterizations of eigenvectors,
              singular  perturbations and hemion-Cosine functions.  The problems are  mostly
              well-posed, but also of concern are ill-posed problems,  including inverse
              problems, nonconvex minimization and numerical  solutions.       Differential
              equations form a basis for mathematical  modeling of the physical world.  The
              role of mathematical  analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is
              to  provide qualitative and quantitative information about the  solutions. 
              This may include answers to questions about  uniqueness, smoothness and growth.
               In addition, analysis  often develops methods for approximation of solutions
              and  estimates on the accuracy of these approximations.  ***
