Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Model Theory and Universal Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1994       
File        : a9403187

Award Number: 9403187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph N. McKenzie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9403187  McKenzie       The principal investigator recently proved that the
              problem  of determining whether a finite algebraic system has a finite 
              equational basis is algorithmically unsolvable, and he is  attempting to extend
              this result to quasi-equations.  Results  showing that some natural problem is
              algorithmically unsolvable,  as in Godel's proof  1931 , are very fundamental,
              because they  reveal inherent limitations both to practical and to theoretical 
              computation.  The unsolvability of Tarski's finite equational  basis problem is
              solid but unsurprising evidence that finite  algebras can exhibit complexity of
              a kind that is not found in  the classical algebras, i.e. in finite groups,
              rings or  semigroups.       The name "algorithm" means a general procedure for
              solving a  problem or performing a calculation.  Godel's proof was  essentially
              a demonstration that there can be no algorithm to  determine all true
              arithmetic properties of the natural numbers.   Ideas implicit in his proof
              were developed by others into the  modern mathematical theory of algorithms
              (recursive functions,  Turing machines), which led as well, through the work of
              Alan  Turing and John von Neumann, to the later development of the  stored
              program computer.  Algebra is a rich source of algorithms,  many of which
              easily exceed the capabilities of modern computers.   In fact, some of the
              deepest results of modern mathematics are  centered on algorithmic problems in
              algebra, and this continues  to be a lively area of research.  It is not
              illogical to suggest  that important breakthroughs in practical computation may
               eventually derive from this theoretical work, although nobody  today can
              foresee in detail how this would come about.  ***
