Title       : Glycolytic Enzyme Dynamics in Living Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1995   
File        : a9403510

Award Number: 9403510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard Pagliaro LEN@U.WASHINGTON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9403510  Pagliaro       Much of modern biology is based on the study of 
              cellular organization in fixed specimens or in dilute  aqueous solutions. 
              While this approach has been very  valuable in the past, it has its limitation
              when one  approaches the organization of the cytoplasm.  The goal of  this
              proposal is to study the organization and behavior of  several glycolytic
              enzymes in living cells.  These enzymes  are believed to exist freely dissolved
              in cytoplasm, but  much recent evidence suggests that they may exist partially 
              in the solid state.  During the first year of the project  efforts will be
              focused on continued studies of the enzymes  aldolase and triose phosphate
              isomerase.  These enzymes are  believed to interact with each other and with
              the actin  cytoskeleton, either directly or indirectly.  The  intracellular
              distribution and mobility of each of these  enzymes will be compared  using
              fluorescence ratio imaging  and fluorescence redistribution after
              photobleaching and the  interaction of these enzymes in vitro and in vivo will
              be  characterized extensively.  Specific antibodies will be used  against
              aldolase, cloned mutant aldolase, and fluorescence  resonance energy transfer
              to probe the interactions between  these enzymes both in vitro and in living
              mammalian  fibroblasts.  The significance of the work is three-fold.  First, it
              is clear that many reactions generally treated as  occurring in soluble phase
              may have some structural basis.  Characterizing and understanding the cellular
              organization  of these reactions is one of the important challenges  remaining
              for biochemical pathways.  Second, molecular  organization of biochemical
              pathways  may provide a link  between biochemical logic and three dimensional
              cytoplasmic  organization. Identifying the rules by which nature has  optimized
              biochemical reactions may allow genetic  manipulations to improve quality or
              efficiency of animals,  microbes and plants.  %%%  Understanding the cellular
              organization of metabolic  processes i s a basic requirement in our
              undestanding of  life.  The work proposed here to investigate the dynamics of 
              glycolytic enzymes in living cells will eventually provide  new tools for
              investigating other processes.  Understanding  the spatial and temporal
              organization of the cytoplasm is a  basic requirement for future genetic
              engineering experiments  in animals, microorganisms and plants.  ***
