Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Exploitation of Symmetry in Discretization Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1996  
File        : a9403392

Award Number: 9403392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene L. Allgower allgower@math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt Georg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rick Miranda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1038,9139,9146,9216,9263,CVIS,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9403392  Allgower         Many problems in science display symmetries with
              respect to  a group of transformations.  The equations describing such 
              problems are then said to be `equivariant' with respect to this  symmetry
              group.  The focus of this project is to continue to  study systematic
              techniques for exploiting symmetry in the  numerical solution of such
              equivariant equations.  This  exploitation leads to more stable solution
              methods and to a  greatly increased numerical efficiency.  One of the methods 
              studied by the investigators (the symmetry reduction method) can  be viewed as
              a generalization of Fourier Transform methods (which  exploit symmetry under a
              cyclic group).  Among other projects,  the investigators further develop the
              symmetry reduction method  and study hidden symmetries, optimal equivariant
              preconditioners  for problems that are only `nearly'equivariant, domain
              reduction  via symmetries, the numerical solution of nonlinear equivariant 
              equations and bifurcation phenomena.  Preliminary numerical codes  are further
              developed into a collection of codes for a range of  important applications.   
                   Geometric symmetries have always played an important role in  theoretical
              physics and some branches of applied mathematics.  However, exploiting these
              symmetries has only lately been  developed in the areas of numerical analysis
              and computational  mathematics.  The aim of this project is to use geometric
              and  algebraic techniques to give efficient algorithms for solving  large
              numerical problems that enjoy such symmetries.  Very large  problems are broken
              down (via symmetry considerations) into  smaller problems that can be handled
              independently and more  efficiently on modern architectures of high-performance
               computing. Problems that are only `nearly' equivariant (i.e.,  where certain
              symmetry structures have imperfections) occur quite  frequently in engineering
              (e.g., in elasticity or flow problems,  or in structural mechanics).  An
              efficient exploitation of these  imperfect sym metries would reduce the
              computational effort for  solving such problems.  This has two direct benefits:
              firstly,  one can solve moderately sized problems much faster, possibly in 
              real time; secondly, very large problems that are inaccessible  via standard
              methods can be solved with this symmetry reduction  method.
