Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Topology to Biology and Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1994      
File        : a9403454

Award Number: 9403454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138000             (Estimated)
Investigator: De Witt L. Sumners sumners@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9139,9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9403454  Sumners         The investigator and colleagues develop topological
              methods  to describe  and compute the spatial configuration of macromolecules,
              and  changes in  configuration due to chemical and biological agents.  These 
              issues arise in  the analysis of experimental data in molecular biology and 
              synthetic  polymer chemistry.  The applications include model building and 
              theoretical  proofs of the structure and mechanism of enzymes that act on DNA, 
              the  quantization of topological entanglement of molecules in random  polymer 
              systems, the development of algorithms for the numerical  computation and 
              simulation of macromolecular structure, and the implementation of  these 
              algorithms to create mathematical data that one can compare with  experimental
              data.  In the topological approach to enzymology,  enzymes  vital in cellular
              metabolism are reacted with circular DNA  substrate.  A  topological enzyme
              signature is observed in the family of DNA  knots and  links produced by the
              reaction.  One long-range goal of this  research is  the development of a
              complete set of experimentally observable  topological  parameters with which
              to describe and compute enzyme mechanism  and the  structure of the active
              enzyme-DNA synaptic intermediate,  allowing  mathematical proof of
              3-dimensional enzyme-DNA structure, and the  ability  to predict results of
              future experiments.  Many recent advances  in  3-dimensional geometry and
              topology (such as the Cyclic Surgery  Theorem)  are useful in the analysis of
              data from these topological  enzymology  experiments.       The results of this
              basic research project have potential  utility in  biotechnology, rational drug
              design and the design and  manufacture of  synthetic polymers.  Before one can
              harness the manufacturing  power of  bacterial cells, one must first understand
              what these cells are  capable of,  and then how to control these processes.  In
              order to combat  viruses in  human disease, and to exploit the ability of
              viruses to control  cellular   processes, one must understand at a fundamental
              level what  viruses are  doing.  An integral part of this understanding process
              is the  study of the  spatial configuration of large flexible molecules.  For
              example,  the  3-dimensional shape of cellular DNA, RNA and proteins is 
              crucially  important to their biological function.  Cellular DNA is highly 
              twisted and  convoluted, and for information retrieval and cell viability, 
              some  geometric and topological features must be introduced, and others 
              quickly  removed.  Some enzymes maintain the proper geometry and topology  of
              DNA in  the cell by passing one strand of DNA through another via an 
              enzyme-bridged  transient break in the DNA; this enzyme action plays a crucial 
              role in cell  metabolism, including segregation of daughter chromosomes at the 
              termination of replication.  Other enzymes break the DNA apart  and  recombine
              the ends by exchanging them.  These enzymes regulate  the  expression of
              specific genes, mediate viral integration into and  excision  from the host
              genome, mediate transposition and repair of DNA,  and  generate antibody and
              genetic diversity.  These enzymes perform  incredible  feats of topology at the
              molecular level; the description and  quantization  of such enzyme action
              absolutely requires the language and  computational  machinery of topology.
