Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algorithms and Numerical Analysis for Partial
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9403512

Award Number: 9403512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred H. Schatz schatz@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9403512  Schatz      New algorithms involving finite element methods for the
              numerical  approximation of various problems will be introduced and  analyzed. 
              New techniques and methods of analysis of the behavior  of existing
              approximation methods will be studied.  Three main  problems will be
              considered:  (1) A new approach to  superconvergence and extrapolation will be
              studied resulting from  new local error estimates.  Extensions to problems with
              non-  smooth solutions, parabolic equations, and integral equations  will be
              investigated, as well as applications to domain  decomposition methods and
              multigrid.  (2) Algorithms for  obtaining optimal order accurate methods for
              elliptic problems on  3-dimensional polyhedral domains where there is a
              confluence of  edge singularities and vertex singularities in derivatives will 
              be studied.  (3) New methods for obtaining local up to boundary  estimates for
              finite element methods using isoparametric elements  in R^n will be
              investigated.    The subject of superconvergence and extrapolation for finite 
              element methods has been the object of investigations by many  researchers.  A
              new and general theory that unifies both of these  subjects and leads to new
              results has been developed by the  principal investigator.  These results lead
              to new highly  accurate and efficient methods for solving some important 
              physical problems.  The methods are easy to implement, especially  on modern
              supercomputers.  They can be totally parallelized and  are compatible with
              recent domain decomposition and multigrid  algorithms.  Fewer finite elements
              are needed for these methods  to produce the same accuracy as standard finite
              element methods  using the same type of element.  The new theory seems to be
              the  most general available at the present time.  It is proposed to  continue
              to investigate new facets of the theory and expand its  applicability to a
              variety of new problems such as problems with  non smooth solutions and
              parabolic equations.
