Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations with
               Applications to Phase Transitions, Front Propagation and Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1996  
File        : a9403412

Award Number: 9403412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Panagiotis E. Souganidis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Souganidis  9403412       Work supported by this grant covers a broad range of 
              problems arising in the areas of hyperbolic and parabolic  nonlinear partial
              differential equations.  Three primary themes  will be emphasized.  First, work
              will be done on the kinetic  theory of conservation laws.  The goal is to
              obtain new  regularity and compactness results for systems of 
              conservationlaws, using a kinetic type formulation/approximation  for these
              systems.  Second, studies will be made on first- and  second-order fully
              nonlinear degenerate elliptic and parabolic  equations.  The emphasis is on the
              analysis of discontinuous  control problems, on proving convergence, on
              obtaining error  estimates for numerical schemes and finally, on studying
              several  issues regarding the regularity and uniqueness of weak solutions.  
              Lastly, work will be done on generalized front propagation and  phase
              transitions. Much of the focus will be on studying the  regularity of moving
              fronts past their singularities as well as  the theory of phase transitions. 
              The latter includes singular  limits of reaction-diffusion equations and
              systems, macroscopic  (hydrodynamic) limits of particle systems and large scale
              front  dynamics for turbulent combustion.       Partial differential equations
              form a basis for mathematical  modeling of the physical world.  The role of
              mathematical  analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is to 
              provide qualitative and quantitative information about the  solutions.  This
              may include answers to questions about  uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In
              addition, analysis often  develops methods for approximation of solutions and
              estimates on  the accuracy of these approximations.  ***
