Title       : Density Functional Theory of the Electronic Structure of Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1996   
File        : a9403431

Award Number: 9403431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Parr   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, supported by the NSF Theoretical and Computational   Chemistry
              Program, continues research by Robert Parr in the related areas   of density
              functional theory (DFT), and the theoretical formulation of   Ralph Pearson's
              concept of hard and soft acids and bases (HSAB).  In one   aspect of this work
              the Kohn-Sham orbitals are determined directly from a   given electron density.
               A major goal is the development of an improved   exchange-correlation DFT
              functional.  To this end, a mathematical   analysis of analytic properties of
              local and non-local functionals, such   as cusp conditions and coordinate
              scaling conditions, will be carried   out.    Density functional theory
              provides an alternative to ab initio solution   of the Schroedinger equation
              for the computation of the electronic   structure of mater. The history of DFT
              dates back to work by Thomas,   Fermi, and Dirac in the 1920's in the earliest
              days of quantum theory.    In the past two decades, DFT calculations have been
              widely applied to   predict the electronic properties of  metals and other
              crystals, but only   in recent years have DFT calculations become sufficiently
              accurate to   permit general application to molecules.  This advance, made
              possible by   the development of new exchange-correlation functionals, reduces 
               computation time for large molecules by at least a factor of ten.  The  
              present project, with its emphasis on analysis of fundamental   mathematical
              aspects,  is just one of several ongoing research projects   which seek to
              develop even more accurate functionals.  Many scientists   anticipate that new
              DFT methods will one day replace the much more   expensive ab initio
              calculations in about 80% of all applications of   molecular quantum theory. 
              If true, this will constitute a major advance   in our ability to design new
              materials.
