Title       : Molecular Characterization of the KDR-type Mutation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1996   
File        : a9409084

Award Number: 9409084
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Koenig                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ke Dong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Voltage-dependent sodium channels play a fundamental role  in generation and
              propagation of action potentials in most  multicellular organisms.  Pyrethroid
              insecticides and  sodium channel site 2 neurotoxins (such as batrachotoxin) 
              presumably bind to unique sites in the membrane-embedded  portion of the sodium
              channel.  They have been very useful  for studying sodium channel functions
              because of their very  specific, well-defined effects on functional properties
              of  the sodium channel.  A class of so-called kdr or kdr-type  (knockdown
              resistance) mutations have been identified in  several insects including the
              German cockroach strain  Ectiban-R. kdr or kdr-type insects are resistant to 
              knockdown (rapid paralysis) and kill by pyrethroids and  some of site 2
              neurotoxins.  Our recent restriction  fragment length polymorphism analysis
              suggests that the kdr-  type resistance is the result of a mutation(s) in the
              para  homologous gene.  The kdr-type mutation(s) in Ectiban-R  most likely
              resides in the coding region of the para-  homologous gene because the
              mutation(s) does not affect the  sodium channel density (i.e., the regulation
              of the para-  homologous sodium channel gene).  The long-term goal of  this
              project is to characterize the kdr-type mutation(s)  that affects molecular
              interactions between the sodium  channel and pyrethroids/site 2 neurotoxins in
              the German  cockroach strain Ectiban-R.  The specific objectives of the 
              proposed work are:  1.  Clone para-homologous sodium channel genes from Ectiban
               R and a genetically related pyrethroid susceptible strain  (CSMA).  2. 
              Determine and compare nucleotide sequences of the  coding regions of the
              Ectiban-R and CSMA para-homologous  genes.  3.  Construct full-length cDNAs of
              the German cockroach para  homologous gene.
