Title       : CSU/TTU Cooperative Wind Engineering Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2001    
File        : a9409869

Award Number: 9409869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1630747            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kishor C. Mehta Kishor.Mehta@wind.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,9196,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9409869   9411147  Mehta          Meroney  The Cooperative Wind Engineering
              Program (CWEP) enters the  second five-year cycle of research activities
              undertaken by  an interdisciplinary team of researchers from Colorado State 
              and Texas Tech Universities working jointly.  The  cooperative research program
              will continue focusing on three  main areas: wind load, wind engineering
              meteorology and wind  flow around buildings.  The combination of full scale
              field  and wind-tunnel physical modeling will be merged in studies  conducted
              in the three main areas and each will be  integrated into the other two.  On
              Wind loads, studies will  continue in topics such as data acquisition and
              analysis,  pressures on permeable surfaces, the influence of  architectural and
              mechanical features, the spatial and  temporal structural of wind loads, and on
              wind loading  reliability analysis of low-raise buildings.  In the area of 
              wind engineering meteorology, instrumentation refinements  and improved
              analysis of wind flow records especially of  NEXRAD data, and the simulation of
              wind storms in the  boundary layer wind tunnel are some of the topics to be 
              studied.  In the area of wind flow around buildings, the  identification of the
              separation region near the surface of  structures, the effect of the Reynolds
              number, the use of  laser-sheet visualization to examine the time-dependent 
              nature of the wind flow, the effect of building shape, roof  line and other
              features, shelter and topographic effects,  and numerical modeling are some of
              the topics to be studied.  The results from the work done in these three main
              areas  will be integrated throughout the duration of the program.  Based on the
              results from this program the safety of  populations at risk will improve and
              the private sector,  such as the construction and insurance industries, will 
              benefit because the vulnerability of new and retrofitted  buildings and
              structures will decrease; the Federal, State  and local administrators will
              continue to benefit because o f  the development of new and improved mitigation
              measures; and  the research community also will gain knowledge from the  data,
              instrumentation and methods developed during the  program.  ***
