Title       : Engineering Research Deployment Teaching Initiative: Effective Engineering and
               Design Courseware via Boundary Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1995  
File        : a9409852

Award Number: 9409852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28709              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Kane kane@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Karis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey B. Layton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Doheny-Farina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,9195,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9409852  Kane       This project deploys advanced boundary element analysis
              (BEA)  simulation techniques with the unique potential for creation of  truly
              effective courseware in engineering and design education.  It  will develop,
              demonstrate, and broadly disseminate the resulting  protype engineering and
              design courseware.  The project synergizes  compelling attributes of advanced
              boundary formulations, with  contemporary/emerging hardware and software, and
              practices in  technical communications and publishing (electronic and
              classical).  An engineering and technical communications team will develop 
              innovative, multimedia courseware via an interactive BEA "engine",  and
              integrate the resulting capability in an engineering lecture  series with
              potential for incorporation in engineering textbooks.       Boundary formulated
              computer simulation techniques are more  amendable to deployment in the
              instruction of fundamental  engineering subjects (i.e., solid and fluid
              mechanics or heat  transfer and design).  Such technology can be made truly 
              interactive, widely available, and readily usable by both  instructors and
              students in the context of an academic semester  without an extensive learning
              curve.  Thus, the active deployment  of interactive computer programs that can
              faithfully simulate and  depict the response of physical systems as an integral
              part of the  engineering instruction process is developed.
