Title       : Barriers to Employment Faced by Female Household Heads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1994    
File        : a9409250

Award Number: 9409250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3744               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Kimmel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WE Upjohn Inst for Emp Re
	      300 South Westnedge Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  490074630    616/343-5541

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409250  Kimmel    This is a Research Opportunities for Women Planning Grant. 
              The  project will focus on health-related employment barriers,  including the
              relationships between maternal and child health  status, health insurance
              coverage, and employment behavior.  The  project will conduct policy
              simulations that will include the  examination of potential work-disincentives
              of publicly-provided  health insurance coverage and the extent to which
              mandated  employer coverage might be expected to reduce such disincentives.  
              The motivation for this particular focus is the impact poor  health and the
              unavailability of employer-provided health  coverage for mothers could have on
              the probability of their labor  force participation.      The research during
              the planning period will focus on each  component of the health issue
              separately, producing separate  estimates of the effects of health status on
              employment; the  effect of the probability of receiving employer-provided
              health  insurance coverage on employment behavior; and the effect of  receiving
              the coverage weighted by the family's valuation of that  coverage on employment
              behavior.  This research will incorporate  data from overlapping waves of the
              1987 and 1988 panels of the  SIPP (Survey of Income and Program Participation),
              and the 1987  NMES (National Medical Expenditures Survey).    During the
              post-planning period, these results will be used to  build a more comprehensive
              model of the linkages between health  care utilization for the mother and her
              children, the  availability of public and private health insurance coverage,
              and  maternal employment behavior.  This will provide evidence of the  impact
              of public and private health insurance coverage  probabilities, and the value
              of this coverage, on the mother's  employment choices.  For this full model,
              the underlying  theoretical model will merge the separate literatures
              concerning  the demand for health insurance, the effect of health problems on 
              employment, and the welfare/work-disinc entives literature.  Such  a full model
              of employment barriers will be quite complex, and  implementation will require
              addressing serious theoretical and  econometric concerns.
