Title       : Theoretical Studies of Structure and Reactions of Transition Metal Atoms, Ions,
               Complexes and Cluster Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9409020

Award Number: 9409020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keiji Morokuma morokuma@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In this research project, supported by the NSF Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program, high level ab initio theory, using good   orbital basis sets
              and correlated wavefunctions, are applied to a broad   range of problems in
              transition metal chemistry spanning the range of   simple transition metal
              complexes with as few as six atoms to studies of   full catalytic cycles.   A
              systematic comparison will be carried out of   H-H and C-H bond activation by
              transition metal complexes.  Improvements   to existing ab initio methodology
              include the further development of   computational techniques using effective
              core potentials.    Modern methods in molecular electronic structure theory are
              applied to   transition metal chemistry.   Detailed calculations will be
              carried out   for small molecular systems which exhibit fundamental bonding
              principles.    Much  larger scale computations of realistic models will also be
              carried   out.  This  research is distinguished by the application of highly  
              rigorous theory to such large molecular systems.  These computations   using
              supercomputers are expected to yield a reliable and more detailed   picture of
              the molecular events which occur during typical chemical   reactions catalyzed
              by transition metal complexes.  Such catalytic   processes are widely employed
              in the chemical industry.  The hope and   expectation is that this research
              will eventually benefit these   industries.
