Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Control Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1996   
File        : a9409037

Award Number: 9409037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100302             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Gardner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409037  Gardner       This project is funded jointly by the Applied Mathematics
               Program and the Geometric Analysis Program. Its goal is to  construct and
              apply new invariants, structure theorems and normal  forms of control systems
              under time-independent, time-dependent,  and dynamic feedback. The tools
              involve the method of equivalence  as refined by the principal investigator,
              exterior differential  systems, and the theory of infinite pseudogroups. An
              important  principle is the enlargement of the notion of feedback  equivalence
              to the fully nonlinear category. This program has  resulted in major
              improvements in exact linearization algorithms.  Similar ideas will be used to
              investigate algorithms for other  applicable normal forms such as standard
              bilinear systems. A new  concept of control structure, a more global viewpoint
              of  nonsingular control systems, will also be investigated.       The theory of
              feedback control systems, originally motivated  by problems in engineering,
              occupies a central place in applied  mathematics and is fundamental to control
              engineering  applications. This project will develop the geometric foundations 
              that underlie the dynamics of high-performance automatic control  systems. It
              focuses primarily on systems that have highly  nonlinear dynamics and which may
              have many interconnected  components influencing each other. The engineering
              demands for  ever higher performance, or even optimality, often require 
              completely new control designs since classical linearization  techniques for
              control design is often inadequate in such  situations. By employing techniques
              from various areas of pure  mathematics, such as differential geometry, major
              improvements in  exact linearization algorithms, with applications to nonlinear
               autopilot design, for example, are expected.
