Title       : Research Initiation Award: "On-Line Optimization of Batch Reactors: Experimental
               Implementation to Polymerization Reactors"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9409577

Award Number: 9409577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivas Palanki palanki@wombat.eng.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Palanki - 9409577      A large variety of specialty chemicals are
              produced in batch reactors. Since batch reactors are transient in nature, the
              major objective is to optimize a performance index (such as yield) at the end
              of the batch cycle.  A major problem in batch reactor operation is that changes
              in initial conditions and environmental conditions can cause significant
              batch-to-batch variations leading to significant losses in resources and time. 
              For this reason, it is necessary to develop optimization strategies that can be
              implemented on-line.    In this study a methodological framework for on-line
              optimization of batch processes with multiple inputs will be developed.  The
              emphasis is on the experimental implementation of optimal state feedback laws
              in industrially important batch polymerization reactors.  The copolymerization
              of styrene with methyl acrylate in toluene using aso-bis-iso-butyronitrile
              (AIBN) has been selected as a model experimental system to demonstrate the
              application of the on-line optimization strategy.  In Phase I of the research,
              a mathematical model of the experimental system will be developed.  In Phase
              II, optimal state feedback laws will be developed for end-point optimization of
              batch reactors with multiple inputs.  The efficacy of the optimal state
              feedback in optimizing the performance index will be tested on the mathematical
              model by computer simulations.  In Phase III, the on-line optimization strategy
              will be implemented experimentally.  Several batch and semi-batch experiments
              will be conducted to demonstrate the ability of the optimal state feedback to
              calculate, on-line, the optimal operating policy when there are batch to batch
              variations in initial conditions and process disturbances.
