Title       : RIA: Imaging of Spatially Separated Electron-Hole Plasma Dynamics In nipi- Doped
               Multiple Quantum Wells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1994  
File        : a9409122

Award Number: 9409122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Magdy F. Iskander                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Rich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Rich  9409122  This NSF Research Initiation Award is aimed at enhancing the 
              understanding of fundamental processes in the carrier dynamics of  modulation
              doped quantum III-V heterostructures.  In spatial light  modulators (SLMs),
              strong photo-optic and electro-optic effects  which lead to nonlinearities in
              the optical absorption and  refractive index are required to obtain sufficient
              control of the  intensity, phase, or polarization of optical signals.  In the 
              proposed work, Professor Dan Rich of USC will study fundamental  problems
              associated with the phenomena of excitation-induced  absorption modulation in
              nipi-doped strained III-V multiple quantum  wells (MQWs).  The spatially
              separated electron-hole plasma that  can be generated in periodically doped
              nipi MQW structures exhibits  unique electronic and optical properties which
              can be utilized to  fabricated low-power and high-contrast SLMs.  Because of
              large  enhancements in the excess carrier lifetime and in-plane ambipolar 
              diffusion constant, large excess carrier concentrations can be  created by
              relatively weak optical excitation to alter the MQW  exciton absorption.  The
              PI proposes to study the carrier  recombination dynamics of the electron-hole
              plasma in nipi-doped  III-V MQW samples using a novel approach called electron
              beam-  induced absorption modulation imaging (EBIA).  In this proposal we  will
              show that EBIA will yield unprecedented um-scale spatial  imaging information
              on the in-plane diffusion processes and  recombination lifetimes which govern
              the performance of optically  addressed and electron beam-addressed SLMs.  The
              effects of  extrinsic defect- and impurity-related processes associated with 
              dopant interdiffusion and strain-induced misfit formation which can  affect the
              spatial distribution of luminescence and differential  absorption in periodic
              nipi-doped InGaAs/GaAs MQWs will be  examined.  It is anticipated that a
              variety of "smart pixel" and  Fourier-plane processing photonic technologies
              will benefit from  the  proposed work.  ***
