Title       : Risk Exposure Analysis for Process Reengineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1994       
File        : a9409815

Award Number: 9409815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17584              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura H. Lally ACSLHL@HOFSTRA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hofstra University
	      128 Hofstra University
	      Hempstead, NY  115501030    516/560-6820

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0522400   Information Systems                     
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 9149,9221,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research planning grant (RPG) addresses the problem of risk analysis for
              the reengineering of organizational processes.  Reengineering is a popular new
              method of re-designing work in organizations.  Reengineering involves:  1) the
              combination of previously fragmented functional tasks into integrated
              processes, 2) the use of information technology within the processes to
              increase efficiency, and 3) a reliance on deferred methods of control to
              decrease supervisory costs.  Proponents of reengineering cite several examples
              of firms significantly decreasing their costs while simultaneously increasing
              the efficiency with which their work gets done.    This study regards
              reengineering from the perspective of Perrow's theory of "normal accidents." 
              Perrow states that as systems become more complex and tightly coupled, the
              likelihood of minor "incidents," turning into major "accidents," increases
              significantly.  Perrow argues that such systems require built in control
              systems that immediately make human operators aware of the location of the
              incident.    This study proposes that, given the complex, tightly coupled
              nature of integrated processes, reengineering is likely to create
              organizational systems more vulnerable to accidents.  Furthermore, because of
              the deferred control methods, managers may not be aware of accidents for longer
              periods of time, exacerbating the damage.  Finally, the information technology
              used in reengineering may be a source of new, damaging incidents.  This
              research argues that these risks must be weighed against the potential benefits
              od reengineering.    The goal of the planning stage of this research is a
              comprehensive literature review in the areas of:  reengineering, risk
              management, risk analysis involving various forms of information technology,
              risk impacts related to increased spans of control, and systems theory.  The
              literature should provide a full understanding of the dimensions of
              reengineering related risk and provide the basis for developing a longer-term
              res earch program to test the relationships between reengineering and risk
              empirically.
