Title       : Barium in Bone as a Paleodietary Indicator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9409384

Award Number: 9409384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309333             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Burton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409384  Price    With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Price
              and  his colleagues will examine the usefulness of barium as a  paleodietary
              indicator. Considerable research done focussing on  strontium has shown that it
              is discriminated against relative to  calcium in biological systems. Therefore
              relatively less  strontium is present in herbivores which eat plants than in
              the  plants themselves. Likewise bones of carnivores contain less  strontium
              than do bones of their herbivore prey. Preliminary  analyses conducted by Dr.
              Price and colleagues indicate that the  same holds true for barium and that in
              this latter case the  differences between trophic level are even more
              pronounced.  Relatively little is known however about how barium moves through 
              ecological systems and preliminary data again indicate that the  patterning is
              complex. Marine, arid and non-arid terrestrial  systems all seem to act
              differently. To gain insight into this  issue, Dr. Price and colleagues will
              study how barium moves  through several ecosystems. He will examine the food
              webs in  selected regions of the Alaskan coastline, Alaskan interior, US  Great
              Basin desert and the Guatemalan tropics. He will also  analyze human
              prehistoric skeletal materials from many regions of  the world.    Because food
              is essential to human existence and subsistence and  social systems of
              necessity are built around this need,  archaeologists pay a great deal of
              attention to the  reconstruction of prehistoric diet. This has proven extremely
               difficult because various classes of food are differentially  preserved in
              archaeological sites. Plants for example which  formed an essential part of
              prehistoric diet are rarely  preserved. Chemical analysis of bone has proven
              extremely useful  since different diets may leave telltale chemical
              fingerprints in  skeletal remains. The proposed work by Dr. Price and
              colleagues  will help to develop a new technique which may yield insight not 
              only into diet but paleoclimate as well.    This wo rk is important because the
              technique, when developed will  provide a useful way to address a number of
              archaeological  questions in many parts of the world.
