Title       : Research Initiation Award: Job Scheduling and Memory Management in
               Message-passing Multicomputers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1994  
File        : a9409697

Award Number: 9409697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88352              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjeev K. Setia setia@cs.gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9264,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The main goal of this project is to investigate multiprogramming based task
              scheduling in multiprocessor environments.  This is based on the belief that,
              like uniprocessors, multicomputers have to be multiprogrammed in order to
              achieve a performance to cost ratio.  Existing policies for resource sharing in
              a multicomputer among multiple applications are static.  This project will
              examine issues that arise in the design and implementation of alternate job
              scheduling policies that have a better performance than static policies.  As a
              first step, the workload on multicomputers will be characterized through
              experimental measurement and analysis.  The insights gained from this study
              will be used in the design and implementation of adaptive and dynamic
              partitioning policies.  In particular, implementation issues involved in making
              adaptive and dynamic partitioning transparent to the applications programmer
              will be examined.  As a part of the research, a run time system that provides
              support for application-directed dynamic reconfiguration will be implemented. 
              Another goal of the research is to examine the impact of the introduction of
              virtual memory in newer multicomputer systems on the performance trade-offs
              between various scheduling policies.  The working set sizes and memory
              reference patterns of several scientific applications will be determined
              through simulation and analysis.  This information will be used in a simulation
              based study that examines the interactions between processor allocation, node
              scheduling and memory management in multicomputers that support virtual memory
              on each node of the system.  ***
