Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Conference on Forecasting, Predictionand Modeling in
               Statistics and Econometrics: Bayesian and Non-Bayesian Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1994      
File        : a9409774

Award Number: 9409774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sallie Keller-McNulty                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18775              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold Zellner arnold.zellner@gsb.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Good procedures for formulating quantitative models that are useful in
              explanation, prediction and decision-making are sorely needed in all sciences
              and applied areas. Currently, model formulation is more of an art than a
              science with much disagreement about how to approach the problem. Some
              emphasize simplicity, parsimony, and Ockham's razor while others emphasize the
              need for complexity, detail and realism. A number of approaches have been put
              forward that have been used in practice, namely, method of moments, time-series
              "identification" procedures using autocovariance matrices, etc., encompassing
              methods, structural econometric modeling-time series analysis procedures,
              maximum entropy, quantum statistical inference and so on. Further, the roles of
              measurement, description, unusual and ugly facts in model formulation have to
              be considered. Papers presented at the Geisser Conference will consider these
              difficult issues in detail, present and compare Bayesian and non-Bayesian
              approaches, and incorporate analyses of data to illustrate the results of
              applying various methods. A summary of the Conference's research findings will
              be prepared. Forecasting, prediction and modeling are central theoretical and
              applied topics in Statistics and Econometrics. Time series forecasting methods
              that are widely employed in industry and government yield useful forecasts of
              future developments but little in the way of explanation. On the other hand,
              causal models can provide predictions and explanations of future developments
              and how they may be influenced by various policies. Improving procedures for
              developing, implementing and using forecasting and causal models is a major
              objective of this Conference. In this connection, a comparative evaluation of
              Bayesian and non-Bayesian methods for achieving the above objective will be
              provided using many applications to illustrate general points and evaluate
              alternative approaches. Thus the Conference will provide evaluations and
              applications of old and new procedures  for developing, implementing and using
              forecasting and causal models.
