Title       : Air-Sea Gas Exchange in Coastal Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1999      
File        : a9409182

Award Number: 9409182
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256354             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernd Jaehne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409182  Jahne    Research will be undertaken in response to a one-time Program 
              Announcement (NSF 93-101) for the Coastal Ocean Processes  (CoOP) Coastal
              Air-Sea Chemical Fluxes pilot study.  The  NSF/CoOP Study will augment and
              collaborate with the  ONR-sponsored Marine Boundary Layer (MBL) Advanced
              Research  Initiative (ARI) project scheduled for 1995 off the  coast of 
              Monterey, California.  The overall scientific project is  interdisciplinary,
              with the NSF/CoOP efforts addressing  chemical and biological parameters, while
              the ONR study  focuses on physical oceanographic and meteorological 
              parameters.     This is a collaborative project between investigators from the 
              Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and from University of  Rhode Island.  The
              research will improve our understanding of  air-sea gas transfer under
              different environmental conditions  at the air-sea interface.  A new in situ
              instrument will be  developed to measure the gas transfer velocity (k) on time 
              scales of minutes to hours that are much shorter than  conventional tracer
              techniques (days or longer).   The  instrument will be integrated into a small
              research catamaran  called LADAS which is towed behind a research vessel. 
              LADAS  carries a scanning laser slope gauge, to measure the three-  dimensional
              capillary-gravity wave spectrum, meteorological  instruments, and a long-wave
              monitoring capability.  Addition-  ally a surface microlayer sampler will be
              installed on the  catamaran to enable coincident measurements of the gas 
              transfer velocity, small scale roughness, wind stress, and  surface chemical
              parameters.  LADAS will be deployed in  several field experiments to determine
              air-sea gas transfer  rates under realistic ocean conditions and especially to 
              relate these observations over different spatial and temporal  scales in
              coastal environments.  Such analyses will not  only provide a more accurate
              parameterization of gas transfer  velocity by avoiding biases caused by long
              time averaging, but  will also provide i nsights as to the transient nature of
              gas  flux.  The correlation of surface roughness and gas flux will  benefit
              future global remote sensing of air-sea gas exchange  since surface roughness
              is one of sea surface parameters than  can be remotely measured from aircraft
              and satellites.
