Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Models of Dynamics of DNA Repeats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1997  
File        : a9409909

Award Number: 9409909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek Kimmel kimmel@stat.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409909 Kimmel    The mechanisms of creation and evolution of repeats are
              important for both theoretical reasons and for understanding the dynamics of
              recently discovered disorders involving expansion of repeated DNA. We have been
              engaged for a long time in studies of dynamics of gene amplification and cell
              populations. We used and refined mathematical tools: multitype branching
              processes, branching processes with continuous type space, branching random
              walks and other. We propose two extensions of our modeling. One is dynamics of
              expansion of arrays of tandem repeats, which can be viewed as the action of a
              discrete stochastic dynamical system. The second concerns genetic aberrations
              caused by dynamic expansions of chromosome regions including short multiple
              tandem repeats of DNA. Both problems are the subject of active research by
              molecular biologists. The goals of this work will be to test if mathematical
              models based on qualitative biological models are sufficient to reproduce
              experimental observations in quantitative detail, to provide a better
              understanding of the molecular processes, and to suggest new experiments.   
              Recent experimental evidence shows that for a fraction of DNA, its amount per
              cell and its structure are not constant. Much of this rapidly evolving DNA
              consists of repeated sequences of various length. The mechanisms of creation
              and evolution of these repeats are important for both theoretical reasons and
              for understanding the recently discovered disorders involving expansion of
              repeated DNA. We have been engaged for a long time in building mathematical and
              statistical models in this field. Now, as more biological information is
              becoming available, we propose further extensions of our modeling. We managed
              to enlist collaboration of competent biological consultants. The goals of this
              work will be to test if mathematical models based on qualitative biological
              theories are sufficient to reproduce experimental observations in quantitative
              detail, to provide a better understandin g of the molecular processes, and to
              suggest new experiments.
