Title       : RIA: Coupled State-Space Filtering with Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9409319

Award Number: 9409319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali H. Sayed   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to develop modular and  parallelizable
              algorithms for problems in adaptive filtering,  robust estimation, control, and
              structured matrix computations.  A  major motivation for this work is the need
              to properly identify,  model, and exploit convenient structures that might
              exist in a  particular problem in order to develop a computationally effective 
              solution.  An intrinsic and relevant part of the proposed work is  to first
              identify common ingredients, as well as to explicitly  clarify, the
              interrelations and interplays that exist among several  problems in the
              disciplines of control, signal processing, and  mathematics.    In this regard,
              the proposed research develops a unifying point of  view that simultaneously
              addresses a variety of seemingly unrelated  problems in estimation, control,
              adaptive filtering, and matrix  computations.  It shows that the solutions to
              many applications in  these areas turn out to share a key and surprisingly
              simple  ingredient, namely, that of computing the triangular factors of 
              matrices that exhibit structure.  The significance of this  particular fact
              and, more generally, of the proposed research as a  whole, is that it enables
              several well-understood concepts from  matrix theory and linear algebra to be
              applied in order to simplify  the derivation of a variety of algorithms, to
              propose new  computationally efficient variants, and to exploit new forms of 
              structure.    The proposed research consists of theoretical investigations and 
              algorithm implementations.  The techniques developed in this work  have
              applications in several areas including, among others, new  windowing schemes
              for adaptive RLS filtering, analysis of gradient-  based algorithms, and
              modular and square-root algorithms for  instrumental variable methods, robust
              estimation, and control.   Equally important is the development of a systematic
              and unifying  methodology.
