Title       : Mechanisms of mRNA Destabilization During the Plant Defense Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1997      
File        : a9409089

Award Number: 9409089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $352657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mona C. Mehdy mmehdy@ccwf.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      9409089  Mehdy  Little is known concerning the molecular mechanisms
              regulating mRNA  stability in plants although direct and indirect evidence
              indicates  that it is an important determinant in the expression of many 
              genes.  The plant defense response is characterized by a rapid loss  of mRNAs
              encoding the bean proline-rich protein, PvPRP1, an  extensin, Beta-tubulin as
              well as a number of unknown proteins.   Among these mRNAs, the PvPRP1 mRNA
              down-regulation is currently the  best characterized mechanistically.  The
              PvPRP1 mRNA is  destabilized after elicitor treatment and a protein which 
              specifically binds this transcript has been identified (PRP-BP).   Purification
              of the RNA binding protein will be a major goal in  order to define its
              biochemical properties including apparent post-  translational activation by
              elicitor treatment and interaction with  the PvPRP1 mRNA.  In addition,
              availability of the purified protein  will allow cloning of its encoding gene
              and production of PRP-BP-  specific antibodies for immunocytochemical
              localization of the  protein.    One of the most rapid processes triggered by
              exposure to pathogens  is the striking release of active oxygen species (AOS)
              which is  termed the oxidative burst.  The possibility that AOS serve as 
              signal intermediates which induce phytoalexin biosynthesis has  received
              considerable attention.  However, the mechanism(s) of AOS  regulation of
              phytoalexin accumulation and other intracellular  defense-related changes is
              unknown.  This research will use  biochemical and molecular approaches to
              clarify the roles of AOS  and changes in cellular glutathione levels in
              elicitor-induced  signalling pathways leading to regulation of PvPRP1 and
              phytoalexin  pathway mRNA levels.  The experimental system being studied is the
               interaction between the fungal pathogen and the host plant (bean).   At a more
              general level, the results of these studies will  contribute to our
              understanding of oxidative stress regulation of  gene expression.   ***
