Title       : Neuronal Synchronization in the Visual Cortex of the Alert State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9409982

Award Number: 9409982
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248747             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Gray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                An important part of vision is pattern recognition, so that a visual scene
              that contains many combinations of visual features is perceived as a coherent
              collection of objects.   Sets of local features making up the objects in an
              image must be grouped according to some criteria and segregated from one
              another to prevent inappropriate feature conjunctions.  The pattern of images
              falling on the retina of the eye is encoded by many thousands of nerve cells
              sending signals into the brain, and it is not clear how the brain integrates
              the information that is sent to different parts of the visual cortex.  One
              alternative commonly accepted is that some neurons are selectively responsive
              to certain features of a stimulus, and the outputs from these neurons, even
              from widely separate areas, converge on other cells that represent "feature
              detectors" in a hierarchical organization of complex processing.  An
              alternative that has recently been raised is that the integrated features that
              make up objects are coded by a distributed population of neurons that share
              synchronous activity.  There is some evidence for both processes, but the
              mechanisms underlying the latter remain unclear.  Synchrony has been observed
              in some cases in the visual cortex of cats and monkeys.  This study determines
              the incidence, properties and spatial extent of neuronal synchronous firing of
              neurons in the visual cortex of alert animals trained to fixate their eyes on a
              target object.  A novel multiple electrode array records the simultaneous
              responses of several single cells to a variety of different visual stimuli. 
              These recordings allow tests of how well responses from different cells are
              correlated, and to what degree synchronous activity is present among cells in
              several different cortical areas.  Results will be important for understanding
              cortical function, for sensory neuroscience and perceptual psychology in
              general, and for potential use in the engineering design of artificial visual
              systems.
