Title       : Collaborative Research: Developmental Ecology of Mayapple
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9409395

Award Number: 9409395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310520             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maxine A. Watson mwatson@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9409395  Watson  Persistence of plant populations in nature is partly due to
              their success at sexual reproduction --i.e., their production of seeds.  Among
              the determinants of plant reproductive success are (1) their schedules of
              reproduction through time, or life histories, and (2) the amount of resources
              available to them at critical points in the expression of these life histories.
               Because plants grow and reproduce by building new leaves and flowers, the
              expression of a plant's life history is the result of on-going developmental
              decisions about the type of structures it makes.  And because a structure
              cannot both be vegetative and flowering, there is an inherent trade-off between
              plant growth and reproduction.  The trade-off between growth and reproduction
              is complicated be the interaction between (1) the expression of the plant's
              developmental program, which specifies when and what type of new structures may
              be made, and (2) the efficiency of a particular type of structure in resource
              accumulation.  Some structures will add to the plant's future growth potential,
              others detract, thus influencing the course of subsequent development and
              reproductive success.  In producing vegetative structures, for example, plants
              may increase their lifetime seed production through increases in plant size and
              vigor.  Little is known about how the interaction between developmental program
              and resource use actually results, mechanistically, in the expression of a
              particular life history.  The interactions between developmental program,
              seasonal patterns of resource uptake and use, and life history in the
              herbaceous perennial, mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum) will be studied. 
              Mayapple is an ideal plant for such studies because each year its rhizome faces
              a simple developmental decision whether to produce a reproductive shoot or a
              single leaf; only one such structure is made.  Longterm studies of native
              populations are used to (1) construct a developmental timetable for shoot type
              determination, (2) examine the  interaction between the degree and pattern of
              resource uptake and use and shoot determination, and (3) determine whether
              differences in the timing of developmental events, as manifested by different
              clones, affect longterm demography and, hence, fitness.  This study also will
              reveal at what points selection may act to alter the timing of developmental
              events, thus contributing to understanding of how different life histories
              evolve -- a critical issue for plants facing rapidly changing environments, as
              well as for the modification of crop plants for higher productivity.
