Title       : RIA: Real-Time Discrete Event Control and Its Application toAutomated
               Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1994  
File        : a9409712

Award Number: 9409712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ratnesh Kumar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kumar  9409712  Discrete event systems are those systems which involve
              quantities  which take on a discrete set of values and which are constant 
              except at discrete times when events occur in the system.   Examples include
              communication networks, intelligent vehicle  highway systems, manufacturing
              systems and computer programs.   Supervisory control theory was developed to
              provide a  mathematical framework for the design of controllers for such 
              systems in order to meet various qualitative or untimed  constraints.    A
              unified approach in which both logical as well as performance  specifications
              can be achieved has been proposed.  We propose to  use timed state machines to
              represent the real-time plant as well  as the desired behavior.  Prioritized
              synchronous composition of  timed state machines has been proposed as the
              mechanisms for  representing interaction among various subsystems of the plant 
              and the controller, and also as the mechanisms of representing  composition of
              various qualitative specifications.    The proposed supervisor is also able to
              react to changes in  control specifications since it computes the control
              policy based  on variable limited look-ahead; such time-varying specifications 
              are quite common in a practical setting.  The issues of failure  detection and
              recovery will also be investigated by defining  "safe" behavior and considering
              "convergence" to such behavior  upon occurrence of failure.    In order to
              apply our theory to the automated manufacturing  facility, we will obtain timed
              state machine models of various  machines on the factory, formulate appropriate
              qualitative and  quantitative control specifications, and develop control
              policies  using our theory.  We will also investigate the computational 
              complexity of this approach.  ***
