Title       : Autoxidation of S(IV) and N(III) in Frozen Solution-- Possible New Role for
               Glaciated Clouds in Aerosol Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1994    
File        : a9409776

Award Number: 9409776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143065             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric A. Betterton betterton@atmo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9409776  Betterton         Dilute aqueous solutions of sulfite and nitrite can
              be rapidly  oxidized in high yields to sulfate and nitrate, respectively, 
              simply by freezing the sample.  Since the yields and rates of  oxidation
              induced by freezing are high compared to their oxidation  pathways in
              hydrometeors, and since many clouds become glaciated at  some point during
              their life cycles, a study of the "freezing  effect" could lead to the
              discovery of significant new pathways for  aerosol formation and acid
              precipitation.  For example, it could  provide a new feedback mechanism between
              the release of cloud  condensation nuclei (CCN) by evaporating clouds and the
              processing  of precursors by existing glaciated clouds; it could provide a 
              further link between cloud formation and the global concentration  of aerosol
              particles (thereby affecting the global radiation  budget); and it could affect
              cloud droplet size distributions and  therefore cloud albedos and the radiation
              budget.  The "freezing  effect" could also play an important role in the
              formation of acid  precipitation since precursors of both sulfuric and nitric
              acids  can be oxidized during freezing.  Also of concern is the possible 
              influence this effect could have on the integrity of cloud- and  rain-water
              samples preserved by freezing.         This research will examine the
              hypothesis that the "freezing  effect" is in fact a concentration effect that
              occurs when  reactants are concentrated into liquid micro-pockets as the 
              solution freezes.  The resulting high concentrations of reactant  and dissolved
              oxygen could then lead to rapid auto-oxidation.  This  study will focus on a
              series of laboratory experiments designed to  test the hypothesis and to
              improve our understanding of the  "freezing effect".  The stoichiometry and
              kinetics of the  auto-oxidation of S(IV) and N(III) upon rapid freezing will be
               studied by means of ion chromatography and capillary  electrophoresis.
