Title       : Research Initiation Award - Microscopic Study of the Phase Behaviour of Liquid
               Crystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1996       
File        : a9409856

Award Number: 9409856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun Yethiraj yethiraj@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9409856  University of Wisconsin Madison  P.I.:  Arun Yethirajo   
                Recent advances in computer simulation algorithms and liquid state theory
              have made possible a microscopic study of flexible polymer melts and solutions.
               The purpose of the proposed work is to extend these methods to the study of
              liquid crystalline polymers.  Using computer simulation and density functional
              theory, a fundamental understanding of the phase behavior of these systems is
              sought, thus assisting the engineering of new polymers for specific
              applications.    Monte Carlo simulations of dense melts of polymers will be
              performed using first a simple semiflexible chain model and then more realistic
              rotational isomeric state models.  These simulations will be used to test the
              approximate theories and suggest new approximations if necessary.    Several
              theoretical approaches will be investigated.  These will include an Onsager
              theory with a renormalized self-consistent intermolecular potential, and a
              density functional theory with an excess free energy functional obtained via an
              extension of the generalized Flory theory of fully flexible polymer melts to
              nematic fluids.    There are several aspects to the proposed research.      (i)
              Large scale computer simulations will be performed in conjunction with the 
              investigation of approximate theories thus allowing for considerable
              interfacing  between the two.    (ii) Some of the most difficult aspects of the
              theories will be performed exactly via  simple two molecule computer
              simulations.    (iii) Theoretical techniques will be developed that are equally
              applicable to both  thermotropic and lyotropic liquid crystalline polymers.   
              (iv) Chemically realistic models will be investigated which will facilitate
              comparison  with experiment without adjustable parameters.    If successful,
              the theories could be useful for the design of new materials by providing means
              of predicting the equilibrium properties from the chemical structure.  The
              possible disadvantage of our pr oposed work is that the techniques we hope to
              develop might prove to be too computationally intensive for routine use in
              industry.  Even so, we will have obtained valuable insight into the behavior of
              liquid crystalline polymers that should assist the design of new materials.
