Title       : Nuclear Structure Studies with 4pi Detector Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0072362

Award Number: 0072362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $870000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Cline Cline@nsrl.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ching-Yen Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072362
Cline
	This research program exploits the most powerful heavy-ion
              accelerator facilities available to probe the structure of nuclei. Coulomb
              excitation is used to study the dominant collective modes of motion in nuclei
              and double-photon decay. Heavy-ion induced transfer is used to probe
              single-particle and pairing degrees of freedom as well as to populate
              neutron-rich nuclei. Fission-fragment spectroscopy is used to populate highly
              neutron-rich nuclei. The research is centered primarily on the DOE-supported
              Gammasphere facility; the world's premier 4-pi (full angular coverage)
              gamma-ray array facility for nuclear structure research.  The Rochester 4-pi
              heavy-ion detector, CHICO (Compact Heavy Ion Counter), significantly expands
              the research capabilities of Gammasphere making it an important component of
              this national facility.
The combination of CHICO and Gammasphere makes it
              viable to utilize coincidences of high-fold gamma-rays to provide an enormous
              advance in selectivity and sensitivity. The development of CHICO, contributions
              to Gammasphere and the techniques of Coulomb excitation, heavy-ion induced
              transfer, and fission, are the culmination of many years of effort at
              Rochester. They open exciting new research opportunities for making significant
              scientific advances in nuclear structure physics. In addition, the
              Yale-Rochester 4-pi gamma-ray array, YRAST, which is coupled to the Yale 20MV
              tandem accelerator, is a powerful facility that is used to complement the
              research program at the oversubscribed Gammasphere facility.


