Title       : Block Thresholding Methods for Adaptive Wavelet Function Estimation: Theory and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0072578

Award Number: 0072578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81063              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Tony Cai tcai@stat.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research studies two interrelated function estimation problems,
              
nonparametric regression and linear inverse problems, using wavelet 
methods
              via the approach of block thresholding and ideal adaptation 
with oracle. The
              goals are to build a bridge between the traditional 
multivariate normal
              decision theory and the adaptive wavelet function
estimation, and to develop a
              family of estimators that achieve 
simultaneously three objectives:
              adaptivity, spatial adaptivity, 
and computational efficiency. A major
              innovation and a consistent 
theme throughout the research is the use of block
              shrinkage
methods which include the standard term-by-term thresholding as
              a
special case. Block thresholding is studied via the approach of
ideal
              adaptation with oracle. It will be demonstrated that block 
thresholding
              serves as a bridge between the classical normal decision 
theory and adaptive
              wavelet function estimation.  This leads to a 
systematic way of developing a
              coherent set of rate-optimal estimators
with good empirical performance, all
              of which may be useful in different
estimation problems.  

To fully
              understand why block thresholding works ``better''
than the standard
              term-by-term thresholding, and more generally,
separable rules, I will explore
              the connection between adaptability
and information-pooling in general
              orthogonal series estimation, of
which wavelets are a special case.
              Preliminary results show that
separable rules lack adaptability; they are
              necessarily not fully 
rate-adaptive. A key to adaptively achieve the exact
              minimax rate is
information-pooling. I will further carry out research in this
              topic
and will derive a lower bound on the amount of
              information-pooling
required for achieving full global adaptivity. These
              results together 
will offer a deeper understanding of the benefit of
              information-pooling 
in nonparametric function estimation, and also serve as a
              guide for
the construction of fully adaptive estimators. Besides
              theoretical
investigation, I am also interested in applications of the wavelet
              
methods. I am collaborating with colleagues on using wavelet methods 
for
              archiving and retrieval of medical images from tomographic databases. 


