Title       : Dynamics of Three-dimensional Nonlinear Internal Waves Over Topography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0072145

Award Number: 0072145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Triantaphyllos R. Akylas trakylas@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072145
Akylas

A common mechanism by which internal gravity waves are
              generated in 
nature is flow over topography.  The goal of the proposed work
              is to 
improve our theoretical understanding of this generation mechanism with
              
particular emphasis on three-dimensional nonlinear disturbances. To this
              
end, an asymptotic theory will be developed to describe the generation of
              
finite-amplitude disturbances by nearly uniformly stratified flow over
              
three-dimensional topography that is more elongated in the spanwise than 
in
              the streamwise direction.  The proposed theory makes it possible to 
explore
              certain features of fully nonlinear waves --- for instance, how 
wave breaking
              is influenced by three-dimensional effects --- that, although 
of primary
              geophysical interest, so far have defied theoretical treatment. 
Moreover, the
              mathematical approach taken here is distinct from prior 
studies and promises
              to advance our understanding of nonlinear internal 
wave propagation from a
              mathematical standpoint as well.

Internal gravity waves are common features
              in oceans, lakes and in the 
atmosphere.  They owe their existence to the
              density stratification present 
in these natural fluid bodies due to
              variations in temperature and changes 
in the salinity (in the case of oceans)
              and pressure (in the case of the 
atmosphere).  Geophysical internal waves are
              known to possess enormous 
scales, on the order of kilometers to hundreds of
              kilometers, so it is not 
surprising that they are important factors in
              determining local weather 
patterns and climate dynamics.  The proposed work
              will provide a 
mathematical description of the generation of internal waves
              by flow over 
topography, modeling the action of wind over mountain ranges in
              the 
atmosphere or the flow of currents over a sill in the ocean bottom.
              
Emphasis is placed on particular flow conditions under which internal-
wave
              generation is most violent and is expected to play an important part 
in
              geophysical applications (e.g., the development of thunderstorms).

