Title       : Research on Stochastic Processes and Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0072004

Award Number: 0072004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Dupuis dupuis@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	For stochastic networks with a fixed service/routing policy it is often
              difficult to uniquely characterize limits under standard law of large numbers
              and diffusion approximation scalings. Related difficulties appear in other
              methods of analysis, such as large deviation approximations. An alternative
              approach is to allow the routing/service decisions to be control variables.
              When properly formulated, the analogous approximations to these controlled
              stochastic networks frequently possess better qualitative properties than their
              fixed policy counterparts. In addition, many approximate models are simple
              enough that closed form (or nearly closed form) solutions are possible. The
              investigator will carry out research on several closely related areas that can
              take advantage of these features: risk-sensitive control and the control of
              rare events in queueing networks; robust optimal control of law of large number
              approximations (also known as fluid models); higher order corrections to the
              control of fluid models. At the heart of each of these topics is a variational
              problem for processes with constrained dynamics (calculus of variations or
              optimal control problems for large deviations and control of fluid models,
              differential games for the problems of robust control of fluid models or
              control of rare events). The investigator has recently shown how in certain
              cases one can convert a variational problem involving constrained and
              controlled dynamics and a relatively simple cost structure into an equivalent
              problem involving unconstrained dynamics and a different cost. The latter
              problem is then solved explicitly. The proposed research includes extending
              this technique to include problems of buffer overflow in large deviations and
              constrained differential games.
	One of the main concerns of applied
              probability today is the development of tractable approximations for stochastic
              networks. Stochastic networks are ubiquitous in modern computer, communication
              and manufacturing systems, but owing to their complexity and detail are very
              difficult to analyze. As a consequence, much effort is being put into the
              development of mathematical models that are faithful enough to "real life" that
              conclusions drawn from them can be used with confidence, and yet which can be
              solved by either analytical or numerical means. The purpose of this project is
              to develop such methods of approximation and also the techniques for their
              solution. A new feature is to allow decisions on routing and service (e.g.,
              which data class should be served in a communication network and where the
              processed data should be sent) to be control variables that can be optimized.
              Two particular classes of network problems will be given special attention. The
              first is the control of rare events. In many networks there are events that do
              not occur very often, and yet which are nonetheless the main concern. An
              example is data loss in a communication network. The second class is the robust
              control of networks, which means the control of a network in which some aspects
              of the network are poorly modeled or otherwise imperfectly known. 
