Title       : Experimental Studies of Surface and Interface Magnetism by Spin Polarized
               Electron Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0072708

Award Number: 0072708
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Hopster hhopster@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research program is concerned with the spin dependent scattering of
              low-energy electrons from magnetic surfaces, and with the magnetic structure at
              interfaces of ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic materials. The role of
              magnons in low-energy electron scattering in magnetic materials is largely
              unexplored. A high-resolution electron energy loss spectrometer (EELS ) will be
              built and combined with a spin polarized electron source to measure these spin
              dependent excitations. The exchange coupling at ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic
              interfaces is of current interest in a range of contexts. For example, atomic
              scale roughness can lead to frustration and can drive magnetic reorientation
              transitions of the ferromagnetic film. This project will study the temperature
              dependent microscopic magnetic structures in ultrathin ferromagnetic films by
              magnetic microscopy and complementary structural characterization by STM and
              AFM. Graduate students will be trained in state of the art sample preparation
              and characterization techniques that prepare them for research positions in
              academic, government or industry laboratories.
%%%
A new field of electronic
              devices based on spin dependent transport in magnetic nanostructures is
              currently emerging under the name of "spintronics". In these devices the
              electrical properties depend on the magnetic structure of magnetic materials
              with layer thickness of nanometers. In these magnetic materials, electrons can
              lose energy by exciting spin waves (magnons) in the material. These processes,
              currently largely unexplored experimentally, are potentially very important in
              determining the materials' electrical properties. In this project, electrons
              will be scattered off magnetic surfaces and their energy losses studied. Use of
              a spin polarized electron beam allows one to distinguish between magnetic and
              non-magnetic excitations.
At interfaces of different magnetic materials the
              magnetism can be dominated by the magnetic coupling between the materials. This
              can lead to unusual magnetic properties of ultrathin magnetic films. These
              effects depend sensitively on the interface quality, e.g. atomic scale
              roughness. This program will combine magnetic microscopy and STM to study the
              interplay between topography and micro-magnetic structure in magnetic thin
              films in contact with antiferromagnetic substrates.  Students will be trained
              in cutting-edge materials preparation and advanced measurement techniques that
              prepare them for academic or industrial research in Materials and Applied
              Physics.




