Title       : Nonparametric Modeling for Nonlinear Time Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0072400

Award Number: 0072400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zongwu Cai zcai@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project covers a variety of methodological developments and foundational
              research.
In particular, the object of this research is to develop some new
              nonparametric model building
and identication procedures for high-dimensional
              nonlinear time series data. The investiga-
tor studies both the
              varying-coefficient regression models and nonlinear additive regression
models
              for nonlinear time series data and makes the models practically applicable. The
              first
objectiveis to develop nonparametric estimation procedures for nonlinear
              time series. In
particular, for varying-coefficient regression models, local
              polynomial regression techniques
are used to estimate the coefficient
              functions and the asymptotic properties of the resulting
estimators are
              studied. This procedure differs from the classical local linear regression
              for
curve fitting where the response surface is of interest. Here, of interest
              is to estimate the
coefficient functions. For nonlinear additive regression
              models, the investigator uses partial
residual method to estimate unknown
              additive functions coupled with projection method
and local polynomial
              fitting. The approach is divided into two steps. In the first step,
              the
initial estimated values for all components are obtained by using the
              projection method. In
the second step, a local polynomial technique is
              employed to estimate any one of compo-
nents by using the initial estimated
              values of the rest of components. The second objective of
this research is
              concerned with the model identification. For both models, a new
              goodness-
of-fit test technique is proposed, based on the comparison of the
              residual sum of squares
under the null and alternative models, to detect
              whether certain coefficient functions in the
varying-coefficient models are
              constant or whether certain components in the additive mod-
els are linear or
              whether any covariates are significant in the models. The null distribution
of
              the test is estimated by a nonparametric bootstrap method. Also, the
              investigator studies
the practical implementation of the methods, particularly
              the automatic bandwidth selection
method based on a modified generalized
              cross-validation. A nonparametric version of Akaike
information criterion is
              proposed for choosing the smoothing variable in varying-coefficient
models and
              determining an appropriate model for given data.
This research is concerned
              with model estimation and identification procedures in non-
linear time series
              analysis. A time series is a set of data observed over a period of time.
              For
example, daily ozone and pollutant levels from environmental study,
              quarterly earnings for
a company or daily currency exchange rate from
              economical study, wild animals' popula-
tion observed over years from
              ecological study, number of in uenza cases observed over time
from
              epidemiology, and noisy telecommunication signals. The investigator has been
              active
in this research area. Furthermore, the investigator has conducted
              preliminary work on the
described problem area which has led to encouraging
              results. There are sufficient reasons
to believe that by pursuing the topics
              outlined in this proposal, the results of this research
should have
              significant contributions in nonlinear time series analysis, which has many
              impor-
tant applications in the fields of economics, social science, medicine,
              epidemiology, biology,
environment, physical sciences, engineering, and many
              others.
