Title       : GOALI: Stability of Ni-Based Superalloy Single Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0072671

Award Number: 0072671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424101             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerhard E. Fuchs gfuch@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert A. Chin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI program teams the University of Florida and Pratt & Whitney Corp.,
              with additional inputs from the NASA-Glenn Research Center and NIST, to develop
              a scientific database for the phase equilibria and mechanical behavior of both
              model and commercial nickel-base single crystals. This microstructural
              stability database will build upon the NIST database created for solidification
              of Ni-base alloys. The improved database will allow material engineers to know
              more accurately which alloys are prone to the deleterious topological close
              packed (TCP) phase and how its formation affects the mechanical properties of
              in-service components. Simple empirical statistical models exist to predict TCP
              phases in simple compositions, but the models have poor predictive accuracy in
              complex alloys. A more accurate model based on firm metallurgical principles is
              needed to predict microstructural stability as a function of alloy composition
              and temperature ranges. The improved database can ultimately be used to
              optimize existing alloys to more stable compositions, assess sensitivity to
              alloy segregation, and define optimum thermo-mechanical processing windows. 
              P&W provides support for the graduate students and the PI for extended visits
              to the P&W facility each year of the program to conduct in-house experiments.
              The students will interact with the program advisors and contribute to
              electronic status reports and annual program review. The project is supported
              by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the DMR Metals Research
              Program.
%%%
The need to achieve greater performance, higher efficiency, and
              reduced emissions has resulted in higher turbine inlet temperatures. A most
              critical component in the turbine section is the turbine blade, which
              experiences high temperature, high stress, high-cycle fatigue, and a corrosive
              environment. Single crystal Ni-base superalloys were developed to meet the
              extreme service requirements in the turbine section. The high temperatures
              typically encountered by turbine blades and vanes can result in the potential
              for both microstructural and mechanical property changes. 
***

