Title       : Electronics and Reactivity in Carbenes, Bis-Carbenes, and Related Reactive
               Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0072894

Award Number: 0072894
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Sheridan rss@chem.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project studies the generation and investigation of a variety of
              new organic reactive intermediates centered around carbenes and nitrenes.  For
              instance, heteroaryl substituted carbenes are described that promise
              unconventional electronic properties.  They also offer the possibility for
              unusual rearrangements to other previously uncharacterized reactive
              intermediates.  The proposed systems will be investigated primarily by
              low-temperature matrix isolation methods, probed by IR and UV/vis spectroscopy.
               Characterization will be aided by DFT and ab initio electronic structure
              modeling.

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              (Organic Dynamics) supports the research of Professor Robert S. Sheridan of the
              University of Nevada Reno.  Professor Sheridan studies reactive molecules
              called carbenes and nitrenes, which have fewer than the usual number of
              chemical bonds and unusual electronic structures.  Carbenes, for example, have
              been implicated in such diverse settings as interstellar chemistry, combustion,
              soot formation, and fullerene production.  The high reactivity of carbenes and
              nitrenes have proven of value in photoaffinity labelling of biological
              molecules, and their interesting electronic properties are of interest in the
              quest for organic magnetic materials.
