Title       : RUI: Magnetoelectric Effects in Multilayers of Magnetostrictive and
               Piezoelectric Perovskite Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0072144

Award Number: 0072144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gopalan Srinivasan srinivas@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      520 O'Dowd Hall
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    248/370-4924

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a professor at an undergraduate
              institution, Oakland University.  The project is directed toward fabrication
              and analysis of multilayer magnetoelectric (ME) composites that are potential
              candidates for use as smart sensors, actuators, information storage media and
              high frequency signal processing devices. In composites consisting of
              magnetostrictive and piezoelectric phases, it is possible to accomplish
              magnetic field-to-electric field conversion with a two step process:
              magnetostriction (MS) induced mechanical deformation and piezoelectric (PE)
              effect induced electric fields.  The work is motivated by theoretical
              predictions of a very large ME coefficient in multilayer composites of MS and
              PE phases, in part due to enhanced piezoelectric effects. Efforts will focus on
              composites consisting of alternate layers of the perovskite oxides: (i)
              ferromagnetic lanthanum manganites that are magnetostrictive and (ii)
              ferroelectric lead zirconate titanates that are piezoelectric. Thick film
              composites will be synthesized by doctor blade techniques and characterized in
              terms of their electrical, magnetic and ME properties.  The proposed studies
              will to lead to an understanding of ME effects in multilayers.  Undergraduate
              students in this project will acquire (i) knowledge in the theory of materials
              and (ii) training in preparation and characterization of magnetic and
              dielectric materials and will be well prepared for entry to graduate education
              or a career in industry.  
%%%
This individual investigator award is to a
              professor at an undergraduate institution, Oakland University.  It will support
              research into the preparation and characterization of a new class of materials
              that will facilitate the conversion of an electric field into a magnetic field
              or vice versa. Magnetoelectric (ME) composites consisting of alternate layers
              of lanthanum manganites that deform in a magnetic field and lead zirconate
              titanates that generate electricity when deformed will be studied. Thick film
              composites will be made and characterized in terms of their structural,
              magnetic, electrical and ME properties.   The proposed studies are likely to
              lead to materials for smart sensors, signal processing, and memory devices.
              Undergraduate student participants will receive hands-on experience in the
              synthesis and characterization of materials of fundamental and technological
              importance, the skills that will allow them to be successful in graduate
              education or for employment in research and development positions in industry.
              
***

