Title       : Nucleon Structure and Nuclear Force Studies at Intermediate Energies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a0072240

Award Number: 0072240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $603000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryon D. Anderson anderson@hpacq.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Mark Manley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072240
Anderson
	This project is centered around the study of the structure
              of the
nucleon, primarily by the measurement of the electric form factor of
              the neutron. This group will play a pivotal role in an approved experiment at
              the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (JLab) designed to measure
              the electric form factor of the neutron as a function of momentum transfer.
              Because the neutron is overall neutral, the electric form factor is very
              sensitive to the details of the constituents and their motions. This
              measurement provides one of the best experimental tests available for any model
              of the nucleon and is generally considered to be one of the most important
              measurements to be performed in intermediate-energy nuclear physics. The
              experiment will be performed by the scattering of longitudinally polarized
              electrons from a liquid deuterium target and detecting the knock-out neutron in
              coincidence with the scattered electron. The Kent State group has the
              responsibility for providing the neutron detector array for this experiment.
              The array consists of thirty-six separate neutron detectors arranged so as to
              both
detect the neutron and determine its spin. The transfer of the spin from
              the electron beam to the neutron is directly related to the charge form factor
              of the neutron. The detector array is called a neutron
polarimeter. The Kent
              State group has used a similar polarimeter in
experiments at other accelerator
              facilities and will have the
responsibility for the installation, operation,
              and maintenance of this
detector array for the experiment. This project will
              be part of the
Ph.D. dissertation research of two Kent State graduate
              students.
	Support from this award will also enable this group to finish
              the
analysis of experiments performed at the Indiana University
              Cyclotron
Facility to study the spin dependence of the nuclear force, to
              search
for three-body contributions to the nuclear force, and also to
              analyze
measurements of baryon resonances using the Crystal Ball Spectrometer
              at the Brookhaven AGS accelerator. These measurements were performed with
              earlier support from the National Science Foundation and are part of the
              dissertation projects of three Kent State graduate students.

