Title       : Kinetics of Ultra-Thin Metal Oxide and Silicate Film Deposition on Silicon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a0072784

Award Number: 0072784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241830             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory N. Parsons parsons@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Parsons - 0072784

Continued scaling of metal/oxide/semiconductor
              transistors to sub-100 nm gate lengths will require new metal oxide gate
              insulators with higher dielectric constants to maintain large capacitances
              (i.e., equivalent to <1nm of SiO2) and minimize gate tunneling currents. 
              Typical low temperature chemical vapor deposition (CVD) processes for metal
              oxides on silicon result in an unwanted thin (1 to 2 nm) SiO2 or metal silicate
              layer at the Si/metal oxide interface.  The interface structure is determined
              by the kinetics of individual deposition reaction steps that favor consumption
              of the silicon substrate, even when the deposited bulk oxide is
              thermodynamically stable on silicon which indicates a problem for non-native
              metal oxide/silicon interfaces not encountered in the native SiO2/Si system. 
              Specifically, how does one control the first few angstroms of non-native
              dielectric deposition on silicon to achieve the required bond structure,
              composition, and electronic quality at the interface?  This problem extends to
              other heterojunction applications, such as optical interconnects,
              magnetoresistive devices, bio-functional systems, etc., where atomic-scale
              control of interface structure is important for device performance.  In this
              project the kinetics of interface layer formation during deposition of yttrium
              oxide, yttrium silicate, and other metal oxides on silicon will be studied. 
              This will include studies of surface treatment on substrate consumption and
              interface oxide formation, and electrical performance of silicon/yttrium oxide
              and silicon/yttrium silicate interfaces.

The work will involve direct
              measurement of deposition reaction kinetics in plasma and thermal CVD, using
              in-situ infrared spectroscopy and on-line Auger electron spectroscopy.  The
              project will be done in collaboration with Roy Gordon at Harvard University,
              who will provide various reactants, to determine the effect of metal-organic
              precursor structure on interface reactions.  Atomic layer deposition methods
              will be used to demonstrate controlled interface abruptness and improved
              electronic performance.  These experiments will help establish new links
              between surface reactions, process temperature, and electrical performance of
              deposited thin film dielectrics, and will have implications for controlling
              interface structures in other sub-nm electronic, optical, and magnetic
              devices.



