Title       : Low-dimensional manifolds and computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0072348

Award Number: 0072348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Hass hass@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for NSF proposal

Low Dimensional Manifolds and Computation

This
              project concerns problems in low-dimensional topology and geometry, 
with an
              emphasis on computational aspects. Manifolds in two and three 
dimensions
              provide the geometric models for many physical phenomena. 
Computational
              issues are playing an increasing role in mathematical 
investigations in these
              areas. Research in low-dimensional manifolds 
in turn is making contributions
              to computational geometry and topology. It also
impacts computational
              complexity theory, which studies questions 
such as how long it takes a
              computer to solve a problem. Techniques of 
computational topology have
              already led to  improvements in algorithms
in computer graphics, 
              visualization, medical and molecular modeling 
and image recognition.  Several
              problems on the theme of computational 
topology will be investigated in this
              project. 

The computational complexity of many important problems in
              topology 
and geometry is unknown, even when explicit algorithms exist.
              
Recent results have revealed intriguing connections between complexity
              theory, 
minimal surface theory, normal surface theory and isoperimetric
              
problems. The project will pursue research  in this direction, 
examining
              the complexity of Knot Recognition,  Knot Genus, Homology Genus
and related
              topological problems. The project also includes plans to 
investigate the
              generalized theory of normal surfaces. Normal surfaces
are particularly 
              simple surfaces relative to a fixed triangulation of
a 3-manifold. They are
              the analogs of minimal surfaces in the PL Category. 
The collection of such
              surfaces is discrete and well suited 
to computation, leading to applications
              in classification, complexity, 
enumeration and algorithmic recognition.
              Index-one, or almost normal 
surfaces, were applied with spectacular success
              in recent work 
on manifold recognition. A third focus of the project
              
concerns multi-region isoperimetric problems, which ask what 
are the
              shortest boundaries enclosing multiple regions of a 
given size. The goal is
              to give a mathematical proof that 
the configurations assumed by soap bubbles
              are optimal. 
Questions such as finding the shortest curve enclosing three
              given areas 
in the plane remain open. Also missing is an understanding of
              general 
properties of stable soap-bubble-like configurations, such 
as
              whether the minimizing configurations always have connected 
regions. 
              Finally, the project examines questions of curve 
and surface evolution, using
              ideas based on normal surfaces. 
Such evolution methods have the potential
              
for practical applications in many areas, similar to the many 
applications
              of mean curvature evolution. 


