Title       : Information Technology Measures and Benchmarks: New Approaches for International
               Measurements and Public Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0072116

Award Number: 0072116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Derek L. Hill                           
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140699             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Schwoch j-schwoch@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shane M. Greenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 8804      SCIENCE & ENGINEERNG INDICATRS
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is designed to analyze and critique current measurements and
              benchmarks for information technology (IT).  In addition, it proposes to
              develop and test new measurements and benchmarks aimed at providing a more
              accurate understanding of infrastructure, access, and use of information
              technologies and telecommunications systems.  As part of this process, the
              proposal will develop an inventory of existing internationally-comparable data
              and benchmarks of global IT that will highlight the type of measurement,
              source, the time period, and any data limitations.  It will also aim to develop
              new approaches to the analysis and presentation of data indicators, with
              particular focus on effective methods of presenting complex information as
              indicators in IT.  While international data does exist, these providers
              currently employ measures and benchmarks that do provide information on IT
              systems and structures, the ability of these data and standards to fully convey
              the complexity of IT is open to question.  For example, current measurements
              and benchmarks take into the account the build-out of copper-wire and fiber
              optic landlines, but do not fully account for the transformation of networks to
              digital capacity.  The audience for the results of this project include both
              scholars and policy practitioners engaged in IT and national development,
              particularly for nations and regions of the developed world.  The project team
              consists of individuals from Northwestern University and the Center for
              Strategic and International Studies (CSIS).    
