Title       : Analytic Properties of Automorphic L-functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0072450

Award Number: 0072450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115696             (Estimated)
Investigator: I. I. Piatetski-Shapiro ilya@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: Piatetski-Shapiro DMS-0072450

The basic question described in the
              proposal is the problem of Langlands lifting.  The definition of Langlands
              lifting can be done the following way. First one  can define the local lifting.
               For an archimedean place one can define Langlands lifting in the following
              way.  By Langlands theorem any irreducible admissible representation of a
              classical group one  can attach a homomorphism of the Weil group to the L-group
              of this classical group. After that, for any classical group there is  a
              natural embedding to the L-group of a general linear group.  In this way one
              can attach a representation of the Weil group over a archimedean field a
              representation of the general linear group over that field.  Similarly one can
              attach to any unramified representation of a classical group over a
              non-archimedean field we attach a semisimple conjugacy class of the L-group of
              the given classical group.  The image of this conjugacy class in the
              corresponding general linear group L-group determines an unramified
              representation of the general linear group over the non-archimedean field.  In
              this way to an automorphic representation of the classical group one can attach
              a collection of local representations of the general linear group defined at
              all archimedean places and at all unramified places. It is a well know
              statement that if a cuspidal  automorphic representation of the general linear
              group exists with this data then it is unique.  So the proposal is devoted to
              the study of Langlands lifting.

Langlands lifting is a part of Langlands
              philosophy.  I was asked by the program director for algebra and number theory
              to explain what the Langlands program is. I have thought about this a lot of
              time and I can say the following.  Langlands philosophy gives a connection
              between automorphic forms  and Dirichlet series.  The most  important example
              of a Dirichlet series is the famous Riemann zeta function.  The automorphic
              form is the classical theta function of Jacobi.  A second example the
              automorphic function is the so called Delta function which is a modular form of
              weight twelve.  The corresponding Dirichlet series was studied first by Mordell
              who showed it had an Euler product.  The coefficients of the Delta function are
              usually called the Ramanujan numbers.  The basic properties of these numbers is
              that they are multiplicative.  So the corresponding L-function has an Euler
              product and similar properties to the Riemann zeta function, namely holomorphic
              continuation the the whole complex plane and satisfies a functional equation. 
              This connection can be extended to any algebraic reductive group.  Let me
              explain it for the general linear group.  Let's consider the space of functions
              which consists on all functions on the group of adeles invariant on the left
              side with respect to the group of principal adeles.  Any smooth  function of
              this type will be called an automorphic form.  There is a way how one can
              attach to any automorphic form on the general linear group a Dirichlet series
              which has an Euler product and nice analytic properties, a nice functional
              equation, and holomorphic continuation to the whole complex plane.



