Title       : Wave Turbulence: Open Challenges and New Opportunities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0072803

Award Number: 0072803
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir E. Zakharov zakharov@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan C. Newell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072803
Mathematical Sciences: Wave Turbulence -- Open
              Challenges and New Opportunities

Abstract

0072803  Zakharov



Wave
              turbulence, the turbulence of a sea of weakly-coupled dispersive wave
              trains
driven far from equilibrium by sources and sinks, is ripe for renewed
              investigation.
First, there are many open challenges which need to be
              addressed: the effect
of discreteness in impeding spectral energy
              redistribution; the general nature of
anisotropic finite flux spectra in
              wind-driven oceans, in magnetohydrodynamics in
the presence of strong magnetic
              field, and in sound waves; the role of hidden constants
of the motion; the
              surprising manner in which finite capacity Kolmogorov spectra
are realized;
              the modification of Fermi-Dirac (and Bose-Einstein) spectra in contexts
such
              as semiconductor lasing where finite flux effects are important.  Second,
              the
subject is important because it provides tractable models which can be
              exploited
to gain insight into the phenomenon of intermittency.  Because the
              approximations
which underlie the applications of wave turbulence theory are
              generally not valid uniformly in wave number, there are windows of
              intermittency at both high and low wave number values.  At these scales, the
              system is fully nonlinear and exhibits intermittent bursts of activity
              associated with coherent but almost singular structures.  Our aim is to build a
              comprehensive theory which combines and connects wave turbulence with the
              random occurrence of coherent events.

This project investigates the
              long-time statistical behavior of complex solutions to nonlinear field
              equations arising in a broad family of physical systems.  Applications of the
              research include modeling of: wind-driven ocean waves, weather, laser beams in
              transparent materials, sound waves, solar wind and stellar atmospheres, and
              motion of charges in semiconductor lasers.  All these systems exhibit turbulent
              behavior with common features, and the project develops the theory of this
              common structure.  The goal is to gain understanding of the behavior of this
              family of physical systems as well as to study the general statistical behavior
              of nonlinear systems in which large fluctuations 
