Title       : Asymptotic Equivalence of Statistical Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0072162

Award Number: 0072162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94731              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Nussbaum nussbaum@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF proposal DMS 0072162
Abstract
Asymptotic Equivalence of Statistical
              Experiments

Principal Investigator: M. Nussbaum, Department of Mathematics,
              Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY


The concept of asymptotic equivalence of
              experiments serves to compare
properties of statistical models. An experiment
              is a family of probability
measures; a distance is defined between these
              objects such that the
informational content of experiments with respect to the
              parameter is
similar if this distance is small. This basic deficiency
              pseudodistance 
(or Delta-distance) has been introduced by L. Le Cam,
              generalizing the
concept of sufficiency. If experiments are equivalent via
              sufficiency
then their Delta-distance is 0; here equivalence via
              sufficiency
means that one experiment results from application of a sufficient
              statistic
to the data of the other.

Based on the idea of the
              Delta-distance, a theory of local
asymptotic normality (LAN-theory) of
              experiments has been developed which
has found widespread application in
              statistics. The idea of data reduction
which is at the heart of the
              sufficiency concept could thus be combined with
limit theorems of probability,
              resulting in approximation of general
statistical models by Gaussian shift
              families. These Gaussian shift or
translation families allow explicit
              expression for risk bounds in many
instances, and these risk bound then become
              valid in an asymptotic sense in
the approximated models.

The limitation of
              the LAN-theory consists in its restriction to a
local setting, in which the
              rate of localization is tied to the
normalization rate in the central limit
              theorem (the classical root-n in
most cases). This setting precludes
              application of the resulting risk bounds
to the class of ill-posed function
              estimation problems. The emphasis of the
current project is on the treatment
              of this problem class (which includes
nonparametric density estimation) by
              methods involving the Delta-distance.

The restriction to a local setting (or
              alternatively, a finite dimensional
setting) which is inherent in the
              LAN-theory has been overcome in recent
years, by efforts of Brown and Low
              (1996) and by various
results of the P.I. and collaborators, starting also in
              1996 
(asymptotic equivalence of density estimation and Gaussian white noise).
              
The main tool has been approximation of general likelihood processes by
              Gaussian
ones, using coupling methodology. The present project focuses on
              elaboration
and extension of these results, with two main directions:

(i)
              constructive realization of equivalence in nonparametric models,
enabling
              explicit equivalence mappings (direct transfer of decision
functions)

(ii)
              equivalences in nonparametric models for dependent data (time series
and
              diffusion process models).


