Title       : Nonlinear wave propagation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0072343

Award Number: 0072343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John K. Hunter jkhunter@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072343
Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Wave
              Propagation


Abstract

0072343  Hunter




This project studies a
              number of problems in nonlinear wave propagation.  The first problem is the
              reflection of weak shock waves, where there have been longstanding
              discrepancies between theory and experiment.  There are close relationships
              between this problem and transonic aerodynamics.  The second problem is the
              study of nonlinear effects on gravitational waves in the Einstein field
              equations of general relativity, an issue of fundamental scientific
              significance.  The third problem is the study of nonlocal, nonlinear equations
              for hyperbolic surface waves in elasticity and magnetohydrodynamics.  Such
              waves arise, for example, in surface acoustic wave devices used in signal
              processing.  The fourth problem is the study of the interaction of high
              frequency vorticity waves and mean flows in incompressible fluids.  This
              research will describe the nonlinear development of vorticity instabilities,
              and is relevant to the closure problem for turbulent flows.  The fifth problem
              is the propagation of fronts in a bistable oscillatory system of
              reaction-diffusion equation that provides a simplified model of the collective
              behavior of beta-cells in the pancreas, which produce insulin.  The sixth
              problem is the study of surfactant deposition by a spreading liquid drop.  This
              problem has industrial applications in the use of droplets for the deposition
              of surface films. 
Waves, such as sound waves, elastic waves, and
              gravitational waves, are an important feature of many physical and biological
              systems.  Large amplitude waves may behave nonlinearly, and this leads to new
              effects not seen in linear waves: for example, the generation of shock waves by
              an aircraft traveling at speeds close to or above the speed of sound.  A
              detailed analysis of the equations that describe nonlinear waves is often very
              difficult.  The aim of this research is an increased understanding of nonlinear
              waves in the context of a variety of applications that involve qualitatively
              interesting and poorly understood phenomena, and that are related to problems
              of current scientific and technological interest. 

