Title       : Semiparametric and Nonparametric Inferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0072635

Award Number: 0072635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74646              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaotong Shen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Semiparametric and nonparametric inferences 

Most scientific problems
              involving data and many medical research problems can be viewed as an
              investigation into the association between a response variable and a number of
              potential explanatory variables. Regression analysis, wavelet techniques,
              hierarchical Bayesian analysis, and neural networks are included in the set of
              tools that can be brought to bear on such problems. Recent advances in computer
              technology make it easier to collect large data sets, which in turn demand more
              complex scientific theories. Hence high-dimensional semiparametric and
              nonparametric techniques become powerful tools for analyzing data. 

  This
              research concerns several related statistical problems ranging from processing
              signals to analyzing survival data. The research includes the further
              development of methodologies and computational tools for model fitting and
              inference in two areas. In the first area, the research develops new techniques
              of random-sieve methodology and deterministic sieve methodology, each of which
              expands existing techniques in novel ways. In the second area, the research
              studies foundational issues of the connection between semiparametric and
              nonparametric Bayesian and maximum likelihood inference, and constructs
              confidence bands andintervals for function inference. The areas of application
              include survival analysis and signal processing. The knowledge gained in this
              investigation is expected to bring great benefit to many other statistical
              areas and will be useful in a variety of complex scientific problems. 


