Title       : Periodic Orbits of Hamiltonian Systems, Cobordisms and Geometric Quantization,
               and Poisson Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a0072202

Award Number: 0072202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154596             (Estimated)
Investigator: Viktor L. Ginzburg ginzburg@math.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0072202
Viktor L. Ginzburg

The present proposal focuses on several
              long-term projects
and continues principal investigator's previous work funded
              
by an NSF grant. The first question addressed in the proposal
is the
              Hamiltonian Seifert conjecture or, more specifically, 
the existence problem
              for Hamiltonian dynamical systems without periodic orbits on a sequence of
              regular energy levels. The 
Hamiltonian Seifert conjecture is closely related
              to the next 
group of questions considered in the proposal. These questions
              
lie in the area of symplectic topology and concern the existence 
of
              periodic orbits for Hamiltonian systems describing the motion 
of a charge in
              a magnetic field.  The second part of the proposal includes a series of
              problems in Poisson geometry. Among these 
problems are, for example, the
              existence questions for equivariant Poisson moment maps and the construction of
              Poisson traces corresponding to the leaves of the symplectic foliation. A
              
general program relying on applications of equivariant cobordisms 
to the
              study of Hamiltonian actions of compact groups is the 
subject of the
              concluding part of the proposal.

Hamiltonian dynamical systems describe many
              classes of 
physical processes in which dissipation of energy can be
              
neglected. For example, planetary motion in celestial 
mechanics and some
              electro- or magneto-dynamical processes 
can be, and usually are, treated as
              Hamiltonian dynamical 
systems. One of the classical subjects in the theory of
              
dynamical systems is the study of periodic orbits 
(i.e. cyclic motions).
              Periodic motion is the simplest 
and most common type of motion after
              equilibrium.
It is believed that a vast majority of Hamiltonian systems 
have
              periodic orbits. The first problem addressed in the
proposal is the
              construction of Hamiltonian systems without 
periodic orbits. This is a
              question of considerable 
importance for the theory of Hamiltonian dynamical
              systems 
because examples of such systems would further advance our
              understanding of Hamiltonian dynamics. The next problem 
concerns the
              existence of periodic orbits for Hamiltonian 
systems describing the motion of
              a charge in a magnetic field. 
This class of Hamiltonian systems naturally
              arises in 
applications in physics and mechanics. However, few of the
              
extremely powerful general methods that have been recently 
developed in
              symplectic geometry are applicable to this 
class of systems. The
              investigation of these systems should 
extend the limits of existing methods
              and result in the 
development of novel ones. Other problems considered in
              
the proposal concern the study of connections between
geometrical properties
              of classical-mechanical systems 
and certain quantum-mechanical phenomena. 

