Title       : Surfaces and Interfaces of Layered Transition Metal Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0072998

Award Number: 0072998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Ward Plummer eplummer@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jian Shen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jiandi Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Mandrus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Stocks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9148,9166,9179,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research project addresses the challenges and opportunities associated with
              the physics of broken symmetry in layered transition-metal oxides (TMOs),
              specifically at surfaces and interfaces. In TMOs, the strong mutual coupling
              between charge and spin of the electrons and the lattice degrees of freedom
              results in dramatic effects such as charge-, orbital-, and spin-ordering,
              colossal magnetoresistance, and unconventional superconductivity. 
              Conceptually, creating a surface or interface is a controlled way to perturb
              the coupled system.  This unique environment will produce new phenomena, while
              providing a fresh approach to the study of the spin-charge-lattice coupling in
              these complex materials. Large single crystals of naturally layered TMOs will
              be grown using a newly acquired NEC optical floating zone furnace, and
              artificially layered structures will be fabricated using laser molecular beam
              epitaxy (MBE). Variable-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) will be
              used to render spatial images of the atomic and electronic distributions at the
              surface. Surface structure and lattice dynamics will be determined with elastic
              and inelastic electron scattering.  Surface magnetism will be determined both
              at a macroscopic and microscopic level by a combination of magneto-optical Kerr
              effect and variable-temperature magnetic force microscopy, with non-linear Kerr
              rotation used to observe buried interfaces.  Synchrotron-based x-ray scattering
              will be utilized to measure interfacial structure.  The theoretical program
              will use state-of-the-art first-principles computer codes, running on parallel
              machines, to calculate the surface structure and the electronic and magnetic
              properties, including stoichiometry effects. This research will be performed
              with graduate and undergraduate students, with the participation of
              postdoctoral research associates. 
%%%
Advances in materials physics have
              dramatically improved our lives over the past fifty years.  From the computer
              chip to the development of highly transparent optical fibers, from defense
              applications to better skis, tennis rackets, and bicycles, the availability of
              new materials has enabled progress in science and technology.  This project, a
              partnership between The University of Tennessee and Oak Ridge National
              Laboratory (ORNL), is aimed at the development of a world-class synthesis,
              characterization,  and educational facility for a family of materials known as
              transition-metal oxides (TMOs).  Interest in this general class of materials
              stems from the richness of their physical properties (e.g., including unusual
              superconducting magnetic and optical properties, high temperature
              superconductivity, colossal magnetoresistance), complexity of their underlying
              physics, and the promise of technological applications.  Large single crystals
              as well as artificially layered structures will be synthesized and studied
              using an extraordinary set of experimental tools (including neutron scattering
              at ORNL) and state-of-the-art first-principles theoretical techniques.  The
              emphasis will be on surface and interface phenomena because of the importance
              of thin films in technological applications and the prospect on new emergent
              phenomena. The objectives are twofold: (1) to learn to tailor the electronic,
              magnetic, and structural surface (or interface) phase transitions in these
              complex TMOs for applications as sensors and transducers, and (2) to create a
              new, interdisciplinary curriculum and perspective on the importance of
              synthesis and fabrication of new materials for the advance of materials
              physics.   The research will be conducted with graduate and undergraduate
              students as well as with postdoctoral research associates.  They will thereby
              receive training in forefront research areas and be prepared to enter the
              scientific- technological workforce of the 21st century.
***


