Title       : Strongly Correlated Electron Phenomena in Rare Earth and Actinide Intermetallics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0072125

Award Number: 0072125
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Brian Maple mbmaple@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This renewal individual investigator award is to a senior professor at the
              University of California, San Diego for a project to study novel electronic
              states and phenomena produced by strong electronic correlations in rare earth
              and actinide intermetallic compounds. These states and phenomena include
              non-Fermi liquid behavior; a "heavy fermion" state; an insulating state with an
              energy gap of only a few meV; and an exotic superconducting state in which the
              pairing of superconducting electrons may be mediated by antiferromagnetic spin
              fluctuations. There are several objectives of this project: to characterize the
              novel electronic states and phenomena, determine the conditions under which
              they occur, identify the underlying microscopic mechanisms, and test relevant
              theories.  The project will involve the preparation of a wide variety of rare
              earth and actinide compounds, and the measurement of their fundamental
              electrical, thermal, and magnetic properties. Information gained from the
              measurements will be used to modify material parameters that will greatly
              facilitate the exploration of electronic phase diagrams and the search for new
              phenomena and f-electron materials. While these studies are of fundamental
              scientific interest, the materials and the electronic properties that will be
              investigated may have technological applications, such as thermoelectric
              cooling, magnetic information storage, and ferroelectric devices.  An important
              mission of this project is the training of postdoctoral associates and graduate
              students at UCSD and the institutions of collaborators.  The collaborations
              with other research groups within UCSD and at other university, national, and
              industrial laboratories will instill in the young investigators
              interdisciplinary approaches to the study of materials.   
%%%
This renewal
              individual investigator award is to a senior professor at the University of
              California, San Diego for a project that focuses on rare earth and actinide
              intermetallic compounds that have unusual physical properties.  These unusual
              properties can be traced to partially filled f-electron shells of these
              elements. The objective of this program is to study the novel phenomena which
              arise in these compounds including superconductivity, magnetism and so-called
              "non-Fermi liquid behavior" in which the physical properties at very low
              temperatures are profoundly different from classical metals.  The project will
              involve preparing these materials and characterizing their electrical, thermal,
              and magnetic properties. The preparation of certain materials and the
              performance of specialized measurements will be performed in collaboration with
              researchers at UCSD and other institutions.  Although this research program is
              directed towards answering fundamental scientific questions, technological
              applications, such as thermoelectric cooling, magnetic information storage, and
              ferroelectric devices, may be found for the materials.  The training of
              postdoctoral associates and graduate students at UCSD and the institutions of
              collaborators is a significant goal of this program.  These young investigators
              will be instilled with interdisciplinary approaches to the study of materials
              as a result of these collaborations with other research groups within UCSD and
              at other university, national, and industrial laboratories.  
***

