Title       : Characterizations on Stability Properties for Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0072620

Award Number: 0072620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80939              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuan Wang ywang@control.math.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072620
Wang

This proposal outlines a research program aimed at
              understanding the 
behavior of systems with regard to external inputs such as
              disturbances 
and track signals.  Specifically, two types of stability
              properties will be 
examined: input-to-output stability and incremental
              stability. Roughly 
speaking, input-to-output stability requires that the
              output signals 
eventually become small if the external input signals are
              small, and in 
particular, the output signals should converge to zero when
              there is no 
input acting on the system.  Incremental stability properties
              require nearby 
trajectories with nearby inputs stay nearby, and eventually
              converge to 
each other.  These properties are nonlinear generalizations of
              some 
frequently used ones in the study of linear systems.  To understand the
              
properties in the nonlinear case well, it is crucial to explore their
              
equivalent characterizations, among which the Lyapunov-like functions
              
provide the most intrinsic insight.  The main objective of the project is to
              
investigate the equivalent characterizations and to develop the theory of
              
Lyapunov-like functions for the nonlinear stability properties.

One of the
              main issues in systems and control theory concerns with the 
study of system
              sensitivity to disturbances, and more generally, of the 
dependence of outputs
              on actuator and measurement errors, magnitudes of 
tracking signals, and the
              like.  For linear systems, the frequency domain 
approach has led great
              success in the study of such problems. Yet for 
nonlinear systems, the
              situation is much more complicated.  A key issue in 
the nonlinear case is to
              identify the most desired features and to formulate 
them into suitable
              mathematical notions.  During the last 10 years or so, 
the notion of
              input-to-state stability was formulated and it quickly became 
a fundamental
              concept upon which much of modern nonlinear feedback 
analysis and design
              rest.  In this project it is proposed to investigate a wide 
variety of
              extensions of the notion of input-to-state stability. The goal is to 
build a
              theoretical foundation for the study of stability-like properties for
              
nonlinear systems, thereby providing a set of sound theoretical tools for
              
nonlinear systems design.

