Title       : Harmonic Maps and Minimal Surfaces into Spaces of Curvature Bounded from Above
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a0072483

Award Number: 0072483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chikako Mese cmes@conncoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Connecticut College
	      Route 32, North
	      New London, CT  06320    203/447-1911

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0072483
Chikako Mese

The principal investigator proposes to study
              geometric 
variational problems, with particular emphasis on harmonic maps
              
in spaces with singularities.  Motivated by questions in 
geometry and
              algebra, the study of harmonic maps to singular 
targets, particularly metric
              spaces of curvature bounded 
from above, has attracted the attention of many
              mathematicians.  
In particular, many remarkable results have been obtained by
              Gromov-Schoen, Korevaar-Schoen, and Jost. The PI proposes to 
develop the
              minimal surface theory as a continuation of the 
study of the harmonic map
              theory.  The PI has shown that minimal
surfaces in metric spaces of curvature
              bounded from above 
generalize several important properties of the classical
              minimal surfaces.  We are interested in the development of a
              higher
dimensional analogue of the theory advanced thus far.  The PI 
will
              also investigate harmonic maps between surfaces when the
target is given a
              metric of curvature bounded from above. 
We are particularly interested in
              understanding the behavior of harmonic maps when the target metric has
              singularities associated 
with curvature concentrations.  Furthermore, we hope
              to gain an understanding of the behavior of harmonic maps when we vary the
              
target metrics in a certain class.  This in turn will be used
to study
              Teichmuller spaces.

The mathematical study of harmonic maps is natural and
              
physically significant.  This is because physics dictates 
that most natural
              actions occur in a way to minimize certain quantities.  For instance, it is
              well known that the path
of light in space is affected by gravity, and this
              path can 
be realized by a curve which minimizes arclength with respect 
to a
              certain metric.  A thin film (such as a soap film formed on 
a closed wire
              frame) will come to a configuration which 
minimizes the surface area.  Both
              these configurations can also
be represented by energy minimizing maps.  As
              critical points 
of the energy functional, harmonic maps are mathematical
              models 
of natural phenomena and provide an interesting mathematical
              study.


