Title       : Determinants, analytic torsion, and functional analytic models for Dirac
               operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a0072551

Award Number: 0072551
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75657              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiang-Hua Lu jhlu@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthias Lesch  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0072551
Matthias Lesch

Dirac type operators are symmetric first order
              elliptic 
differential operators arising naturally in Riemannian geometry.
              
They are of considerable interest in theoretical physics. Given 
such an
              operator on a compact manifold with boundary it is 
possible to characterize
              those boundary conditions which lead 
to a self--adjoint elliptic problem. 
              These so--called well--posed boundary value problems were introduced by R. T.
              Seeley. A recent account from a functional analytic perspective was given by
              the researcher in collaboration with J. Br\"uning.  This is the 
starting
              point of the current project in which the researcher 
wants to investigate
              spectral invariants associated to Dirac 
operators on manifolds with boundary.
              More specifically,
we want to present an analytic proof of the gluing formula
              
for the analytic torsion in the presence of an arbitrary 
flat bundle. As a
              consequence one obtains an alternative 
approach to Cheeger--Muller type
              theorems on the relation 
between analytical and topological torsion in the
              most
general setting, including manifolds with boundary.  An 
invariant
              related to the analytic torsion is the zeta-regularized determinant. We want to
              study this determinant as a function
of the boundary condition, generalizing
              earlier work of Burghelea-Friedlander--Kappeler and Scott-Wojciechowski.
The
              third subproject, jointly with J. Bruening,  deals with a functional analytic
              approach to boundary value problems for 
Dirac type operators. The ultimate
              goal is to find a simple 
functional analytic model for a Dirac type operator
              on a 
manifold with boundary which allows to derive basic results
like heat
              trace expansions, index theorems and the spectral
flow theorem. Such a model
              would hopefully lead to such 
theorems for manifolds with corners.

Dirac
              type operators are symmetric first order elliptic 
differential operators
              arising naturally in Riemannian geometry. 
They are of considerable interest
              in theoretical physics. 
There are interesting relations between the spectrum
              of 
the operator (the 'measurable' quantities of the physical 
system) and
              the underlying geometry. In general the spectrum 
of the operator is hard to
              compute.  However, it is possible 
to extract certain spectral invariants
              which are intimately 
related to the geometry. If the underlying geometry is a
              
manifold with boundary then, at first, one has to impose 
boundary
              conditions in order to get a self--adjoint problem 
and hence a well--defined
              spectrum. In the current project 
the author wants to investigate certain
              spectral invariants 
(analytic torsion, determinant) for such boundary value
              
problems. A special issue is the dependence of the invariants 
on the choice
              of the boundary condition.
 

