Title       : Asymptotic and Algorithmic Invariants of Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0072307

Award Number: 0072307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Y. Olshanskiy alexander.olshanskiy@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark V. Sapir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators study asymptotic and algorithmic properties of groups. The
              area of research includes Dehn functions and relative Dehn functions of groups,
              the complexity of algorithmic problems of groups, Burnside problems for groups.
               Many papers published during the last forty years showed deep connection
              between asymptotic invariants of groups and topology, geometry, amenability,
              dynamical systems, etc.  Quite
recently, the proposers (jointly with Rips and
              Birget) discovered a close
relationship between the asymptotics of
              isoperimetric functions, on the one
hand, and the complexity of the word
              problem for groups, on the other hand.
The investigators are developing their
              method, combining geometric and
computational approaches. One of their goals
              is to obtain the solution
of other algorithmic problems using geometric group
              theory. In particular
the investigators believe they will be able to prove
              that every recursively presented
finitely generated group can be embedded into
              a finitely presented group
with the same degree of unsolvability of the
              conjugacy problem. This would
solve a problem formulated by Collins in
              1976.
The computational-geometric methods of the investigators also show
              promise of being able to be fruitfully applied to the  Burnside-type 
              problems.
The investigators are close to constructing non-amenable finitely
              presented
groups having no non-cyclic free subgroups. This will solve
              the
corresponding well-known problem which goes back to von Neumann's
              1929
paper. Since the group in question is a finitely presented extension of
              a
torsion group of finite exponent by a cyclic group, this example will be
a
              breakthrough in the search for a finitely presented torsion
group (one of the
              main open problem in the theory of infinite groups).


    It is a well
              known point of view after Klein, Hilbert, Einstein and Weil
that fundamental
              laws describe symmetries occurring in the nature. The
symmetry of an object
              can be measured by the group corresponding to the
object. Groups can be
              defined as groups of symmetries or abstractly by an
algorithmic description
              (generators and relations). In the second approach,
the investigators choose
              some basic symmetries (generators) so that all other symmetries
are
              compositions (words) of the basic symmetries, and describe certain
relations
              between the basic symmetries such that all other relations follow
from the
              chosen relations. One of the main problems about a group given by
generators
              and relations and relations is the word problem: when are two
compositions of
              generators the same?  In some exotic cases this problem can
be undecidable,
              that is there are groups for which there are no automatic
procedures to
              recognize if two words of generators are equal. but even
in cases when this
              problem is decidable, the automatic procedure can be very
complicated.  In
              recent years the investigators discovered a deep
relationship between the word
              problem of a group and the global geometry of
the group. The geometry of a
              group is described in terms of certain
asymptotic invariants. The invariants
              have been known since the pioneering
works of M. Dehn at the beginning of the
              20th century but the investigators
discovered deep relationship between these
              invariants and algorithmic
problems. The investigators are developing their
              geometric method solving
old mathematical problems of algorithmic nature and
              corresponding algebraic problems about groups.
