Title       : Modeling Data from Electronics Manufacturing Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a0072960

Award Number: 0072960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52765              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jye-Chyi Lu jclu@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chen Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this university-industry cooperative research project is to create
              an environment for training students with experience of solving real-life
              application problems. The proposed technical projects have potentials to make a
              broad impact in analyzing large volumes of (non-standard) data in many
              engineering applications.  Both NSF and Siemens provide half of the three
              student research assistantships, and Siemens also provides engineering
              expertise, process data and facility for experimentation. Half of the student
              
time will be spent on understanding the product, process, problem and data
              encountered at Siemens and the other half of the student time will be involved
              in developing general methodologies that solve problems similar to what Siemens
              encountered.

With more advanced tools developed in automating the data
              collection process, many companies like Siemens have an opportunity to explore
              ways to extract knowledge from this data for improving their decision-making
              quality. The challenges in synthesizing data collected from Siemens' printed
              circuits board assembly processes are the large sizes of data and the numerous
              numbers of zero-defect counts.  This proposal formulates several specific tasks
              outlined as follows to solve these problems: 
(1) Extract mean and variance
              change-point features (using data segmentation and wavelet procedures), 
(2)
              Formulate multi-layer process improvement rules, 
(3) Research automatic data
              modeling procedures, 
(4) Conduct Bayesian analysis of zero-inflated data for
              improving production quality.
There are many opportunities for developing
              statistical theory to understand the proposed methods, and all tasks involve
              heavy computing and data analysis.  Siemens has located trial-out data for
              students to gain hands-on experience in their research training programs. This
              proposal first formulated a task-force 
team consisting of university faculty
              members, students and company managers for organizing our resources and efforts
              to develop mathematical tools in the proposed technical projects.  The
              committee will then identify short- and long-term goals and formulate specific
              problems for student thesis research training.  Finally, students will conduct
              hands-on projects, document study results and present findings in meetings. 
              This project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences.
