Title       : Obstructions in Quantization Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0072434

Award Number: 0072434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Gotay gotay@math.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072434
Mathematical Sciences: Obstructions in
              Quantization Theory

Abstract

0072434   Gotay



The process of
              constructing a quantum formulation of a system from a knowledge of a classical
              approximation to it is called "quantization," and over the years many different
              quantization schemes have been developed.  Unfortunately, quantization is not a
              straightforward proposition, as evidenced by the discovery, over fifty years
              ago, by Groenewold and Van Hove of an "obstruction" to quantization.  Their
              "no-go theorem" asserts that in principle it is impossible to consistently
              quantize every classical observable on a Euclidean phase space, regardless of
              which quantization procedure is employed.  Similar results hold under a wide
              variety of circumstances.  But no-go theorems are not universal; the principal
              investigator and collaborators have recently constructed examples of phase
              spaces which admit consistent full quantizations. The goals of this project are
              to delineate the circumstances under which such obstructions will appear and to
              study the underlying mechanisms that produce them.  Another problem, when an
              obstruction does exist, is to determine the maximal subalgebras of observables
              that can be consistently quantized.  Solutions to these problems will be used
              to refine extant quantization procedures, or design new ones, to adapt to the
              obstruction and quantize these maximal subalgebras.  From a mathematical
              standpoint, this research will lead to structural insights into the Poisson
              algebras of classical systems and their representations.  Physically, this
              research will aid in clarifying the correspondence between classical and
              quantum mechanics in general, and in particular will enhance our understanding
              of quantizations of specific classical systems.

Although the universe is
              quantum mechanical in nature, our perceptions of it are rooted in classical
              physics.  Thus it is often desirable to construct a quantum formulation of a
              system from knowledge of a classical approximation to it.  This process is
              called "quantization," and many different quantization schemes have been
              developed.  Unfortunately, quantization is not a straightforward proposition,
              as evidenced by the discovery, over fifty years ago, of an "obstruction" to
              quantization:  in principle it is impossible to consistently quantize a
              (nonrelativistic) particle.  But it is now known that no-go theorems are not
              universal;  there are classical systems which admit consistent quantizations. 
              The goals of this project are to delineate the circumstances under which such
              obstructions appear and to study the mechanisms which produce them.  This
              research will aid in clarifying the correspondence between classical and
              quantum mechanics.

