Title       : In Search of Sharp Inequalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0072037

Award Number: 0072037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodrigo Banuelos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072037
Banuelos
	Firstly, ideas from martingales theory will be used to
              investigate sharp inequalities for certain singular integrals which have played
              a fundamental role in several different areas of harmonic analysis, partial
              differential equations and the calculus of variations. These investigations
              lead to connections of probability to a conjecture of Morrey which asserts that
              rank--one convexity does not imply quasiconvexity in dimensions larger than 2.
              Secondly, extremal problems for the hyperbolic metric will be investigated.
              These problems arise from the conformal invariance of Brownian motion and
              conditioned Brownian motion in simply connected domains in the plane. These
              investigations in turn lead to new problems for martingales and Brownian
              motion. These problems will also be explored.
	Morrey's conjecture is
              important because of its implications in constructing minimizers in several
              problems in the calculus of variations describing various physical systems. The
              connection of these problems to probability was discovered by the PI and his
              collaborator, G. Wang and A.J. Lindeman, while investigating sharp inequalities
              for stochastic integrals and more general martingales. These connections lead
              to several questions which if false prove Morrey's's conjecture, a long
              standing open problem, and if true prove a conjecture concerning the norm of
              certain singular integrals, another long standing open problem. The solution to
              the proposed problems on the hyperbolic metric will yield a deeper
              understanding of various isoperimetric (extremal) inequalities for Brownian
              motion and conditioned Brownian motion. As with previous research projects of
              the PI, graduate students will be (are already) involved.

