Title       : Dynamics of Disordered Non-equilibrium Systems: Hysteresis, Noise, and Domain
               Wall Dynamics in Systems Ranging from Magnets to Earthquakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0072783

Award Number: 0072783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karin A. Dahmen dahmen@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0072783
Dahmen
This grant supports theoretical research in condensed matter
              and materials physics.  An increased interest in real materials has brought
              much attention to disordered systems.  Disorder changes the free-energy
              landscape of a system and can lead to large energy barriers between metastable
              states, resulting in extremely slow approaches to equilibrium, as seen in many
              experiments.  There has been much progress made recently in the study of
              distinctly nonequilibrium effects, such as collective response to an external
              driving force (avalanches) and internal history dependence of the system
              (hysteresis).  This project deals with different effects of disorder on long
              length-scale behavior in hysteretic systems.

On long length-scales, where
              local fluctuations in the amount of disorder are averaged out, systems driven
              far from equilibrium can often be usefully described by simple laws, and
              universal, i.e., detail independent, critical behavior has been detected. 
              Examples range from collective dynamics of advancing domain walls in magnetic
              tapes to event size distributions of earthquakes.  The methods applied include
              ideas from dynamical systems and chaos, critical phenomena, hydrodynamics and
              disordered systems theory.

Hysteresis loops are often seen in experiments at
              first-order phase transformations when the systems goes out of equilibrium. 
              They may have a macroscopic jump, roughly as seen in the supercooling of
              liquids, or they may be smoothly varying, as seen in most magnets.  In a recent
              collaboration with the Sethna group at Cornell, we have studied the
              non-equilibrium zero-temperature random-field Ising model as a model for
              hysteretic behavior at first-order transformations.  As disorder is added, one
              finds a transition where the jump in the magnetization (corresponding to an
              infinite avalanche) decreases to zero.  At this transition, the model exhibits
              power law distributions of noise (avalanches), universal behavior and a
              diverging length-scale.  The effect of adding temperature fluctuations and
              finite field sweep rate to the system will be studied.  Tuning the sweep
              frequency allows the entire experimetally relevant crossover regime to be
              studied between the two extreme cases that are found in the literature (far
              from and close to equilibrium).  The results will be used to interpret
              experiments in magnetic systems and to pursue related questions relevant to
              industrial applications.
%%%
This grant supports theoretical research in
              condensed matter and materials physics.  An increased interest in real
              materials has brought much attention to disordered systems.  Disorder changes
              the free-energy landscape of a system and can lead to large energy barriers
              between metastable states, resulting in extremely slow approaches to
              equilibrium, as seen in many experiments.  There has been much progress made
              recently in the study of distinctly nonequilibrium effects, such as collective
              response to an external driving force (avalanches) and internal history
              dependence of the system (hysteresis).  This project deals with different
              effects of disorder on long length-scale behavior in hysteretic systems such as
              magnets.
***

