Title       : Geometry and Algebra of Nonlinear Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0072369

Award Number: 0072369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101481             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthias Kawski kawski@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0072369
Kawski

This project builds on the formalism of chronological
              algebras to study the 
geometric foundations of nonlinear control systems.
              Geometrically, the 
chronological product encodes the interaction of the
              components of 
controlled nonlinear dynamics.  Algebraically it is the
              fundamental 
structure that underlies effective series expansion and formal
              solution 
algorithms. Areas of special focus are interconnections of systems,
              and 
systems that exhibit full nonlinear dependence on the control. In either
              
case, specific objectives are to develop normal forms and to find effective
              
series (or product) representations (using tools from algebraic
              
combinatorics). Possible applications include algorithms for path 
planning,
              feedback stabilization, optimal control and even numerical 
integration. A
              complementary second thread develops interactive 
visualization tools for
              research (simulation and experimentation) and for 
communication. This
              research is motivated and driven by the desire to 
understand the fundamental,
              common principles that govern the 
interactions of dynamical systems on any
              scale, from molecular levels to 
astronomical dimensions. The diversity of
              possible outcomes is a 
consequence of nonlinear effects that permeate our
              environment: When 
combining two subsystems, the result is generally different
              from just the 
sum of the parts.

This research focuses on further
              developing the algebra which captures 
such nonlinear interaction, where the
              effect of a+b is more than just the 
sum of the effects of a and b. The
              chronological algebra provides the 
formal language to model such interactions
              where even the order in which 
pieces are put together matters, where a*b is
              generally different from b*a. 
The control perspective is distinguished from
              the basic study of dynamical 
systems as it aims beyond just descriptive
              understanding: The objective of 
control theory is to exploit the subtle
              nature of the interactions in order to 
shape complex systems -- often via
              only minute interference with how the 
parts interact. While this mathematical
              research applies to virtually any 
kind of dynamical system, including even
              social, medical and financial 
environments, this project will focus on
              mechanical systems (like large 
satellites with several moving parts) in
              efforts to demonstrate the general 
principles. An important component of this
              project is the development of 
interactive visualization tools. These are used
              for research, and for 
communicating the geometry of the nonlinear
              interactions, to demonstrate 
how the profound understanding of the
              fundamental mathematical 
structures leads to effective means of controlling
              complex systems. This 
visualization effort also provides a rich environment
              for undergraduate 
students to connect with advanced theoretical research. It
              may prove to be 
an effective means to expand the pipeline bringing new
              talents into 
mathematical research.

