Title       : Theoretical Study of Chemical Reaction Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0072183

Award Number: 0072183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Z. Zhang zhang@quantum.chem.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              John Zhang of New York University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to develop practical computational methods to
              study reaction dynamics of polyatomic molecules with an emphasis on gas-surface
              reaction.  A reduced dimensionality strategy is used to eliminate unimportant
              degrees of freedom, while preserving important dynamical effects and the
              quantitative treatment.  The theoretical method uses the semi-rigid vibrating
              rotor target (SVRT) model as a general, practical, and quantitative dynamics
              approach to study reaction dynamics involving complex or polyatomic molecules. 
              The basic SVRT model will be improved by including adiabatic correction for
              neglected degrees of freedom and additional vibrational coordinates.  These
              theoretical methods will be applied to the study of chemisorption dynamics of
              polyatomic molecules, focusing on methane and other hydrocarbons that are
              important in catalysis. 

The development of quantitative computational
              methods to study polyatomic reaction dynamics is of enormous importance in
              enabling the understanding and prediction of complex chemical and biological
              phenomena using computer simulations.  Despite the success of several reactive
              scattering approaches in treating chemical reactions, these approaches
              currently cannot handle large scale scattering calculations because of
              intensive computational requirements.  This effort aims to develop methodology
              that can be realistically applied to study complex chemical reactions using
              currently available computational resources.  Applications will be geared
              toward improved understanding of systems that are important in understanding
              chemical catalysis, such as the reaction of methane and other hydrocarbons on
              metal surfaces. 
