Title       : Synthesis and Nanomorphology of Tethered Block Copolymer Brushes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0072977

Award Number: 0072977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Brittain brittain@polymer.uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A systematic investigation into tethered block copolymer brushes is proposed. 
              The impetus for this work stems from preliminary results where a
              polystyrene-block-poly(methyl methacrylate) polymer was created by the
              "grafting-from" approach on a silicate substrate.  Treatment with
              block-selective solvents effected reversible contact changes that were
              interpreted in terms a model that placed either polystyrene or PMMA at the air
              interface.  The purpose of the proposed research is to confirm the speculative
              models for this system.  The 1st goal is to better characterize the PS-b-PMMA
              bush by correlating film thickness with Mp,  determination of chain length
              dispersity, determination of percent PS homopolymer and a more complete
              characterization of nanostructure composition.  The 2nd goal is to study the
              dynamics of surface reorganization by a systematic variation in temperature and
              solvent.  The 3rd goal is to develop alternative polymerization methods for
              block copolymer brushes.  A 4th goal is to expand the composition of the
              tethered block copolymers by including new monomers (e.g., fluorinated and
              water-soluble monomers) and the preparation of tethered triblock copolymers. 
              The 5th goal is to control the distribution of tethered block copolymers by
              using mixed self-assembled monolayers, microcontact printing or
              stereolithography.

Successful completion of this proposed research will have
              several potential benefits to society.  The synthesis and characterization of
              polymer brushes will have a large impact on colloidal stabilization, which is
              critical for stable emulsion and latex formulations.  Other applications
              include new adhesives, protein-resistance biosurfaces, chromatographic
              separation of biomolecules, lubricants and polymer blend
              compatibilization.
*** 

