Title       : Investigation of Nanoscale Electronic Properties and Transport in Semiconductors
               and Magnetic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a0072912

Award Number: 0072912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward T. Yu ety@ece.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses research centered on III-V nitride heterostructures and
              spin-dependent transport in magnetic materials. The approach employs proximal
              probes(scanning capacitance and tunneling microscopies), as well as a
              conducting proximal probe tip to perform local photoconductivity measurements
              for characterization of local electronic structure and charge transport
              properties in semiconductor and magnetic materials. The aim is to increase
              understanding of the nature and influence of defects and other structural
              features on material properties and device performance, serving to inform
              strategies for optimization of material quality and epitaxial layer design for
              a variety of device applications. Investigation of magnetic thin-film materials
              will focus on the development and application of spin-polarized current-voltage
              and conductance spectroscopy in combination with atomic and magnetic force
              microscopy to characterize spin-polarized current injection and spin-dependent
              carrier transport in magnetic thin-film materials. The approach allows studies
              at lengths scales as small as a few tens of nm of phenomena such as
              spin-polarized current injection into a variety of magnetic and
              magnetoresistive thin-film materials, spin-dependent carrier transport across
              single magnetic domain walls, and the detailed nature of spin-dependent
              tunneling processes in ferromagnet-insulator-ferromagnet tunnel junctions.
              
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in topical areas of
              materials science with high technological relevance. High priority will be
              placed on training of graduate students in advanced nano-characterization
              techniques of increasing importance in modern materials and device engineering.
              In addition, the connection between studies of basic material properties and
              their role in device engineering and applications will be emphasized, thereby
              affording students opportunities for interaction with other university and
              industrial researchers working in related areas.
***

