Title       : Combinatorics with Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0072187

Award Number: 0072187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerrold R. Griggs griggs@math.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laszlo Szekely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                              COMBINATORICS WITH APPLICATIONS

             Jerrold R.
              Griggs and Laszlo A. Szekely

The proposers seek results in extremal
              combinatorics that exhibit structures which are key to applications, or which
              provide bounds on what can be achieved by any algorithm.  The proposers will
              search for a profitable crossover of ideas and methods, including applications
              of algebraic and analytic tools.  The particular problems include
 * 
              improving current bounds on the maximum concentration of subset sums of 
   
              vectors, especially for problems arising from models of database security
 * 
              finding better algorithms for graph drawing, developing the theory
    of
              crossing numbers of graphs, and working out further applications of 
    of
              the theory to geometric problems
 *  developing robust algorithms for
              reconstructing very large phylogenetic 
    trees, and analyzing conditions
              necessary for reconstruction, with 
    attention to models where the i.i.d.
              property fails
 *  completing the solution of maximum non-spanning sets in 
 
                finite abelian groups
 *  advancing the study of algorithms for large
              independent sets
    in graphs of given maximum degree and clique size
 * 
              classifying graph subdivision problems which admit small threshold function
 *
               leading the development of the theory of graph labellings spawned by the 
   
              problem of optimal channel assignments with multiple levels of
              interference

Research in combinatorics and graph theory is proposed in a
              wide variety of areas, including those that arise in such rapidly developing
              fields as computer science, computational biology, and number theory.  Problems
              arise at the very core of our understanding of how discrete structures work and
              how to use them optimally.  Among the questions they will study are these:  

              *  How can one optimize public access to a statistical database 
   
              (containing, say, salaries of a department's employees) by maximizing the 
   
              number of queries, each one asking for the average salary of some 
   
              collection of the employees, that can be answered without compromising  
   
              the salary of any individual?
 *  Given corresponding aligned segments of the
              DNA sequences of many 
    biological taxa (or species), how does one build
              large phylogenetic trees 
    reflecting their true evolutionary
              relationship?
 *  How can one draw a very large network such that the viewer
              can grasp it  
    from a clear drawing?  
 *  How can the frequency spectrum
              span alloted to a network of transmitters
    (radio stations, mobile phones,
              etc.) be minimized, such that channels
    assigned to nearby transmitters
              must avoid interference?
 *  What is an efficient method to select a large
              number of transmitters,
    no two close together, given a network and
              information bounding the
    complexity of the network?  Fundamental problems
              of this kind arise in 
    many settings.
Involvement of graduate students in
              research on these problems will enable 
the investigators to continue their
              successful training program for careers
in industry, government, and
              academia.

