Title       : Advanced Digital Controls for Disk Drives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0072752

Award Number: 0072752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300569             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Messner bmessner@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuhong Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geir E. Dullerud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072752
Messner

The rapid increase in the complexity and size of software in
              business, science and engineering, and the need to store increasingly large
              amounts of information in data bases for commercial, government, and medical
              applications has propelled the growing demand for data storage devices that
              have higher date transfers rates, have higher capacity, and are physically
              smaller.  In future years this trend is expected to rise dramatically as the
              use of disk drives in portable and wireless devices becomes widespread.  To
              respond to this demand, the current annual rate of increase in data storage
              density is 100% per year.  The majority of this increase comes from increases
              in track density, because of physical limitations on magnetic recording media
              and read and write heads.  This places disproportionate burden on the servo
              system to keep the head near the data track center for good read/write
              performance of the drive.  Reduced latency times to reach data on different
              data tracks also requires higher performance servo systems.

To improve the
              performance of disk drive servo systems to support the rate of increase in data
              storage density, new and advanced analytical techniques must be developed that
              specifically address the complex dynamics of the disk drive mechanics. 
              Furthermore, there are many issues concerning the hybrid nature of the control
              system which must simultaneously respond to both discrete-time and
              continuous-time signal, since the controllers for disk drives are inherently
              discrete-time.  The construction of such methods requires a spectrum of
              research effort ranging from the development of fundamental theory to the
              creation of domain specific computational algorithms to the implementation of
              these algorithms on appropriate test facilities.

The broad objectives of
              this research proposal are (1) to develop high performance design methods for
              control of disk drives, which have further general use; and (2) to demonstrate
              and apply these methods successfully to testbed disk drive systems.  Two major
              features of the work proposed here are that the PI's will directly address the
              hybrid nature of disk drive control where both continuous and discrete signals
              must be directly confronted and that the PI's will unify the approach to
              control for the two separate functions of the disk servo, namely track
              following and track-to-track seeking.  The proposed methods and approach will
              assist the competitiveness of the US dominated $60 billion data storage
              industry by providing systematic methods for control design for current and
              future disk drives.  Furthermore, many of the analytical tools developed will
              be applicable to alternative mechanical applications, and insights gained from
              this complete treatment and evaluation of disk drive control design will be
              parlayed into other related technologies.

