Title       : Fundamental Properties of Superconductors and Mesoscopic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2002    
File        : a0072618

Award Number: 0072618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Tinkham tinkham@rsj.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a senior professor at Harvard
              University for research that will probe the electrical properties of normal and
              superconducting structures fabricated at the nanometer length scale, at which
              quantum mechanical effects may modify behavior in a crucial way.  Such
              structures are of interest because they may make possible the further
              miniaturization of digital circuits. Specific attention will be paid to the
              following structures: (1) Superconducting nanowires fabricated by sputtering a
              superconducting metal onto a carbon nanotube template; here the basic issue is
              to understand the fundamental principles which limit how long and thin such
              wires can be made without losing the essential superconducting properties. (2)
              Carbon nanotubes themselves; these can be either metallic or semiconducting,
              and the planned research will study possible nanoscale devices made by
              manipulation of individual single-walled nanotubes. (3) Metallic nanoparticles,
              which make possible experimental probes of the interactions and quantum states
              of electrons inside a metal, and may have applications in compact memory
              structures. This project will provide training for graduate students and
              postdoctoral researchers in a field that is critical for maintaining national
              technical
leadership.
%%%
One of the most urgent technical problems facing
              our high-tech economy is finding a way to continue the miniaturization of
              electronic components, as described by "Moore's Law", beyond the limit
              projected on the basis of foreseeable improvements of current technology. This
              will
presumably require invention and testing of new concepts and new physical
              structures which take account of the crossover from classical to quantum
              physics as things are made smaller. This individual investigator award is to a
              senior professor at Harvard University for research that will focus on three
              such ultrasmall systems: superconducting nanowires, carbon nanotubes, and
              metallic nanoparticles. All have potential importance for devices, and the work
              will provide training for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in
              this field, where the availability of trained personnel is crucial for
              maintaining our national technical leadership.
***

