Title       : Physical Phenomena in Low-Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  2000     
File        : a0072115

Award Number: 0072115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valery L. Pokrovsky pokrovsky@physics.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical studies will be conducted on the fundamental physics of various
              low-dimensional systems.  Systems to be considered include heterogeneous
              magneto-conducting and magneto-superconducting systems, and ensembles of
              nano-scale magnetic clusters.  These systems are presently being produced in
              forefront physics and chemistry laboratories, but their physical properties
              have not been studied extensively.  One can expect new topological defects, a
              rich spectrum of ordered and disordered states, and new transport and dynamical
              phenomena.  Also, a host of applications are suggested, including very dense
              and reliable memory, sensors, magnetic transistors and other magneto-transport
              devices, as well as quantum generators.  Collaborations have been established
              with experimental and theoretical groups in the US and
              Europe.
%%%
Theoretical studies will be conducted on the fundamental physics
              of various low-dimensional systems.  Systems to be considered include
              heterogeneous magneto-conducting and magneto-superconducting systems, and
              ensembles of nano-scale magnetic clusters.  These systems are presently being
              produced in forefront physics and chemistry laboratories, but their physical
              properties have not been studied extensively.  One can expect new topological
              defects, a rich spectrum of ordered and disordered states, and new transport
              and dynamical phenomena.  Also, a host of applications are suggested, including
              very dense and reliable memory, sensors, magnetic transistors and other
              magneto-transport devices, as well as quantum generators.  Collaborations have
              been established with experimental and theoretical groups in the US and
              Europe.
***

