Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics and Pattern Formation in Combustion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0072491

Award Number: 0072491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard J. Matkowsky b-matkowsky@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072491
Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Dynamics and
              Pattern Formation in Combustion

Abstract

0072491  Matkowsky


This
              research involves a synergism of analytical and numerical studies of problems
              in combustion and flame propagation. This approach is highly successful in
              elucidating behavior of solutions to the highly nonlinear systems of partial
              differential equations under study.  Interest centers on problems exhibiting
              complex spatio-temporal dynamics in gaseous combustion as well as in solid fuel
              combustion and in heterogeneous 
combustion (solid plus gas), which arise in
              the self-propagating high-temperature synthesis process for advanced materials.
              The goal of the research is to describe transitions to, and the structure of,
              complex solution behavior.  The project addresses gaseous combustion problems
              in the areas of flames with sequential reactions and flames in gas filled
              tubes.  These systems exhibit transitions to states with greater degrees of
              spatio-temporal complexity as parameters are varied.  The project also analyzes
              problems in solid fuel combustion, in which high temperature combustion waves,
              referred to as solid flames, are used to synthesize advanced materials.
              Research centers on the areas of solid flames and filtration combustion, which
              involves heterogeneous combustion, with reaction between gas and solid phases.
              The analytical studies are based on bifurcation and nonlinear stability
              theories, which employ asymptotic analysis and singular perturbation theory in
              the neighborhood of bifurcation or other transition points to yield a local
              description of the solution.  An adaptive pseudo-spectral method is employed
              for large scale scientific computations, with which the local description is
              globally extended.  The solutions exhibit layers, localized regions in which
              the solution varies rapidly.  The adaptive pseudo-spectral method successfully
              meets the challenge of accurately and efficiently resolving such layer type
              behavior. 

This project is concerned with understanding processes that occur
              in energy conversion and materials synthesis, two areas of national importance.
               The research in energy conversion is focused on flame structure and dynamics,
              which involve interactions among many physical mechanisms. To determine cause
              and effect relations among the various mechanisms, this work explores parameter
              dependencies.  The research in materials synthesis studies the use of
              combustion waves to produce materials having desired properties, for example,
              extreme hardness or imperviousness to temperature extremes. In this innovative
              technological process, which appears to enjoy advantages over conventional
              technology, the combustion wave propagates through the sample, converting an
              unreacted solid powder mixture to solid product. When so synthesized, materials
              can have superior properties.

