Title       : Spectral Theory and Geometry of Locally Symmetric Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a0072299

Award Number: 0072299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lizhen Ji lji@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0072299
Lizhen Ji
 
Symmetric and locally symmetric spaces are important
              
objects in mathematics and arise from many different 
subjects such as Lie
              group theory, representation theory, 
number theory, differential geometry,
              algebraic geometry, 
and dynamics.  Many natural such spaces are noncompact.
              
For example, the space of positive definite matrices of 
determinant one is
              a noncompact symmetric space, and the 
moduli space of all elliptic curves is
              a noncompact locally 
symmetric space of finite volume which is one example of
              
Shimura curves and plays an important role in the recent 
solution of the
              last Fermat's theorem.  To understand the 
geometry and analysis of such
              noncompact spaces, an important 
problem is to study their compactifications. 
              One of the common 
themes of the four projects in this proposal is to
              understand 
refined structures of the compactifications and their relations
              
to the spectral theory of the spaces. For example, for locally symmetric
              spaces, geodesics which are eventually distance 
minimizing can be used to
              study the compactifications and 
also to understand the generalized
              eigenfunctions of the 
continuous spectrum, specifically, the scattering
              matrices.
Compactifications of symmetric spaces play an important role 
in
              understanding behaviors at infinity of the joint eigenfunctions 
of the
              invariant differential operators and the matrix 
coefficients of
              representations.  The compactifications 
of globally and locally symmetric
              spaces have mainly be 
studied separately before, and an important feature of
              
this proposal is to study compactifications of both types 
of spaces using a
              similar approach.

Mathematicians study geometric shapes and their
              structures.  One
such collection of shapes consists of objects called
              manifolds. 
If a drum is pictured as a particular type of manifold then
              the
tones produced by the drum can be thought of as mathematical
objects
              associated to the manifold.  For a particularly important
collection of drums
              there are two kinds of tones: the discrete (or
isolated) ones and the
              continuous families. The PI intends to 
investigate a variety of mathematical
              structures on these drums or manifolds.  

