Title       : Groups and Singularities in Quantum Control and Nonlinear Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a0072415

Award Number: 0072415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Viswanath Ramakrishna vish@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072415
Ramakrishna

The project aims to develop i) numerically inexpensive
              methods for state 
preparation in quantum control; and ii) control laws for
              nonlinear systems 
in the presence of singularities, and techniques for
              singular exterior 
differential systems. Several extant and future
              technologies call for the 
control of quantum systems - semiconductor
              heterostructures, 
spectroscopy, atomic lasers, quantum information
              processing, control of 
molecular dynamics, to name a few. Many of these
              problems can, after 
judicious modeling and optimization, be recast as the
              problem of 
preparing desired unitary generators, via an external control
              acting on a 
quantum system. This leads quickly to the problem of path
              planning for 
systems with drift on Lie groups, via controls that are
              constrained. Path 
planning for systems with drift, with few and constrained
              inputs, has not 
hitherto been studied. The only other alternatives for the
              control of 
quantum systems are computationally expensive optimization, and
              
tracking which relies heavily on intuition. In this project the role of
              
intuition and optimization will be limited to reformulating a given physical
              
objective as state preparation for a quantum system. The latter problem
              
will be attacked by developing structured factorization of unitary matrices,
              
the structure being determined by the constraints. The resulting control
              
design will be compared with other techniques such as inversion and 
optimal
              control.  Applications to lasing without inversion, molecular 
control,
              quantum computing and information will be then carried out. 
Related issues,
              such as tractable descriptions of reachable sets of quantum 
systems, will
              also be studied. The second part of the project stems from 
the fact that the
              extant non-linear control schemes are rarely directly 
applicable in singular
              situations such as a varying rank decoupling matrix 
and a change in relative
              degree. Tools from singularity theory, the theory 
of foliations, nonsmooth
              analysis and Lie groups will be developed to 
address this problem. A key
              feature will be the use of differential forms 
instead of vector fields for
              studying such issues. This should also have 
payoffs for singular exterior
              differential systems. Applications to 
techniques such as the method of
              intermediate integrals for partial 
differential equations and equations that
              change type will be studied from 
this vantage point. It is worth remarking
              that both components of the 
project call for similar
              mathematics.

Successful completion of this project should yield benefits for
              several 
current and future technologies. For instance, the fabrication of a
              quantum 
computer calls for solutions to precisely the type of problems being
              
studied in the project. Similarly, obtaining a snapshot of chemical
              
reactions at the molecular level also requires the control of quantum
              
processes. Active control of quantum phenomena would also lead to the
              
control of chemical reactions via tuned lasers. This should enhance 
product
              specificity in chemical reactions, thereby minimizing the presence 
of
              products that are not desired. The control of quantum phenomena is still 
in
              its infancy. The project aims to move it along further by linking it
              
concretely to traditional control theory. Conversely, the results of the
              
project should shed light on the control of macroworld systems. This will
              
also have benefits for traditional technologies such as robotics, consumer
              
electronics and electrical networks, since the underlying mathematics is
              
quite similar. From a didactic point of view, the project's contribution will
              
be to show to undergraduates and graduate students alike that advanced
              
mathematics is not an arid field, but is in fact a lively process with
              
palpable connections to real life situations. This should enhance the
              
likelihood of students, especially from under represented groups, to pursue
              
higher education in mathematics, science and technology.

