Title       : The Study of Nuclear Physics with Intermediate Energy Probes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0072361

Award Number: 0072361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1250000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Tedeschi tedeschi@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Steven Whisnant  (Principal Investigator former)
              Barry M. Preedom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chaden Djalali  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072361
Whisnant
	The focus of the South Carolina Intermediate Energy Group is
              the study of nucleon and meson interactions using unpolarized and polarized
              photon beams. Our experimental photonuclear physics program is conducted at the
              Laser Electron Gamma Source (LEGS) located at Brookhaven National Laboratory
              and with the Large Acceptance Spectrometer (CLAS) at the Continuous Electron
              Beam Accelerator Facility (CEBAF) located at the Thomas Jefferson National
              Accelerator Facility (JLab). The proposed activities significantly impact three
              overlapping areas: the spin structure of the nucleon, the study of the
              nucleon-nucleon interaction, and meson production. Central to these
              investigations is the Strongly
Polarized Hydrogen deuteride ICE (SPHICE)
              target. This novel polarized HD target permits measurement of asymmetries and,
              for the first time, absolute cross sections on the polarized proton, neutron,
              and deuteron. With SPHICE at LEGS, and at JLab (E94-117), a direct
              determination of the forward spin-polarizability and the Gerasimov-Drell-Hearn
              sum rule integrals for both the proton and neutron will be made. The
              photodisintegration of vector and tensor polarized deuterium at LEGS with
              linearly and circularly polarized photons will examine the nucleon-nucleon
              interaction in the region of the delta resonance in unprecedented detail. Our
              meson production program investigates the photon-nucleon and meson-nucleon
              interactions. From LEGS data we will be able to make the first
              model-independent determination of the pionphotoproduction multipoles. At JLab,
              phi meson production in the threshold region will be performed with unpolarized
              and linearly polarized (E98-109) photons. The photoproduction of vector mesons
              will be used to measure the mass of vector mesons embedded in nuclear matter by
              observing their dilepton decay (E94-002).


