Title       : Smooth and Symplectic 4-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0072212

Award Number: 0072212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162248             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald A. Fintushel ronfint@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Title: Smooth and Symplectic 4-Manifolds
PI: Ronald Fintushel
Award:
              0072212

Abstract:   The theory of smooth 4-manifolds gains its importance
              both from its central location between low and high-dimensional topology and
              from its close interaction with high energy physics. The major problem in this
              field is the classification of smooth simply connected
4-manifolds. The
              interaction between topology and physics has
stimulated the construction of
              invariants - at first Donaldson's invariant, and then the invariant of Seiberg
              and Witten - which are useful in distinguishing the diffeomorphism types of
              4-manifolds. These have led to major advances, and they have allowed workers to
              study new constructions of 4-manifolds. These have confused the issue of
              classification, but also have invigorated the theory and reinforced its
              richness. The theory is now left without even a conjectural classification. It
              seems that still further examples are needed to identify a suitable
              classification scheme, and the proposer intends to work on such constructions.
              One class of 4-manifolds which have exceptionally close ties to theoretical
              physics are those with a symplectic structure, and the last few years have also
              seen progress in the theory of symplectic 4-manifolds; especially new
              constructions, and most notably, Donaldson's work on Lefschetz fibrations. The
              proposer intends to continue work on the explicit constructions of Lefschetz
              fibrations and related questions on symplectic submanifolds. The ultimate goal
              of the proposer is to develop new constructions of smooth 4 manifolds in the
              hope that a general picture will begin to emerge.

   The focus of this
              project will be to construct new types of examples of smooth and symplectic
              4-manifolds and to study the diversity of embedded symplectic submanifolds (up
              to smooth isotopy) in a given homology class. In particular, is every
              symplectic surface in the complex projective plane smoothly isotopic to a
              holomorphic curve? If one allows enough blowups, this is not true.
Another
              issue is the geography problem for simply connected
irreducible 4-manifolds.
              Each such manifold can be assigned a lattice point in the plane corresponding
              to its characteristic numbers. The problem is to study which points are
              realized. There has  been notable
progress, but much work still remains, and
              the principal investigator plans to seek new methods for constructing
              irreducible simply connected 4-manifolds of positive signature. These
              techniques are related to a kind of theory of minimal genus surfaces with
              constraints. Also he, along with R. Stern, conjectures a replacement for the
              Noether inequality for symplectic 4-manifolds,  and they have a promising
              technique for its proof, which they plan to pursue.




