Title       : Low Temperature Scanning Probe Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a0072834

Award Number: 0072834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex L. de Lozanne lozanne@physics.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project a two-tip scanning tunneling microscope (STM) of a new design,
              never considered before, will be developed.  In this design the two tips probe
              a very thin sample from opposite sides.  In addition, another two-tip STM will
              be designed in which the two tips probe the sample in a more conventional
              geometry, with both tips on the same side of the sample.  Nanotube tips
              recently developed by the investigator enable these designs.  Nanotube tips may
              be ideal for spin-polarized tunneling, as well as for a host of scientific and
              practical applications that can benefit from a coherent point source of
              spin-polarized electrons.  The two-tip STM will make possible new experiments
              that will probe the Green function of the sample material, so that one can get
              detailed information on semiconducting or metallic samples such as mean free
              path, the phase and energy dependence of scattering from impurities, details of
              the band structure, and the transition from the ballistic to diffusive
              transport.  This instrument can also probe the symmetry of the order parameter
              in a superconductor, so that refinements of the current d-wave picture can be
              obtained for high temperature superconductivity.  Graduate and undergraduate
              students will participate in this project.  They will benefit from training in
              advanced instrumentation and techniques, in the development of the novel STM
              instrument, and from using it to probe the behavior of electrons in the most
              detailed fashion yet available.

%%%

Microscopes with ever increasing
              ability to probe small details have been major instruments in advancing our
              understanding of the microscopic structures and behaviors of materials. 
              Scanning tunneling microscopes (STMs) are the latest types of such instruments
              that now allow the probing of materials at the atomic level of dimensions.  In
              this project, a new type of STM, based on the use of two, rather than one,
              probe tips will be developed.  One version will have the two tips on opposite
              sides of a very thin sample, a geometry that has never before been even
              contemplated.  A second version of the two-tip STM will be of a more
              conventional geometry, in which the two tips are on the same side of the
              sample.  Both versions can be realized on the basis of probe tips, which are
              atomically sharp needles (carbon nanotubes), that were recently developed in
              the investigator's laboratory. Such two-tip STMs will allow a new set of
              investigations of the properties of materials, including high temperature
              superconducting compounds that will result in a better understanding of their
              structure and behavior.  These results will ultimately be of use and benefit to
              technology.  This project will involve the participation of graduate and
              undergraduate students.  They will thereby acquire knowledge and skills in a
              very active contemporary area of condensed matter physics and materials
              science. These will enable them to be productive members of the
              scientific/technological workforce of the next few decades of this
              century.

***  


