Title       : STM-fabricated Magnets and Their Influence on Semiconductor Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2000      
File        : a0072395

Award Number: 0072395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230147             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephan von Molnar molnar@martech.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              

The potential utility of arrays of magnetic nanoparticles as dense magnetic
              storage media as well as their integration in semiconducting and metallic
              'spintronic' devices is the basis for the proposed work.  The effort
              concentrates on the production and characterization of magnetic particles
              either individually or arranged in small groups, or large arrays. 
              Micro-metal-organic vapor deposition using scanning tunneling microscopy
              (STM-MOCVD) and high-resolution e-beam lithography will be used to fabricate
              these systems on III-V semiconductor heterostructures.  Fe, Co, and Ni
              particles, with diameters as low as 10 nm will be fabricated.  Their magnetic
              behavior will be probed indirectly by sensing the magnetic fields of the
              particles through Hall crosses fabricated from the semiconductor
              heterostructures.  Measurements in a gradiometer configuration will be extended
              beyond their present limitations to arrays and low temperature to single
              particles and to room temperature.  Moreover, complementary direct observations
              at room temperature will be made using a magnetic force microscope (MFM) with
              variable field capability.  Interparticle interactions will be investigated
              experimentally as well as by numerical simulations.  The combination of
              magnetic and electronic measurements on well-characterized structures will be
              used to formulate a physical picture of magnetic dynamics within reduced length
              scales and the influence of such magnetic structures on semiconductor
              electronics will be explored.
%%%
Modern technology relies heavily on
              micro-fabrication and specifically on microelectronics. The goal of the
              proposed work is to fabricate regularly arranged magnetic particles of the size
              of nanometers (nm); (the diameter of an atom is about 0.3 nm) onto
              semiconductor structures and to study their magnetic properties as well as
              their influence on the electrical conductivity of the semiconductor.  Such
              integration of magnetic and electronic properties is believed to lead to the
              next generation of microelectronic, so-called 'spintronic', devices.  In the
              proposed work magnetic particles, either individually or arranged in small
              groups, or in large arrays will be fabricated and studied.  The experimental
              techniques that have been used in such investigations have so far been limited
              to arrays and to very low temperatures.  One of the goals of the present
              research is to go beyond these limits and extend the studies to single
              particles and to room temperature.  The combination of magnetic and electronic
              measurements on well-characterized structures will be used to formulate a
              physical picture of magnetic dynamics within reduced length scales and the
              influence of such magnetic structures on semiconductor electronics. 
              Undergraduate and graduate students, as well as post doctoral research
              associates will participate in this research.  They will thereby acquire skills
              and knowledge in a forefront area of condensed matter physics and materials
              science.  These will enable them to be productive members of the
              scientific/technological workforce for the next few decades of this
              century.
***

