Title       : Template Synthesis and Electronic Properties of Bismuth Quantum Wire Arrays and
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0072847

Award Number: 0072847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301049             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tito E. Huber thuber@howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This experimental condensed matter physics project addresses the transport
              properties of quantum wires (i.e. wires with diameter smaller than the Fermi
              wavelength).  While the theory of such wires is relatively well developed, the
              experimental situation is less explored, due to the difficulty of fabricating
              and characterizing such materials.  The project focuses on quantum wires of the
              semimetal bismuth, which is unique because its extremely small effective mass
              leads to an unusually long Fermi wavelength, 25 nm.  Consequently, quantum
              confinement effects should be readily observed in nanowires whose diameter are
              below about 25 nm.  High-pressure, high-temperature melt injection templates
              will be used to make arrays and networks of bismuth wires of diameters down to
              6 nm.  The semimetal-to-semiconductor transition, doping effects, localization,
              and mesoscopic phenomena will be probed via optical measurements and
              low-temperature magnetic-field-dependent electronic transport measurements.  An
              important feature of the work is the use of a scanning force microscope with
              electric force capability for visualization and testing of the nanowires.  The
              research will be carried out by undergraduates from Howard University, Boston
              College, and Georgetown University.  These students will receive scientific
              training in cutting edge experimental techniques that will prepare them for
              careers in academe, industry and government. 
%%%
This project is directed at
              developing a more complete understanding of the properties of ultra-fine
              nanowires, which are expected to have many applications as electronic circuitry
              becomes more compact.  While several theories of these nanowires have been
              developed, experimental studies are lacking due to the difficulty of
              fabricating wires in this so-called quantum regime. In this work, closely
              packed nanowire arrays and networks will be fabricated by injecting molten
              bismuth metal under high pressures into porous template materials, where it is
              subsequently cooled and solidified.  Wire diameters down to 6 nm can be
              achieved with this technique. The optical and electronic transport properties
              will be measured and comparisons to the various theoretical predictions will be
              carried out.  An important feature of the work is the utilization of a scanning
              force microscope with electric force capability for visualization and testing
              of the nanowires.  This collaboration between a historically-black university
              and two collaborating universities will directly impact over 15 undergraduate
              students who will receive rigorous training in Physics, Chemistry and
              Materials.  Through the interdisciplinary and inter-university character of
              this program, students will gain a fuller understanding of the scientific
              enterprise.
***
