Title       : Problems in Statistical Model Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0072292

Award Number: 0072292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335178             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grace G. Wahba wahba@stat.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1303,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT

Problems in Statistical Model Building. Grace Wahba,
              PI.

This research is to further the development of Smoothing Spline ANOVA
              and related variational methods for multivariate function estimation and
              statistical model building, so that these methods may be used in analyses of
              very large complex heterogenous data sets as occur in demographic medical
              studies, environmental and climatic data analyses and classification problems
              in a variety of areas.  These methods are flexible nonparametric methods, but
              generally contain commonly used parametric families as special cases.  The
              general approach proceeds in the following steps:  (i)propose families of
              models that are appropriate for specific areas of application, (ii) develop new
              numerical algorithms as required for fitting the models, (ii) develop further
              methods for tuning the models and providing accuracy estimates, (iii) develop
              information concerning the properties of the methods, including testing on
              realistic simulated observations where the `truth' is known, (iv) and applying
              the resulting methods to important data sets, with the expectation of
              extracting information from these data that is not obtainable by standard
              parametric methods.

The goal of this project is provide to scientists in
              medical, environmental and atmospheric sciences and supervised machine
              learning, new and useful tools to more efficiently analyze their data.  Tasks
              are proposed to develop new methods that are appropriate for more efficient
              data analysis in complex demographic studies which follow populations over
              time, collecting information useful for understanding relationships between
              possible risk factors and the incidence and progression of various diseases. 
              Tasks are also proposed for the development of new methods that are appropriate
              for understanding relationships among various factors of interest in large
              environmental and atmospheric data sets with `non-standard' indirect
              observational data; and for exploiting some new methods in classification that
              have wide applicability for building classification algorithms based on
              learning from large data sets in very high dimensional spaces.

