Title       : Dynamical and Structural Studies of Liquid Crystal Phases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0072989

Award Number: 0072989
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465236             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel A. Clark noel.clark@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at the study and potential of freely suspended liquid
              crystal films.  Freely suspended films are structures of fundamental interest
              in condensed matter science.  They are the thinnest known stable condensed
              phase structures and have the largest surface-to-volume ratio of any condensed
              phase preparation, making them ideal for studies of dimensionality,
              fluctuation, and interface effects.  The focus will be on (i) studies of the
              polarization structure of tilted smectic films including effects of
              longitudinal polarization (ferroelectric ordering in the tilt plane) and
              transverse polarization (ferroelectric ordering normal to the tilt plane); (ii)
              investigation of films and filaments of smectic phases formed from banana or
              bow-shaped molecules; (iii) study of topological defect annihilation and
              orientational dynamics in 2D XY systems; (iv) orientation dynamics in tilted
              smectic films; (v) electron microscopy of films transferred to solid
              substrates.  In addition the structure of smectic liquid crystals will also be
              studied by probing the structure and interactions of smectic.  A focal defects
              in a novel three dimensional geometry, and by investigating the x-ray
              diffraction and video microscopic of the tubules formed by the diacetylenic
              lipids, pursuing recent findings that the tubules formed by the diacetylenic
              lipids, pursuing recent findings that the tubule formation process is
              achiral.
%%%
The topics explored in this project will have a significant
              scientific and technological imput on new technologies such as flat panel
              display, liquid crystal composites, and photonic band gap structures.

