Title       : Methods for Reliability Theory and Applications of Order-Restricted Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0072207

Award Number: 0072207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry W. Block hwb@stat.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan R. Sampson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Savits  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The question is addressed of when the bathtub shape of a failure rate function
              is preserved by various functions used to describe optimal behavior.  A second
              issue is when do mixtures have specified shapes such as a bathtub shape.  A
              third topic introduces isotonic logistic discrimination, which is developed as
              a nonparametric generalization of linear logistic discrimination taking into
              account order restrictions.  The fourth question addresses finding simultaneous
              confidence bands for isotonic response surfaces and the fifth topic develops an
              ordinal extension of the Pearson chi-squared for testing 2(k ordered tables.  A
              new metric on permutations is proposed and developed as the sixth
              topic.

	Failure rates are a method used to describe the propensity of a
              system, either engineering or biological, to fail.  They are a function of time
              and typically at an early age they are high (more likely to fail), at middle
              age they are low, and then at an old age they tend to increase (called
              wearout).  This gives rise to the bathtub shaped failure rate.  For mechanical
              or electrical systems, which have a bathtub failure rate, there are many early
              failures.  Consequently, a product should not be released until this period of
              early failures is past.  A method of insuring this is called burn-in. 
              Typically this means testing such products for a length of time until this
              critical period is over.  An important consideration is how to optimally
              determine such a period and this is one question studied by the researchers.
              Another research area deals with a common phenomenon in many scientific
              problems where the experimental responses tend to get larger as various
              underlying experimental parameters are increased.  For example, an individual's
              likelihood of heart attacks within a five-year period will increases as
              baseline systolic blood pressure increases and as cholesterol levels increase. 
              In order to properly analyze the data arising from such phenomena, new and more
              general statistical methods need to be developed.  The researchers are
              considering several major new statistical methods to model and analyze such
              data.
