Title       : Homotopy theory, loop spaces,group cohomology, and configuration spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0072173

Award Number: 0072173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick R. Cohen cohf@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel Gitler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Frederick R. Cohen
DMS-0072173

The projects outlined in this proposal are
              directed toward 
the interplay between homotopy theory, group theory, and the
              
topology of function spaces. Artin's braid group plays a 
central role.  The
              main projects are as follows:  (1) 
continuation of a program to finish
              Barratt's finite exponent
conjecture, (2) computations of the group cohomology
              for certain discrete groups with varying choices of representations, 
(3) a
              further investigation of the connections between the
cohomology of function
              spaces, group cohomology, as well
as the connections with the topology of
              function spaces, 
configuration spaces, and hyperplane arrangements, 
(4) an
              analysis of the overlap of properties of homotopy 
groups with other
              structures such as the Lie algebra attached 
to the descending central series
              for Artin's pure braid group, 
and the Lie algebra obtained from the higher
              homotopy groups 
of configuration spaces, and (5) a detailed analysis of
              
certain groups of coalgebra morphisms as well as their 
connections to braid
              groups, and homotopy theory.

The main goals of the projects here involve
              geometry of 
circles moving through space. These circles can be thought 
of
              as the motions of planetary objects in orbit around each 
other. The interplay
              between the geometry of these orbits 
occurs in mathematics as well as in
              mathematical physics.  
Precise information concerning these orbits has
              provided 
fruitful mathematical applications to several subjects. 
The
              ultimate goal of this project is to measure different 
quantities in the
              subject as well as analyzing concrete 
useful answers, and computations.

