Title       : Studying the Nucleon with the CLAS detector at Jefferson Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0072339

Award Number: 0072339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112012             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin L. Giovanetti giovankl@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9152,9178,9229,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0072339
Giovanetti
This project is designed to integrate important
              contributions to the
ongoing research at Jefferson Lab with an educational
              experience for
promising undergraduate students. A team of undergraduate
              students and one full time faculty member, Dr. Kevin Giovanetti, will carry out
              this work both at Jefferson Lab and in the James Madison University detector
              development laboratory. One of our goals is to extend the operational
              capabilities and to improve the CLAS detector for performance at the higher
              anticipated beam energies of CEBAF. Several types of calorimeters have been
              proposed as possible new components for CLAS.  Their design, performance and
              geometry need to be assessed. The JMU group is studying these issues and will
              develop readout mechanisms and methods for calibrating the proposed
              calorimeters. The CLAS detector has been operational since December 1997 and
              has been making important contributions to many outstanding questions in
              Nuclear and Particle physics.  The central physics interest for the JMU group
              is the three-quark system and a program to enhance our fundamental
              understanding of this structure is now underway.  The proton and the neutron
              are the best known of the particles that are described as a bound state of
              three valence quarks. The JMU group will support this exploration and plans to
              continue to perform shift work and to provide an acceptable level of general
              service toward the overall CLAS effort for the duration of this proposal.  This
              is important. It helps maintain a high level of productivity for the CLAS
              detector.
In addition to the CLAS project, a small portion of the requested
              funds
will support a contribution to a new effort. The JMU research
              group
plans to build a calibration and monitoring system for a newly approved
              mu+ Lifetime experiment at PSI and to participate in data-taking and initial
              beam tests. The work overlaps the ongoing detector development at JMU.  The
              measurement is of fundamental importance because it can be used to determine
              the strength of a fundamental interaction, the weak coupling constant GF.

