Title       : Bifurcation Analysis and Computation in Elliptic and Multiphase Problems of
               Nonlinear Elasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0072514

Award Number: 0072514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Healey tjh10@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phoebus Rosakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              T. Healey and P. Rosakis plan to study various problems from solid
              continuum
mechanics governed by nonlinear partial differential equations.  A
              major
thrust of the proposed work will be on the static morphology and
              dynamic
evolution of microstructure due to phase transitions in
              two-dimensional
models of shape-memory alloys.  In contrast to well-known
              absolute,
minimum-energy approaches to the statics problem, we plan to employ
              modern
techniques of symmetry-breaking, bifurcation theory.  The latter
              enables
systematic determination of metastable states, which we believe our
              ensuing
dynamical studies will show to be associated with hysteresis. 
              Another
aspect of the work will involve applications of a generalized
              topological degree
(developed previously by Healey & Simpson) to global
              bifurcation problems
of nonlinear elasticity - these will be the first such
              results in
three-dimensional elasticity.  The overall goals of the work are to
              detect
new nonlinear phenomena, obtain constitutive restrictions that are
              both
physically and mathematically reasonable for general classes of
              materials,
and to develop new tools/approaches to such nonlinear problems -
              both
analytical and computational.  The proposed approach comprises a blend
              of
solid continuum mechanics, materials science, nonlinear analysis,
              symmetry
and group-theoretic methods and computation.

The analysis of
              models of nonlinear materials at a very general level is fundamental 
to the
              understanding of shape-memory effects in certain advanced engineering
alloys
              as well as more traditional engineering materials/structures.  The
proposed
              investigation is strongly interdisciplinary, combining models and
techniques
              from mechanics, materials science and modern mathematics.
Broadly speaking the
              work will provide new mathematical approaches to
difficult nonlinear problems
              arising in structural/mechanical engineering
and materials sciences.  This has
              the potentia of leading to a better understanding of
material behavior and
              design - including the design of "smart" structures.


