Title       : Homogenizations Continuum Limits and Kinetic Limits for Stochastic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0072666

Award Number: 0072666
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fraydoun Rezakhanlou rezakhan@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	An outstanding and long studied problem in statistical mechanics is to
              establish the connection between the microscopic world and its macroscopic
              behavior. The investigator's research concerns stochastic models associated
              with the evolution of dilute gases and the formation of solids. As the first
              step, one derives a partial differential equation for the macroscopic evolution
              of such stochastic models. Roughly speaking, one shows that after a suitable
              scaling, the particle density of a dilute gas (respectively, the boundary
              surface of a solid) converges to a solution of the Boltzmann equation
              (respectively, Hamilton-Jacobi equation). Probabilistically, such a convergence
              is a law of large numbers and its corresponding central limit theorem provides
              us with some vital information about the microscopic model under the study.
              
	Solids form through growth processes which take place at the surface.
              Imagine an already formed nucleus to which further material sticks from the
              ambient atmosphere. The process of the attachment is a function of a huge
              variety of growth mechanisms depending on the materials involved, their
              temperature, composition, etc. Following the tradition of statistical
              mechanics, one studies simplified models which nevertheless captures some of
              the essential physics. Such simplified models are proved to be useful in
              understanding the intricate formation of solids. It turns out that these models
              describe other phenomena such as the spread of infected cells in a tissue, the
              effect of impurity in the evolution of a fluid, etc. The investigator's
              research concerns the interplay between the microscopic growth rules and the
              macroscopic shape of the surface of a solid. 
