Title       : SGER: Social Cognitive Neuroscience of Self-Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a0072861

Award Number: 0072861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98898              (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd F. Heatherton todd.heatherton@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The methods of cognitive neuroscience will be used to examine a social
              psychological theory of self-regulation. According to the strength model,
              self-regulation is governed by a limited resource that allows people to control
              impulses and desires. Self-regulatory resources can be depleted or fatigued by
              self-regulatory demands. Hence, the active effort required to control behavior
              in one domain leads to diminished capacity for self-regulation in other
              domains. Because people have a limited reservoir of self-regulatory resources,
              they can be overwhelmed by both self-initiated and situational demands, thereby
              resulting in self-regulation failure. Preliminary studies using social
              psychological methods have found consistent support for the strength model. The
              new studies use methods from cognitive neuroscience to more fully elucidate the
              underlying brain mechanisms involved in self-regulation. A first project
              examines whether performing an initial self-regulatory task leads to
              alterations in performance on a subsequent test of frontal lobe functioning.
              Tasks such as the Tower of London, Stroop Task, and negative priming have been
              shown to reflect frontal lobe activity. A second project uses functional
              magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to assess brain activity correlated with
              self-regulatory effort. Together these studies should provide substantial
              evidence about the neural correlates of self-regulation. In addition, this
              research allows for an examination of the strength model of self-regulation
              that is not possible using traditional social psychological methods. More
              generally, this research will demonstrate the usefulness of cognitive
              neuroscience methods for examining social psychological phenomena.

