Title       : Classical Topology Inside Quantum Invariants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0072857

Award Number: 0072857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65331              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lev Rozansky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: 0072857

An important problem of the 3d topology is how to establish
              a relation between the old "classical" invariants of 3-manifold and knots such
              as the Casson-Walker invariant and the Alexander polynomial, and the new
              "quantum" invariants such as the Reshetikhin-Turaev 
invariant and the Jones
              polynomial. The existing evidence suggests that quantum invariants can be
              disassembled into simpler pieces, the first of which are known classical
              invariants, whereas the others are their close cousins which may also have a
              nice direct interpretation in the framework of classical topology.  The
              invariants that appear in the decomposition of 
quantum invariants, are the
              so-called Vassiliev or finite type invariants. Therefore it turns out that
              Vassiliev invariants are a link between the quantum and classical invariants. 
              I propose to study the properties of Vassiliev invariants appearing in the
              decomposition of quantum invariants and especially their relation to classical
              topology. In particular, I propose to study the new polynomial Vassiliev
              invariants that are hidden inside the colored Jones polynomials. These new
              polynomial invariants of knots and links seem to be the 
descendants of the
              Alexander polynomial and therefore, similarly to their ancestor, they may have
              a direct topological interpretation. The first direct descendant of the
              Alexander polynomial is a 2-variable polynomial with integer coefficients. Path
              integral arguments  suggest that it is a knot analog of the Casson-Walker
              invariant of rational homology spheres.

The topological classification of
              3-manifolds and knots is still an open problem. A natural way to approach it is
              to construct as many invariants of knots and 3-manifolds as one would need in
              order to distinguish between any non-equivalent objects. In recent years we 
              witnessed an outburst of new "quantum" invariants  (Jones polynomial and
              Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant in particular). These invariants are more powerful
              than the old Alexander polynomial, yet they are relatively easy to compute.
              However, their application towards the solution of topological problems is
              impeded by the fact that their definition is purely combinatorial and has no
              obvious connection to the well-established methods of classical topology. 
              Existing evidence suggests that quantum invariants are packed up with an
              infinite number of simpler invariants the first of which are well-known
              classical invariants. 
Therefore a study of quantum invariants (especially in
              the semi-classical approximation when they unpack) may produce an infinite
              number of new classical invariants which may be enough to distinguish all
              3-manifolds and knots. I propose to study the properties of new simple
              invariants that come from the quantum ones. In particular, I will study the
              decomposition of the colored Jones polynomial into an infinite sequence of
              simpler polynomials which seem to be the descendants of the Alexander
              polynomial.

