Title       : Transport and Magnetic Studies of Phase Separation and Electron Correlations in
               Magnetic and Superconducting Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0072276

Award Number: 0072276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua L. Cohn cohn@phyvax.ir.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a young professor at the University of
              Miami for an experimental research project that focuses on the phenomenon of
              electronic phase separation in charge-carrier-doped antiferromagnetic (AF)
              manganites and cuprates. Electron-doped manganites, for example
              Ca(1-x)La(x)MnO(3) (x <= 0.2), have been shown through preliminary data to be
              model systems for testing theoretical predictions of phase separation and are
              targeted for further study. The research on cuprates is motivated by a
              hypothesis that attributes anomalous phonon damping in AF YBa(2)Cu(3)O(6+x) to
              local lattice distortions induced by charge-stripe dynamics in the
              phase-separated CuO(2) planes. Of particular interest for the proposed work are
              compositions near the insulator-superconductor phase boundary (x~0.3-0.4),
              where the development of charge-stripe order competes with long-range Neel
              order.  Complementing these investigations of inhomogeneous materials will be
              parallel studies of the layered superconductor Sr(2)RuO(4). Experiments are
              proposed to test the limits of applicability of Fermi-Liquid theory to this
              highly correlated, anisotropic system.  The proposed work is expected to
              significantly enhance the understanding of the interplay between spin, charge,
              and lattice excitations that determine the novel physical properties of
              transition-metal oxides. The young scientists involved with this project,
              undergraduate students through postdocs, will receive training that will enable
              them to compete for future positions in academia, government, or industrial
              laboratories. 
%%%
This individual investigator award is to a young professor
              at the University of Miami for an experimental research project that focused on
              the investigation of transport (electrical and heat conduction, thermoelectric
              effects) and magnetism in transition-metal oxide compounds that are of
              significant intellectual and technological interest. Three classes of compounds
              (manganites, cuprates, and ruthenates), that exhibit magnetism and/or
              unconventional superconductivity, have been targeted for study. The manganites
              and cuprates are systems where the physical properties can be controllably
              altered by adding charge carriers (doping) via chemical substitution. An
              important theme for this program is the phenomenon of electronic phase
              separation (PS), wherein the charges doped into insulating antiferromagnetic
              compounds segregate into nano-scale clusters. This small-scale inhomogeneity
              appears to be intrinsic to these materials and may prove significant for
              technological development, given that recent experiments and theory suggest PS
              is an important ingredient in the mechanisms for colossal magnetoresistance and
              high-temperature superconductivity. The young scientists involved with this
              project, undergraduate students through postdocs, will receive training that
              will enable them to compete for future positions in academia, government, or
              industrial laboratories.
***

