Title       : Spatio-Temporal High-Speed Modulation of Semiconductor Optoelectronics by
               Lateral Electric Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0072986

Award Number: 0072986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Citrin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal addresses fundamental physical issues impacting the growing area
              of integration 
of high-frequency electronics with  optoelectronics and
              photonics.  Our focus is the
optical properties of semiconductors (quantum
              wells, wires, and dots) in the presence of strong
dc and high-frequency
              (GHz-THz) electric fields.

In particular, we will concentrate on cases where
              the high-frequency field is applied capacitively,
i.e., it does not introduce
              additional carriers. The particular phenomena we will consider involve
an
              interplay of ultrafast carrier dynamics in high-frequency fields, screening of
              the field by
the spatial motions of the carrier distributions, propagation
              effects of the high-frequency field,
and the interaction of the carrier
              distributions  with light.  Thus, the work will unite both micro
and
              macroscopic length scales as well as dynamics on the femto to nanosecond
              timescales. Our effort will be primarily theoretical and computational. 
              

Together with our experimental collaborators, we will study the
              spatio-dynamics of carriers in 
photoconductors, semiconductor optical
              amplifier, and VCSEL's in the presence of the high-frequency fields.  In the
              phenomena we will explore, the spatial aspects play a key role; on the one
              hand, we will be concerned with how such high-frequency fields adversely
              perturb the operation of  optoelectronics and photonics, while on the  other,
              we will explore potential phenomena for  device applications.  Potential
              applications include ultrahigh-bandwidth optical switching, enhanced
              photoconductive THz generation,  ultrahigh-speed optical modulators, lateral
              mode control from semiconductor light emitters, and  ultrahigh-speed beem
              steering.





 

