Title       : Variational Analysis: Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0072179

Award Number: 0072179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris S. Mordukhovich boris@math.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              1. The proposed research mainly deals with developing the first-order
              generalized differential theory of variational analysis in broad classes of
              infinite-dimensional spaces, with some basic aspects of the second-order
              variational analysis in finite dimensions, and with their applications to
              important problems arising in optimization, control, mechanics, and economics.
              The main tools of the generalized differentiation in the proposed research are
              based on the normal cones, subdifferentials, and coderivatives of nonsmooth
              objects, in the study of which the PI has been involved for a long time.  The
              project will pay a particular attention to the second-order subdifferential
              theory and its applications to the Lipschitzian stability of variational
              systems, mathematical programs with equilibrium constraints, and to some
              problems of continuum mechanics. It will contain new development and
              applications in the area of dynamic optimization for control systems governed
              by differential, delay-differential, and partial differential
              equations/inclusions. It also aims to develop new applications of variational
              analysis to the study of Pareto optimality in equilibrium models of welfare
              economics.    

2. Variational analysis has been recognized as a fruitful
              area in the modern Applied Mathematics that, on one hand, is concerned with
              finding the best solutions in 
large-scale mathematical models with
              complicated ``nonsmooth" constraints and, on the other hand, develops
              optimization strategies and technologies to solve a broad spectrum of real-life
              problems arising in various areas of applied science, control, economics,
              engineering, mechanics, etc. The proposed research aims to develop new methods
              of variational analysis and its application to some important problems in
              optimal control, economics, and mechanics. In particular, the proposed methods
              of minimax control design are largely motivated by applications to
              environmental systems. The proposed study of variational stability for
              optimization problems with equilibrium constraints is motivated by applications
              to practical problems of material design in continuum mechanics. New
              applications of variational analysis will be developed to multiobjective models
              of welfare economics.

