Title       : Acoustic Birefringence and Superfluid 3He
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0072350

Award Number: 0072350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449998             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Halperin w-halperin@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will further our understanding of a broad class of materials of
              considerable interest and importance to a wide range of scientific disciplines
              including quantum fluids and materials physics.  The main goal is to develop
              new acoustic techniques based on the discovery of the Acoustic Faraday Effect,
              a discovery made last year of an effect strictly analogous to the important
              magneto-optic effect discovered by Michael Faraday in 1845.  The proposed
              research will improve the spectroscopy of order parameter modes in superfluid
              3He by several orders of magnitude using the techniques based on these acoustic
              principles.  These experiments will give new and important information on the
              nature of the superfluid itself as well as on the pairing mechanisms that give
              rise to it.  New collective modes of the superfluid will be sought which have
              been predicted theoretically and which can be identified from the new
              experimental methods.  A second goal of the proposed work is to study impurity
              scattering effects which can suppress superfluidity in 3He.  This will give
              important insight into the unusual superfluid behavior in 3He and suggest how
              to control the superfluid suppression.  New phases and unusual properties have
              recently been discovered but which are not consistent with present theoretical
              understanding.  To pave the way for better use of superconductivity as well as
              superfluidity it is very important to gain this understanding in 3He using
              impurities introduced into 3He in a controlled manner by means of very porous
              silica aerogel.  Undergraduate students, graduate students, and some high
              school projects will be part of this research.  Two local high school students
              are planning to prepare projects for the national Intel competition based on
              their experience in this low temperature laboratory.  The integration of
              supervision from faculty, postdoctoral associates, and graduate students with
              these projects is a unique and mutually beneficial experience. 
%%%
The
              proposed research will develop understanding of an important class of materials
              holding significant promise for applications to our society and for basic
              scientific knowledge.  They are called unconventional quantum systems.  This
              class includes superconducting materials for which their successful application
              requires development of new measurement tools.  The main goal of the project is
              to develop a new acoustic spectroscopy using techniques similar to optical
              techniques that have been so important in the past 50 years in the
              semiconductor-materials field.  The proposed research will improve the
              spectroscopy of order parameter collective modes in superfluid 3He by several
              orders of magnitude using the new acoustic principles.  The experiments will
              reveal the nature of the superfluid and the physical mechanisms responsible for
              it.  Since this material is an excellent representative of all materials in
              this important class it can be expected that there will be broad impact on
              their applications resulting from the proposed work.  A second goal is to
              determine the sensitivity to impurities of the superconducting and superfluid
              behaviors.  The results will pave the way for better use of superconductivity.
              Undergraduate students, graduate students, and some high school projects will
              be part of this research.  Two local high school students are planning to
              prepare projects for the national Intel competition based on their experience
              in the university laboratory.  The integration of research activity from
              faculty, postdoctoral associates, and graduate students with these high school
              projects will be a unique and mutually beneficial experience. 


