Title       : Some Mesoscale Issues for Applied Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0072194

Award Number: 0072194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197745             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Kinderlehrer davidk@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Mesoscale is a term intended to convey an intermediate level description of
a
              physical system.  Its function is to capture the interactions of the
system at
              finer scales with interactions or influences from larger coarser
scales, and
              the mesoscale level itself.  Such systems, active across
disparate length and
              time scales, are inherently metastable.  This feature
is often revealed by
              hysteretic behavior or by a reluctance to evolve
quickly to equilibrium.  The
              focus in this proposal is on several
prototypes of these systems that occur in
              materials sceince.  One is 
the role of interfaces, or grain boundaries, in
              determining or limiting the 
behavior of polycrystalline materials. The energy
              and mobility of grain 
boundaries depends on crystallography and geometry,
              according to 
established thermodynamic principles.  Innovative new ways to
              determine 
these functions explicitly for important materials are the
              objective of the 
Mesoscale Interface Mapping Project.  This involves
              developing automated 
microscopy to harvest large amounts of data from samples
              and then 
formulating and solving a complex inverse problem.  One way to
              approach 
determination of mobility consists in the development of large scale
              
simulations of grain boundary evolution.  The second focus is the 
coarse
              grained descriptions of mesoscale systems, the functional analytic 
limit
              processes in the microstructure of solids or the averaging to distribution
              
functions in systems with stochastic behavior. The new methods allow 
study
              of situations where kinetics arise directly in terms of thermodynamic 
state
              functions and naturally carry with them an appropriate topology.  
The issue
              of metastability has been under investigation in this context.  
There is now
              the opportunity to improve understanding, for example, 
of microstructural
              evolution in shape-memory materials and diffusion 
mediated transport in
              certain liquid crystal systems and in protein motors.  
This will include
              diagnostics for these systems.


The challenge of the mesoscale in materials
              science is to understand how 
it constrains finer scale systems (at the
              molecular scale) and determines 
larger scale systems (at the scale of entire
              devices).  This is accomplished
through coarse graining procedures.  For
              example, many technologically
useful materials are polycrystalline, or
              granular, in nature.  The aluminum
skin of an aircraft and the copper or
              copper-aluminum interconnects in
computer chips are but two examples at vastly
              different size scales of such
granular materials.  It is widely understood
              that many aspects of these
materials depend on the interfaces they contain, or
              their grain boundaries.
Properties of grain boundaries determine the
              reliability as well as the 
mechanical strength. This project will exploit the
              exciting opportunities and 
challenges for mathematical science in this field
              and beyond.  Specifically, 
coarse graining methods will be developed in order
              to better understand 
phenomena that occur in protein motors and in liquid
              crystals.  A related 
problem of coarse graining arises when information is to
              be extracted from 
the immense amounts of data that can be produced with
              simulations of
complex systems, such as polycrystalline materials. This
              problem of coarse 
graining at an information scale rather than a physical
              scale will also be addressed 
in this project.

