Title       : Parallel Nonlinear Elimination Methods and Software for Partial Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a0072089

Award Number: 0072089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393082             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao-Chuan Cai cai@schwarz.cs.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are the basic mathematical
              description for a wide variety of important application areas. In particular,
              this project will consider PDEs that arise in fluid dynamics, biology, and
              radiation diffusion. Because of their complexity, these equations can only be
              solved numerically by computers, and because of their particular properties
              (shock waves, sharp fronts, and local singularities) they are difficult to
              solve even then. This project will design, analyze, and implement software for
              a class of iterative methods to numerically solve nonlinear PDEs. The software
              will be provided in two forms - Matlab codes and a package interoperating with
              the PETSc library - for other researchers to apply the methods.

Technically,
              the project will study a class of nonlinear elimination algorithms for solving
              algebraic nonlinear equations with unbalanced nonlinearities. The elimination
              methods avoid traditional methods' slow convergence when local singularities
              appear by identifying "misscaled" nonlinear components and replacing them with
              a function of the remaining more uniformly scaled components. The family of
              algorithms thus devised will obtain parallelism from domain decomposition,
              scalability (with respect to problem size) from multilevel methods, and
              robustness (against local singularities) from incomplete elimination. The
              methods will be tested on three important classes of applications: transonic
              compressible flows (CFD), electric wave problems in the heart (computational
              biology), and Marshak wave problems (radiation transport). The proposed
              algorithm and software development will have a great impact on the three
              applications, and will also have substantial influence on other areas of
              computational science where large nonlinear equations need to be solved.

