Title       : Selfdual Sheaves on Singular Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0072550

Award Number: 0072550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Markus Banagl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0072550
Marcus Banagl

Complexes of sheaves which are self-dual in the
              sense of 
Verdier have become indispensable tools in studying the 
topology
              of singular spaces, a prime example being the Goresky-MacPherson-Deligne
              intersection chain sheaf on a 
stratified space with only even-codimensional
              strata. On 
spaces that include strata of odd codimension as well,
              
self-duality of the latter sheaf fails to hold in general. 
In recent
              research, we have shown that "Lagrangian structures" 
can be employed to
              construct self-dual intersection homology 
on such spaces. We propose to study
              the variance of the 
associated characteristic classes as the Lagrangian
              structure
changes. In many situations, the effective manipulation of
              
self-dual sheaves places heavy demands on the stratification 
of the
              underlying space. We propose to investigate the potential existence of a good
              "sheaf package" on weakly stratified 
spaces (the homotopically stratified
              sets of Quinn), using the technology of teardrop neighborhoods and manifold
              stratified approximate fibrations. Further, in collaboration with Sylvain
              
Cappell, we are interested in developing characteristic class
formulae for
              the signature of singular spaces in the presence of
non-trivial monodromy, via
              a synthesis of Atiyah's formula for manifolds and the Cappell-Shaneson
              signature formula.

Topology is the study of geometrical objects focusing on
              the neighborhood relations between points rather than on measurement 
of
              distances. In the last century, considerable effort has been directed towards
              studying "manifolds" -- spaces that locally look uniform, at each point and in
              each direction. This effort has 
been immensely successful; a central insight
              was that crucial information about a manifold is carried by one number: its
              
"signature," measuring intersections of geometric sub-objects 
within the
              manifold. In the last two decades, topologists have 
studied "singular" spaces
              with increasing interest, due to their numerous occurrences and applications
              within pure mathematics (algebraic geometry, number theory) and outside pure
              mathematics (mathematical physics). In contrast to a manifold, a singular
              
space may locally look different from point to point. The proposed research
              tries to define, understand, and compute topological 
invariants for singular
              spaces.


