Title       : Conformal Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2000       
File        : a0072312

Award Number: 0072312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Swiatek swiatek@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0072312

The term conformal dynamics has recently gained some currency and
              is
meant to cover real and complex dynamics. This merging of sub-areas
makes
              sense because their methods are showing more overlap than ever.  
The project
              suggests a variety of goals. The first is the study of
boundaries of
              connectedness loci for families of polynomials. This
generalizes the study of
              the boundary of the Mandelbrot set. Problems
include the metric structure of
              the boundary, including the boundary
behavior of the Riemann map of the
              complement and the distribution of
the harmonic measure. This part of the
              problem continues the on-going
work by J. Graczyk and the proposer. The second
              goal is the study of
boundaries of Siegel disks. The main problem in this area
              is deciding
whether such boundaries are Jordan curves. The proposed approach
              is
based on gaining information on the Riemann map of the Siegel disk
              by
means of a cohomological equation. The third problem is in real
dynamics
              and concerns the existence of wild attractors with additional
properties. The
              forth goal is to estimate the measure and Hausdorff
dimension of sets
              invariant under certain iterated function systems. 

To understand the
              meaning of this research in the broad perspective of
science, one has first to
              realize the role played by one-dimensional,
or conformal, dynamics. Systems
              which appear as models in natural
sciences, such as physics, astronomy,
              meteorology, economics or
ecology, involve multiple parameters.  However,
              
frequently one dominant parameter emerges
which controls long time-behavior
              of the system. In such a way the
logistic family appears in the study of many
              complicated systems. The
logistic maps are quadratic polynomials. It is useful
              to study them on
the complex plane, and thus complex quadratic polynomials
              enter the
picture. This is the first object of our study. 
In other
              situations the system begins to show quasi-periodic
or ``rotational''
              behavior. This is situation is modeled by Siegel
disks which are another
              subject of our proposed study. Wild
attractors, which are our third subject,
              refer to a very unusual
chaotic regime for a system in which two completely
              different limiting
modes of long-term behavior co-exist side by side.   The
              attractor
for an iterated function system which we will also investigate
              appears
as a projection of a certain fractal set. This kind of problem
              appears
in applications where one often has a multi-dimensional fractal
              set
which can be studied by projections onto lower-dimensional spaces.   

