Title       : Nonparametric Bayesian Modelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0072526

Award Number: 0072526
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88046              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven N. MacEachern snm@stat.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Nonparametric Bayesian Modelling

Nonparametric Bayesian models are
              motivated by the desire to more realistically
model data.  They provide a
              means of escaping the strictures of parametric 
models, while, with their
              Bayesian nature, they allow the incorporation of some
information about the
              process under investigation.  These philosophical 
advantages translate
              directly into superior performance for the models, which
have had a
              particularly strong showing wherever random effects are involved.
When these
              models are used in conjunction with the hierarchical model, they 
constitute a
              powerful modelling tool.  

The current state of the art in nonparametric
              Bayesian modelling allows one to 
propose and fit models, and a limited amount
              of work has been done on selection
of a model from some small set of candidate
              models.  The greater field of data
analysis in this context is almost
              untouched.  The reason for this is that the 
current set of models do not
              allow for a sophisticated data analysis:  the 
iterative process of proposing
              a model, assessing its fit, developing a 
modification of the model to improve
              its fit, and reducing the model if no 
substantial improvement in fit is
              found.  The main focus of this work is to 
formulate and implement
              sophisticated nonparametric Bayesian data analysis.  

To accomplish the
              above goal, this research proposal identifies five areas 
where nonparametric
              Bayesian models currently either perform poorly or cannot
be used in a
              satisfactory, general fashion.  These areas are (i) examination
of the
              relationship between covariates and response (ii) assessment of the fit
of a
              model (iii) combination of information from related experiments (iv)
modelling
              distributions with outliers and (v) working with small to moderate
sample
              sizes.  

In the proposed research, the author will develop models that will
              show strong
performance for each of the above problems.  The first class of
              models, 
dependent nonparametric processes, move beyond current models which
              are aimed
at providing a description of a single random distribution.  They
              provide a 
means of modelling a collection of random distributions which
              exhibit strong
local dependence and long-range independence.  This feature of
              the model makes 
it ideal for (i) - (iii) above.  The second class of models,
              contaminated 
models, directly targets the departure from a parametric model
              in a clear, 
easily interpretable fashion.  This type of model is ideal for
              describing 
distributions that contain outliers, and its close proximity to a
              parametric 
form will yield small sample performance that is nearly equivalent
              to the 
parametric model, providing an approach to problems (iv) and (v). 
              Additionally,
the two types of models may be freely combined, resulting in a
              single, coherent 
approach to all five problems.  The basic theoretical
              properties of the models
will be investigated, the computational strategies
              needed to fit the models
will be devised, and the models will be applied in a
              variety of settings.  
Throughout, the emphasis of the research will be on the
              development of sound
data analytic strategies so that the theoretical and
              practical advantages
of nonparametric Bayesian modelling can be realized.  

