Title       : Mathematical Descriptions of Anisotropic Fluids and Optical Pulse Propagation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0072553

Award Number: 0072553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Gregory Forest forest@amath.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072553
Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical
              Descriptions of Anisotropic Fluids and Optical Pulse
              Propagation


Abstract

0072553  Forest



The research project on
              anisotropic fluids investigates critical mathematical problems arising in the
              flow of macromolecular fluids such as liquid crystal polymers.  We analyze the
              tensorial partial differential equations that describe the flows of
              macromolecules to construct orientation patterns and determine their stability.
               These analyses yield information about flow-induced phase transitions and
              models for orientation patterns routinely observed in experiments and
              manufacturing processes.  The research project on optical pulse propagation
              employs methods of integrable systems in the analysis of pulse propagation in
              nonlinear optical fibers.  The governing model equations are perturbations of
              scalar or coupled nonlinear Schrodinger equations with small dispersion.  The
              research extends previous results on scalar equations to systems, studies new
              instability phenomena that arise from the coupling, constructs explicit
              solutions that serve as models for pulse propagation, and predicts the onset
              and fate of pulse degradation as a function of fiber properties and of pulse
              shape and power. 

The proposed research focuses on mathematical issues
              central to two important technologies:  high-performance materials and optical
              fiber communications.  Many super-strong materials are produced from liquids
              comprised of large molecules whose shape and dynamics constrain manufacturing
              processes and are responsible for material properties.  This research develops
              mathematical models for the interaction of flow and microstructure, applies
              these models to explain observed patterns and their relation to material
              properties, and analyzes other phenomena that affect processing behavior and
              properties of materials.  Long-haul optical fiber communications systems are
              well-described by special nonlinear differential equations that are amenable to
              analysis with recently-developed mathematical methods.  Observations show that
              light pulses in optical fibers degrade through ripples that emerge on the
              pulse, and this phenomenon is also seen in computer simulations.  This project
              develops rigorous mathematical understanding of why ripples form and an
              explicit algorithm that predicts pulse degradation given the properties of the
              fiber and the input pulse. This tool will be useful to design optimal pulse
              shapes for given optical fibers.




