Title       : Designing Structure and Properties of Metal-Halide Framework Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0072828

Award Number: 0072828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412458             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Martin JDMartin@NCSU.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is focused on the designed construction of metal-halide open
              framework materials out of building blocks that are disposed toward reactivity
              with small molecules and/or electron transfer.  In previous work we have
              demonstrated the utility of a halide for oxide substitution strategy to design
              novel metal-halide materials patterned after known oxide and chalcogenide
              phases.  The present proposal will build on this success and target the
              complementary investigation of the synthetic design of specific structures, and
              the design and characterization of the reactivity of novel metal-halide
              materials.  Synthetic investigations will extend principles that we have
              developed for the construction of metal halides by investigating
              template/framework interactions; and by constructions with new metal-halide
              building blocks.  Reactivity studies will probe the reversible sorption of
              small molecules and electron transfer reactions, and their respective influence
              on framework distortion and reconstruction.  Specific efforts will include:  
              1. The designed templating of framework structures to understand the role of
              the template in framework formation and control of the construction of specific
              architectures;  2. The construction of novel materials with redox active
              templates such that framework to template charge transfer can be utilized to
              design magnetic, optical and electronic properties; and  3.  The synthesis of
              halozeotypes from tetrahedral transition-metal halides to create redox tunable
              frameworks with coordinative unsaturaturation at the metal centers to create
              "active sites" in a size and shape selective environment.

This is a fertile
              area of solid-state synthesis that is leading to promising areas of
              applications in materials technology's such as liquid crystals, phosphors and
              chemical sensors.

