Title       : Groups, Lattices and Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0072839

Award Number: 0072839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Conway conway@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The main aim of the project is to describe, classify, enumerate and
              name the interesting discrete groups in low dimensional spaces, in as uniform a
              manner as possible.  My "orbifold symbol" does this very effectively for those
              that act in 2-dimensional spherical, Euclidean or hyperbolic spaces, and as
              part of the project I am writing a book on this theory with Heidi Burgiel and
              Chaim Goodman-Strauss.  This has been extended to the 3-dimensional spacegroups
              in a paper soon to be published by Conway, Delgado, Huson and Thurston.  A book
              on quaternions and octonions that I am writing with Derek Smith will contain
              chapters on the subgroups of  GO(4), and joint works with Marc
LaFortune and
              Frank Swenton will be concerned with the classification and enumeration of
              knots and 3-manifolds via the associated discrete groups in hyperbolic
              3-space.

The symmetries that objects can have are of great interest to many
              different communities both inside mathematics (number theorists, geometers,
              group theorists, Lie algebraists and topologists) and out (physicists,
              crystallographers, and artists).  This has had the unfortunate effect that
              often the same object is known under different names to different people. 
              Moreover, the standard treatments are ignorant of the recent great developments
              in the mathematical theory.  I aim to change all this by producing definitive
              classifications and systematic names for all the symmetry types of
              low-dimensional objects, and writing books and papers on the theory, addressed
              to wide audiences.  I believe this will have a great educational effect, and as
              evidence can point to that of my previous books "Sphere Packings, Lattices and
              Groups" (with Neil Sloane) and "An Atlas of Finite Groups" (with several
              co-authors) that have become standard works by performing similar services for
              other structures.


