Title       : Stochastic and Quantum Dynamics of Large Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0072098

Award Number: 0072098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350575             (Estimated)
Investigator: Horng-Tzer Yau yau@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072098
Yau

	The Euler equations were derived from microscopic Newtonian
              dynamics heuristically by Morrey in the sixties and rigorously by
              Olla-Varadhan-Yau recently (assuming the Boltzmann hypothesis).  The first part
              of the project proposes to change the underlying dynamics to quantum mechanics.
               The aim is to show that the Euler equations obtained in the quantum case are
              similar to the classical ones except all physical quantities should be computed
              quantum mechanically.  The approach will be based on the relative entropy
              method and certain extension of large deviation theory to the quantum case. 
              The second part of the project concerns the dynamics of an electron interacting
              with a lattice structure, modeled by a phonon field.  Therefore, its dynamics
              is governed by a Schrodinger equation of an electron coupled to a scalar
              quantum field.  The goal is to prove that the phase space density of the
              electron converges to a Boltzmann equation in the weak coupling limit.

	The
              underlying dynamics for electrons in a material are governed by quantum
              mechanics, or more precisely the Schrodinger equations.  Since the Schrodinger
              equations are difficult to solve no matter analytically or numerically, most
              models in use nowadays for transport behavior of electrons are semi-classical
              ones based on classical particles and diffusions.  Although these
              semi-classical models are valid approximations for large distance behavior,
              they neglect crucial quantum effects in small scales.  The aim of this project
              is to study the transport behavior starting from the first principle---the
              Schrodinger equations.  In particular, the validity of the Euler and Boltzmann
              equations will be established from the Schrodinger equations.  This is the
              first step toward understanding the quantum effects in transport behavior.  The
              long term goal is to understand quantum corrections to these equations. 

