Title       : Morphological Development in Strained Alloy Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a0072532

Award Number: 0072532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78432              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. Spencer spencerb@math.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Strained solid films are an important component of newly-developed
electronic
              devices such as the quantum-well semiconductor and the
bipolar heterojunction
              transistor.  The strain in the film is
essential to these devices because it
              modifies the electronic band gap
in the device to generate the desired
              electronic properties.  The
strain in the film, however, is also responsible
              for the generation of
instabilities during growth, resulting in nonplanar
              films with
inhomogeneous microstructure, such as "quantum dots" and
              "quantum
wires".  Because of the strain localization associated with
              the
inhomogeneous microstructure, the resulting electronic properties can
be
              enhanced due to quantum electronic effects.  Thus, there has been
intense
              interest in natural "self-assembly" of quantum dot and quantum
wire
              morphologies during the growth process.  The research of the PI
will focus on
              the analysis of mathematical models for the development
of such inhomogeneous
              microstructures in strained alloy films.  The
theoretical description of
              morphological development in strained films
is difficult because of the major
              role that elastic strain plays in
the development of the morphology; the
              generic case is that of a free
boundary or moving boundary elasticity problem.
               While there has been
a significant amount of progress made on the
              mathematical modeling of
the growth of single-component strained films, models
              for the growth
of alloy strained films are still in their infancy.  The
              proposed
research will examine the microstructure generated from the new
              alloy
film models as nonlinear solutions to the moving boundary
              elasticity
problem using a combination of both analytical and
              numerical
techniques.  The research will focus on three areas relating to
              the
formation of microstructure in strained alloy films.  First,
              the
possibility of generating a new type of microstructure based
              on
self-assembled compositional modulations in thick films will
              be
investigated by a bifurcation analysis of the nonlinear free
              boundary
problem.  Second the growth of inhomogeneous alloy quantum dots
              will
be described using a hybrid asymptotic and numerical approach, and
              the
theoretical predictions will be compared to experiments carried out
              in
parallel by a collaborator.  Finally the appropriate mathematical
modeling
              of facet corners in strained alloy crystals will be examined
through a model
              which incorporates atomic-scale behavior in a
macroscopic model for film
              growth.  The overall goal of the research
is to develop mathematical
              approaches that enable a comprehensive
theoretical description of
              nanostructure formation in strained alloy
films.

In nanoscale electronic
              devices, strained solid layers play an
important role because of the improved
              electronic properties of the
strained material.  While flat, planar strained
              films have been used
successfully, they can be susceptible to instabilities
              during the
growth process and develop nanoscale bumps ("dots").  These
              nanoscale
"quantum dots" have been found to give superior electronic
              behavior
because of quantum-physics electronic effects.  There is thus
              interest
in growing quantum dots with a controlled size and spacing to give
              a
material with specified or optimum electronic properties.  The
research
              supported by this grant focuses on the development of
mathematical models for
              describing the formation of quantum dots and
other nanostructures from
              detailed modeling of the physics of the
growth process.  In particular, the
              work will focus on the growth of
alloy films, for which theoretical
              understanding not well developed.
The goal of the theoretical work will be to
              evaluate the effect of
different growth parameters to guide the development of
              "optimum"
quantum dot structures.  To solve the mathematical problem,
              advanced
mathematical techniques will be developed and applied to determine
              the
characteristics of the solutions and how they depend on the
              material
properties and growth conditions.  In addition, the research will
              also
address the difficult question of how to incorporate
              atomic-level
behavior into a large scale model for strained film growth. 
              The
theoretical predictions will be compared to experiments conducted
              in
parallel by a collaborator here at the University at Buffalo.  The
results
              of the work will be twofold.  The understanding of how to
treat the
              mathematical issues of strained alloy film growth well will be 
improved.
              Also,  a useful "parameter map" describing the important 
physical processes
              that influence the development of nanostructures 
will be developed. This
              parameter map can be used as a
guide to the design of strained alloy
              nanostructures with specified or
optimum properties.



