Title       : Kinetic Monte Carlo Methods for Epitaxial Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a0072919

Award Number: 0072919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russel E. Caflisch caflisch@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is for computational methods in material science, in particular
              for Monte Carlo simulation of atomistic models for epitaxial growth of thin
              films. The project is multi-disciplinary, involving both mathematics and
              materials science, and multi-institutional, involving both academia and
              industry. Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulation of simple atomistic models such
              as simple cubic Solid-On-Solid (SOS) models, has been successful in describing
              many basic properties of epitaxial growth, accurately predicting quantities
              such as island size distribution and step edge density. Other quantities,
              however, including detailed surface morphology and surface reconstructions, are
              not accounted for and have important effects on growth of device-quality
              semiconductor materials. Moreover, since the description of the crystal
              structure is only schematic in the model, its interaction rates are effective
              rates and cannot be easily related to atomistic quantities. We propose to
              develop high-fidelity KMC methods that will realistically include the
              main
features of epitaxial growth, including non-cubic lattice structure,
              multiple species, and surface reconstructions.

This work will be performed
              by a postdoctoral scholar who will work in the Computational Physics Group at
              HRL Laboratories and the Computational and Applied Mathematics (CAM) group at
              UCLA. Russel Caflisch at UCLA will supervise the mathematical aspects of the
              research including mathematical modeling, algorithm development and Monte Carlo
              acceleration; Mark Gyure at HRL will supervise the materials aspects including
              physical modeling, implementation and validation by comparison to experimental
              data.

This postdoctoral scholar will have extensive interactions with Gyure
              and Caflisch, as well as with other members of their research group, from which
              the postdoc should learn a lot that is new and exciting. Development of the
              postdoc's individual research perspective will be strongly encouraged. For
              example, part of the postdoc's research will be an individual project based on
              the postdoc's research interests and for which the postdoc is primarily
              responsible. This project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences.
