Title       : Dissertation Research: An Experimental and Genetic Analysis of Two Salamander
               Contact Zones: Adaptive, Biogeographic, and Systematic Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a0072869

Award Number: 0072869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Wake wakelab@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0072869
Wake and Kuchta
Contact zones, where biological lineages once
              geographically separated come back together, are windows to the evolutionary
              process that enable the study of diverse evolutionary phenomena.  Graduate
              student Shawn Kuchta, under the direction of Dr. David Wake, will use molecular
              techniques and field experiments to study two cryptic contact zones in two
              unrelated salamander taxa.  In the Ensatina eschscholtzii (Caudata:
              Plethodontidae) complex, two distinct subspecies (oregonensis and xanthoptica)
              contact in northern California.  An earlier detailed analysis of color pattern
              characterized the interaction as broad intergradation, but new molecular data
              suggest a tight genetic border.  The hypothesis under test is that the
              "intergradation" of color pattern is introgression across a hybrid zone because
              the xanthoptica color pattern is a potential mimic of the extremely toxic newts
              of the genus Taricha.  The contact zone between oregonensis and xanthoptica
              will be characterized genetically using mitochondrial (mt) DNA molecular
              sequence data, allozymes, and Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphisms (RFLPs)
              of nuclear DNA. Tests of bird predation will employ clay models in field
              experiments designed to test the possibility of a mimicry system between
              xanthoptica and Taricha.  The second contact zone is located in the southern
              Sierra Nevada, where two clades of the California Newt, Taricha torosa,
              contact.  This border is truly cryptic: it appears that T. torosa from the
              coast ranges colonized the southern Sierra Nevada, then acquired the phenotypic
              characteristics of Sierra Nevada populations.  The causes of this phenotypic
              shift are unclear. Nuclear and mtDNA markers will be used to characterize the
              contact zone, and to investigate the cause of the phenotypic evolution of the
              southern Sierra Nevada populations.  Both of these studies are grounded in
              population-level phylogenetics and an empirical approach to the study of
              species formation and differentiation.

