Title       : A Program of Medium Energy Nuclear Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0072044

Award Number: 0072044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard  N. Boyd                        
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4896667            (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas H. Beck dhbeck@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy J. Holt  (Principal Investigator former)
              Alan M. Nathan  (Principal Investigator former)
              David W. Hertzog  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research activity that would be supported by this grant includes
              research in four broad areas.  First, there is the program of
              parity-nonconserving electron scattering at the JLab accelerator that will try
              to measure the contribution of "strange" quarks to the structure of protons and
              neutrons.  Second, there are two experiments to measure fundamental properties
              of the muon.  One experiment at BNL to measure the anomalous magnetic moment of
              the muon in order to test the so-called Standard Model of electroweak
              interactions and set important limits on "new physics" beyond that model.  The
              other is a measurement at PSI to measure the lifetime of the muon in order to
              place stringent limits on the universal Fermi coupling constant.  Third, there
              is the experiment at HERA to determine the contribution of quarks and gluons to
              the intrinsic angular momentum of the proton and neutron by measuring the
              scattering of polarized electrons on polarized targets.  Fourth, there is the
              program of real Compton scattering at JLab that seeks to test certain aspects
              of the theory of Quantum Chromodynamics and to measure new features of the
              quark structure of the proton/  Lastly, all research activities are closely
              integrated with education at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
              levels, and contribute to important outreach aimed at K-12 students.
