Title       : Mathematical Problems Arising in Aircraft Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a0072247

Award Number: 0072247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianna A. Shubov mshubov@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072247
Shubov

The primary goal of this proposal is to develop the spectral,
              asymptotic, 
and stability analysis for three increasingly more complete and
              
complicated models of an aircraft wing in a surrounding airflow. The first
              
two of these models (1-dimensional and 2-dimensional respectively) have
              
been developed in the Flight Systems Research Center (FSRC) at UCLA 
in
              collaboration with NASA Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, 
CA. The
              designing of the 3-dimensional model is in progress. Among the 
wing models
              existing in the extensive modern literature on aeroelasticity, 
the
              aforementioned ones are most physically complete. In November 
1999, the
              1-dimensional model was tested in a series of four flight 
experiments at
              Edwards Airforce Base, CA. The experimental results are 
in excellent
              agreement with the theoretical predictions of the model at 
least for low -
              energy aeroelastic modes. Currently, the collaboration is 
supported by NSF
              Grant DMS-9972748 (Interdisciplinary Grants in the 
Mathematical Sciences).
              This grant provides the support for a one year 
visit (Fall 1999 - Spring
              2000) of the principal investigator to the Center in 
order to study in depth
              the engineering and physical principles of aircraft 
wing modeling and to
              continue work on the joint project with the 
researchers of the Center. During
              recent years, the investigator's research 
has been focused on two main
              directions: (a) spectral and asymptotic 
analysis of non-self-adjoint
              operators in a Hilbert space, operators which 
are the dynamics generators of
              hyperbolic equations and systems 
containing damping terms and subject to
              dissipative boundary conditions; 
(b) applications of the results of this
              analysis to the control of distributed 
parameter systems governed by those
              equations and systems. The series of 
results and methods, developed in this
              research, has now culminated in the 
work on the aforementioned 1-dimensional
              model of a vibrating aircraft 
wing. Substantial progress has been made: the
              PI was able to obtain first in 
the literature explicit asymptotic formulas
              for the high-frequency 
aeroelastic modes and mode shapes. The objectives of
              this project include: 
(a) obtaining space-time domain representations for the
              solutions of the 1-
dimensional model; (b) obtaining spectral asymptotics and
              representations 
for the solutions of most recent 2-dimensional model; (c)
              applying 
asymptotic and spectral results to the flutter suppression problem;
              (d) 
participating in the designing of a 3-dimensional model of a wing and
              
extending the above analysis to this model.

The present project can be
              considered as a theoretical part of the broad 
wing modeling project conducted
              by the researchers at the aforementioned 
Centers. The ultimate goal of the
              entire project is to give specific practical 
recommendations to aircraft
              industry engineers working on flutter 
suppression in aircraft wings and
              tails. Flutter is a dynamic instability 
occurring in an aircraft in flight at
              a specific speed which is called a flutter 
speed. Damage inflicted by flutter
              results in significant cost to the aircraft 
industry. The objective of this
              project is to carry out a rigorous 
mathematical analysis of the aircraft wing
              model and to apply the results 
of this analysis to the problem of flutter
              control. It has been recognized in 
the engineering community that the results
              of such an analysis can provide 
new insights which are not available from
              experiments or from numerical 
simulations. In addition to the above technical
              objectives of the project, 
the principal investigator is planning to develop
              a new graduate program 
on mathematical methods in aircraft engineering for
              both mathematics and 
engineering students.

