Title       : Low-dimensional Geometry and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0072540

Award Number: 0072540
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $625000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Thurston thurston@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS-0072540
PI: William Thurston

Abstract:  A variety of
              structures on three-manifolds have contributed significantly to our
              understanding: notably, geometric structures, incompressible surfaces,
              foliations, laminations, contact structures, automatic structures on
              fundamental groups of three-manifolds, and the lattice of finite-sheeted
              coverings of three-manifolds.  There are many connections among these
              structures, but nevertheless the known connections are sporadic and often only
              loose, although suggestive of deeper connections remaining to be discovered. 
              The PI will investigate these various structures and their interrelationships,
              with an emphasis on analyzing computability, and developing techniques for
              actually constructing and computing examples.  For example, is there a
              construction to go from a taut foliation or an essential lamination to a
              geometric decomposition? And conversely, does every hyperbolic 3-manifold admit
              a foliation or at least a genuine lamination?

Three-manifolds are the
              mathematical descriptions of the possible ways for 3-dimensional space to be
              topologically interconnected. They are important because they arise through
              geometric models in every corner of mathematics.  A central theme in modern
              three-manifold topology is the Geometrization conjecture, which is the
              conjecture that all three-manifolds are made up of locally homogeneous pieces,
              that is, three-manifolds that have a geometry in which a neighborhood of any
              one point is completely identical to a neighborhood of any other point, up to
              some fixed radius.  This conjecture, proposed by the PI about 20 years ago  is
              now supported by a great deal of theoretical and empirical evidence. 
              Nonetheless, many basic questions remain unknown, including the famous Poincare
              conjecture a special case of the Geometrization conjecture which asserts that
              there is only one possible topology for a three-manifold in which every loop
              can be contracted to fit inside a small ball.  Besides geometric structures for
              3-manifolds, there are a number of other interesting structures that have
              important implications for topology, but only loose connections among them are
              understood.  Among these structures are  incompressible surfaces, foliations (a
              kind of layered structure), laminations (layered structures that only exist on
              part of the manifold), contact structures (related to Hamiltonian mechanics),
              and various combinatorial structures from group theory.  The PI will
              investigate connections among these various structures, with an emphasis on
              computability and techniques of making actual computations of examples

The
              project is supported by both the Topology Program in the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences and the Numeric, Symbolic, and Geometric Computation
              Program in the Computer and Information Science and Engineering Directorate

