Title       : Dynamics and Optimization of Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0072717

Award Number: 0072717
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114062             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrej V. Cherkaev cherkaev@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal studies optimal structured materials. These problems  
require
              non-standard methods of calculus of variations that are  
developed.  The
              first project deals with materials or structures  
with inner instabilities.
              Under ballistic impact, these materials  
dissipate and radiate the energy in
              an abnormal high rate; the  
effect can be used in various protective
              devices.
The second project aims to find the optimal structures for 
              
multi-component composites. This problem is not solved even 
for the
              simplest cases;  the optimal structures  are significantly 
different from
              optimal  two-material structures.
The third project deals with specific
              problem of ``inverse  
optimization". It aims on understanding of optimality
              of natural  
structures, as trunks of trees or human bones. Here we want to 
              
determine the goal functional of the structural optimization from  
the
              known structure and external conditions.


The three chapters of the
              proposal treat novel problem in theoretical 
material science that require
              development of new mathematical methods. 
All problems originate in science
              and engineering.
The first projects is concerned with new structures with a
              very high ability to 
resist shocks. Such materials can be used in various
              protective devices or  
containers.  The second project addresses optimal
              structures of   
composites that are made of three or more components. The
              study of such 
structures is demanded by many engineering applications because
              the  
majority of natural or artificial composites are made of more than 
              
two materials. The last project aims to develop mathematical  
methods for
              evaluating the optimality of biological structures.  
The goal here is to
              understand in what sense biology is optimizing its 
structures and to use
              biological "solutions" to evolutionary challenge 
in engineering applications.
               

