Title       : NMR Studies of Density Wave Phases, Superconductivity, and Polymer Electronic
               Conduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0072524

Award Number: 0072524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Gilbert Clark clark@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a senior faculty member for
              experimental investigations using NMR to measure the microscopic static and
              dynamic properties of the electrons that govern the key properties of
              superconductors, density wave materials, and conducting polymers. The project
              includes electrical transport and ESR measurements, often concurrently with the
              NMR.  The measurements will be performed at extremes of temperature, pressure,
              and magnetic field.  The studies in superconductivity include rf-induced flux
              lattice annealing using NMR spin echoes and measurements of apparently p-wave
              superconductivity in the organic conductor (TMTSF)(2)PF(6) under pressure. 
              Experiments on density wave materials will include the study of the magnetic
              field-induced spin-density wave (SDW) phase of (TMTSF)(2)PF(6) under pressure,
              investigation of thermal SDW phasons below 4 K in (TMTSF)(2)P(1-x)As(x)F(6) to
              resolve the conflict in interpreting the SDW, and measurement of repinning
              dynamics.  NMR and ESR will be used to investigate the mechanisms for electron
              charge propagation and the role of disorder in "metallic" and metal-insulating
              polypyrrole-PF(6).  High frequency NMR instrumentation that benefits this
              research and the larger user community will be developed.  This mix of
              instrumentation techniques and challenging research problems will provide
              valuable preparation of the participating students and postdocs for their
              future academic or industrial careers.
%%%
This individual investigator award
              is to a senior faculty member for a project that uses nuclear magnetic
              resonance, electron spin resonance, and electrical transport to study the
              properties of electrons in several materials, such as superconductors, density
              wave systems, and an electrically conducting polymer.  Many of the measurements
              involve extremes of high field, high frequency, high pressure, and low
              temperatures, along with some development of the instrumentation to carry them
              out.  One of the major goals of this project is to investigate the response of
              collective electron states, such as vortices in superconductors and pinned
              density waves in quasi one-dimensional materials, to an external driving force.
               Other goals are to explore the unusual superconducting state of an organic
              superconductor under pressure and to determine the microscopic mechanisms of
              electrical conduction in a conducting polymer.  Results gained from this work
              should contribute to knowledge of the basic physics that forms the underpinning
              for using superconductivity and conducting polymers in technical applications. 
              The advances of magnetic resonance instrumentation into extremes of parameter
              space will benefit other groups exploiting these methods.  This mix of
              instrumentation techniques and challenging research problems will provide
              valuable preparation of the participating students and postdocs for their
              future academic or industrial careers.
***

