Title       : Conference: Homogenization and Materials Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0072259

Award Number: 0072259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Berlyand   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald W. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Subramaniya I. Hariharan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              An International Conference, "Homogenization and Materials Science", in
honor
              of the late Professor Ulrich Hornung of Bundeswehr University Munich,
Germany,
              will take place at the University of Akron, Akron, Ohio, during
September 15 -
              17, 2000.  The purpose of this interdisciplinary conference
is to bring
              together researchers from interacting areas of Materials
Science.  In
              particular special focus will be paid to the latest scientific
and industrial
              developments concerning homogenization theory and methods.
Homogenization is a
              powerful mathematical tool for solving, both static (effective
properties) and
              dynamic (wave propagation, transport equations) problems in
inhomogeneous
              materials with periodic and random microstructure. This
includes prediction of
              mechanical and dielectrical properties of
composites, shape memory materials, 
              materials undergoing phase
transitions, and polymeric composites. Solutions of
              these problems provide
guidance in the design of new materials possessing the
              specific properties 
required by modern technological needs. The conference
              shall address both 
modeling and computational aspects of these problems. This
              conference will bring
together the leading scientists from Europe and the U.S.
              who are working on
homogenization problems and applications in materials
              science.

Modern electronic and mechanical devices require materials with
              specific
properties in their design.  For example, the automotive industry
              seeks
lightweight yet very strong materials.  Such materials do not
              necessarily
occur naturally.  Hence, these materials must be engineered from
              existing
resources.  One approach is to form a composite material.  A
              composite
material is made from a blend of other materials.  Fundamental
              questions in
the design of composites are (1) what materials should be used to
              form the
composite, (2) how much of each material should be used in the
              composite,
and (3) how should the materials be combined to form the composite?
               In the
latter case the geometric patterns of the combined materials (think
              of
plywood) play an important role.  Materials scientists and engineers try
              to
answer the above keeping in mind the specific properties required from
              the
resulting composite.  Practical experience and trial and error
              approaches
are common means of obtaining answers.  Within the past two decades
              many
new tools have been developed by the applied mathematics community to
              help
answer these questions.  These tools fall under the heading of what
              is
called homogenization theory.   One reason for holding this conference
              will
be to highlight the use of these new tools.  A second purpose of
              the
proposed conference will be to highlight the formulation and solution
              of
new homogenization problems arising in materials design.  For example,
              one
area that may further benefit from the utilization of homogenization
              tools
is polymer-based composites.  Hence, the conference should help answer
              two
questions: (1) what should be the future directions in
              homogenization
theory based upon the current needs of modern technology (in
              short, which
problems should be solved), and (2) what is the best way of
              utilizing newly
developed mathematical tools to solve these problems in order
              to enhance
the use of homogenization methods in materials design?  These
              questions
will be answered through both speaker presentations and a panel
              discussion,
which will summarize the current state of the subject and future
              trends.


