Title       : Analysis and Computation of Shape Sensitivities for Elliptic Interface Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0072438

Award Number: 0072438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72832              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa G. Stanley stanley@math.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT.

DMS-0072438
Lisa G. Stanley
Department of Mathematics
Univeristy
              of Montana


Engineers, mathematicians and other scientists who use
              mathematical 
models to describe physical systems often need to answer the
              question: 
``How does the system response change as system parameters
              change?'' 
For example, how does the airflow around an airplane wing change
              as
the shape of the wing changes, and how does this affect drag? 
Sensitivity
              analysis seeks to answer such questions.  The sensitivity
provides
              quantitative information which can be useful as a 
mathematical tool to gain
              insight into the behavior of a system.
This proposal deals with the analysis
              and design of
computational methods for approximating sensitivities for a very
              specific 
class of problems.  The research focuses on shape sensitivity
              calculations
for interface problems.  These problems arise in the analysis
of
              a variety of physical systems such as groundwater flow through 
different
              types of sediment as well as manufacturing processes such as die 
casting
              problems and alloy solifidification problems.
In die casting, for example,
              there is an interface
between the solidifying part and the mold itself.
When
              analyzing such a process, the mold and the part may be considered 
as one
              composite material, and in order to optimize the casting process, 
the
              designer needs to determine the sensitivity of the temperature 
throughout the
              composite material to small changes in the thickness 
of the respective
              component materials.   Since the mold and the 
manufactured part consist of
              different materials which have different 
heat conductivity properties, the
              mathematical equation governing 
the cooling process has a solution which
              lacks smoothness at the 
interface.  For these types of problems, computing
              the sensitivity 
requires a different, and more clever, approximation scheme
              than 
that which is typically used to determine the temperature.  The
              
current research attempts to analyze and exploit the mathematical 
structure
              of these problems and to modify existing numerical methods 
in order to
              develop a computational algorithm which is accurate, 
efficient and reasonable
              to implement.  Estimates regarding inclusion 
of such techniques in the design
              of rocket engines show that design 
cycle time could be reduced from one year
              to one month.  Results
of this magnitude make the development of such
              
computational tools critical for the national interest
both in cost savings
              during the design stage and in remaining
on the forefront of new
              technology.

This project investigates the use of
domain decomposition
              techniques for the development of 
accurate and efficient computational
              algorithms for shape 
sensitivity calculations.  Specifically, the work
              involves
the implementation of Continuous Sensitivity Equation
Methods
              (C-SEMs) in order to derive infinite dimensional
sensitivity equations which
              usually take the form of
partial differential equations.  The research
              focuses
on elliptic interface problems containing 
parameters which determine
              the spatial 
location or the shape of the interface.  The  resulting shape
              
sensitivities exhibit discontinuities across the interface.  
Efficient
              computational algorithms for this
class of problems rely on two essential
              components.  The first 
is the mathematical analysis needed to establish
              fundamental 
properties such as existence, uniqueness and regularity.  
The
              second component is 
the clever choice of a numerical method which is
              suitable
for solving the equations.  The theoretical analysis guides
the
              construction of a computational method which exploits 
the problem structure. 
              Specifically, an iterative, nonoverlapping
domain decomposition algorithm is
              used to accurately capture 
discontinuities in the sensitivity variable. 
              



