Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics in Heterogeneous and Random Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0072311

Award Number: 0072311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99034              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel A. Kuske rachel@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072311
Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Dynamics in
              Heterogeneous and Random Systems

Abstract

0072311   Kuske



The
              project covers four areas of research, which all use a combination of
              asymptotics and computation. The first goal is to understand how small noise
              alters transitions in nonlinear dynamics, focusing on interface dynamics,
              transitions in bursters, and oscillations in lasers with delayed feedback. 
              This research also contributes to a broad characterization of the effects of
              noise in nonlinear systems, useful for effective modeling.  The second
              objective is to predict and understand localized behavior in coupled
              oscillators, coupled laser arrays, calcium oscillations, and structural
              dynamics. The strength of the localization can depend on competing effects in a
              non-uniform way. The third objective is to understand the effects of
              heterogeneity on the dynamics of patterns in reaction-diffusion problems, using
              both envelope equation approximations and computations of the full model.  The
              fourth goal is developing new methods for pricing financial derivatives. To
              price a variety of options, we combine methods for moving boundaries in partial
              differential equations with singular perturbation methods.

The overall goal
              of the project is to develop asymptotic theory and methods for mathematical
              models of heterogeneous complex systems.  Such methods are often combined with
              computations in order to completely analyze these models.  When including
              disorder or inhomogeneities in a mathematical model, we try to answer the
              following questions:  Does the heterogeneity cause qualitative changes in the
              behavior of the system?  Is the model highly sensitive to physical variations
              or computational inaccuracies?  Is the model realistic, and can similar models
              be used as accurate descriptions or predictors for the "real world" system? 
              What are the deficiencies of the model, and how might it be improved?  In this
              project we focus on mathematical models in which heterogeneity plays a
              significant role, including models of laser dynamics, chemical reactions,
              calcium concentrations in cells, neuronal dynamics, engineering structures, and
              financial products.


