Title       : Algebraic Methods in Systems Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0072383

Award Number: 0072383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim Rosenthal Rosenthal.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072383
Rosenthal

Mathematically, convolutional codes can be viewed as
              linear systems over 
a finite field. The study of these codes requires a good
              understanding of 
the algebraic representation of linear systems.  The
              proposed project 
therefore addresses a number of issues in mathematical
              systems theory and 
in coding theory.  The main objectives of the proposal
              are: 1. New 
methods for constructing convolutional codes with a large free
              distance 
and a relatively small degree. 2.  New techniques to tackle the
              decoding 
problem of convolutional codes in an algebraic manner. 3. An
              
investigation of the class of low density parity check convolutional codes
              
which constitutes a natural generalization of the class of low density parity
              
check codes. For this project it is the ultimate goal to algebraically
              
construct low density parity check convolutional codes whose encoding 
and
              decoding complexity is `near linear' and whose performance is `near
              
capacity'.

Convolutional codes are used in the data transmission of many
              
communication systems. Applications range from airborne satellite
              
transmission systems to terrestrial telephone lines.  Most pictures
              
transmitted from deep space involve in one way or another some encoding
              
with a convolutional code. It is the goal of the proposed research to
              
construct new powerful convolutional codes which can be efficiently 
encoded
              and decoded. Having such new codes would have several 
benefits. First and for
              all it would allow the construction of smaller and 
more energy efficient
              transmission devices which are still capable of doing 
reliable data
              communication. The research project will necessitate a 
mathematical
              investigation into the algebraic structure of convolutional 
codes. As it was
              outlined in the proposal this mathematical research could 
also lead to a new
              cryptographic protocol.

