Title       : Quantum Transport and Metallic Nanocohesion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0072703

Award Number: 0072703
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Stafford stafford@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports theoretical research on the cohesive and conducting
              properties of atomic-scale metal structures, with a particular emphasis on
              understanding the interrelation of electrical conduction and metallic cohesion.
               Motivation is provided by recent advances in scanning tunneling and atomic
              force microscopy, which have made it possible to fabricate and manipulate
              metallic structures atom by atom, as well as to measure the electrical and
              mechanical properties of spontaneously occuring atomic-scale structures.  A
              phenomenon of fundamental interest is conductance quantization: it has been
              found that the electrical resistance of atomic-scale contacts formed in many
              metals is nearly equal to the resistance quantum h/e2 divided by an even
              integer.  The mechanical analogue of conductance quantization has also been
              observed in gold nanocontacts: the cohesive force of the contact was found to
              exhibit quantum jumps on the scale of a nano-Newton, which were synchronized
              with the quantized steps in the resistance.  A unified theoretical treatment of
              the cohesive and conducting properties of metallic nanostructures in terms of
              the electronic scattering matrix, which gave quantitative agreement with the
              experiments in gold, has been developed.  The goal of the proposed research is
              to further elaborate this theoretical framework and to explore its implications
              for possible applications in nanomachines and nanoelectronics.
%%%
This grant
              supports theoretical research on the cohesive and conducting properties of
              atomic-scale metal structures, with a particular emphasis on understanding the
              interrelation of electrical conduction and metallic cohesion.  Motivation is
              provided by recent advances in scanning tunneling and atomic force microscopy,
              which have made it possible to fabricate and manipulate metallic structures
              atom by atom, as well as to measure the electrical and mechanical properties of
              spontaneously occuring atomic-scale structures.  A phenomenon of fundamental
              interest is conductance quantization: it has been found that the electrical
              resistance of atomic-scale contacts formed in many metals is nearly equal to
              the resistance quantum h/e2 divided by an even integer.  The mechanical
              analogue of conductance quantization has also been observed in gold
              nanocontacts: the cohesive force of the contact was found to exhibit quantum
              jumps on the scale of a nano-Newton, which were synchronized with the quantized
              steps in the resistance.  A unified theoretical treatment of the cohesive and
              conducting properties of metallic nanostructures in terms of the electronic
              scattering matrix, which gave quantitative agreement with the experiments in
              gold, has been developed.  The goal of the proposed research is to further
              elaborate this theoretical framework and to explore its implications for
              possible applications in nanomachines and nanoelectronics.
***

