Title       : Metal Nanoshperes Modified With Molecular Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0072034

Award Number: 0072034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angel E. Kaifer akaifer@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              While metal clusters, metal colloidal particles and semiconductor nanocrystals
              have been very attractive subjects of research work for several decades, the
              last few years have witnessed a clear upsurge of interest in metal and
              semiconductor particles with nanometer dimensions.  The rapidly increasing
              number of research publications in this field correlates with the recent
              development of methodology to chemically modify the surface of these particles
              with organic monolayers, which can stabilize and modulate the physical and
              chemical properties of the nanoparticles.  This research project concentrates
              on the preparation and characterization of metal (gold, platinum and palladium)
              nanoparticles modified with monolayers of molecular receptors.  The key concept
              driving this research work is that the molecular recognition properties of the
              surface-immobilized hosts may be combined with the intrinsic properties of the
              nanoparticles to yield materials with novel and interesting properties.  For
              instance, the catalytic ability of platinum and palladium surfaces may be
              modulated by the binding properties of the hosts to produce new catalysts with
              enhanced or modified selectivity.  Surface modified nanoparticles can also be
              utilized for the preparation of novel composite materials and for  the
              development of new types of sensors.
%%%
The proposed research work will
              increase our fundamental knowledge of these inorganic/organic composite
              materials.  The initial stages of the work will focus on the characterization
              of gold nanospheres prepared by methods already developed in the P.I.'s
              laboratory.  As this work moves forward, efforts will gradually turn to the
              preparation of platinum and palladium nanoparticles modified with molecular
              hosts, their characterization and their use as new catalysts.

In addition to
              the scientific significance of the proposed work, funding of this proposal will
              allow the continued training and development of underrepresented scientists in
              the P.I.'s group.  During the 1990's, five out of a total of eight Ph.D.
              graduates from the group were of Hispanic origin.  The only two students
              obtaining a M.S. degree for the group were also Hispanic.  Currently, four out
              of a total of nine graduate students in the group are also Hispanic.

