Title       : RUI: Studies of Single Molecule Vibrational Spectra and Zero Bias Features Using
               Point-Contact Tunnel Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0072148

Award Number: 0072148
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169812             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darin T. Zimmerman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this project a new tunneling configuration will be used to study the
              vibrational spectra of molecules adsorbed on metal surfaces and to perform
              experiments to understand the physical origin of the zero-bias feature (ZBF)
              that appears to be a universal aspect of the technique. The technique uses
              inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy (IETS) adapted to a new
              configuration, the "self-assembling tunnel junction" (SATJ), consisting of two
              metal wires in a cross geometry. In SATJ, a rare-gas barrier film replaces the
              oxide layer of the metal-oxide-metal junctions normally used in IETS.
              Preliminary experiments have demonstrated that with this technique it is
              possible to distinguish between acetylene molecules chemisorbed on the metal
              electrodes and those that are either physisorbed or incorporated in the
              rare-gas film.  Regardless of the composition of the tunnel barrier film, all
              data show a region around zero-bias voltage where the junction conductance is
              significantly reduced, the ZBF.  In this project isotope substitution
              experiments will be performed to measure the ultimate sensitivity of the
              technique.  The goal is to observe and study the spectra of single molecules in
              order to understand the adsorption and tunneling electron-molecule interaction.
               The ZBF will be examined as a function of the temperature, barrier film
              composition, electrode composition, and varying junction conductance with the
              aim to determine the mechanism behind this poorly understood effect.  This
              research will be performed in an undergraduate institution.  Undergraduate
              students will participate in this project and will learn skills in a research
              area that will prepare them for graduate school and future employment.
%%%
In
              this project a new approach will be used to study the chemical and physical
              properties of molecules adsorbed on metal surfaces, and to determine a poorly
              understood effect that is present in these and other experiments, the so-called
              Zero-Bias Feature (ZBF).  With the new experimental approach isotopes of
              acetylene and of carbon monoxide will be measured to determine the ultimate
              sensitivity of the technique.  The goal is to observe and study individual
              molecules and thereby obtain a better understanding of the adsorption of
              molecules on surfaces.  The behavior of the ZBF will be studied in detail in
              order to bring about a better understanding of this phenomenon.  This project
              will be pursued in an undergraduate institution and undergraduate students will
              participate in the research.  They will thereby acquire skills in a field of
              research that will prepare them for advanced training in graduate school and
              for future employment.
*** 

