Title       : Collaborative Research of the Joint Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0072711

Award Number: 0072711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Wiescher wiescher.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grant J. Mathews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ani Aprahamian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal aims as part of the JINA collaboration at the
              improved
experimental study of nuclear reactions, relevant for the
              nucleosynthesis in stellar hydrogen and helium burning scenarios.  The
              measurements are performed at the KN&JN high current
accelerators at the
              University of Notre Dame. One ocus of the measurements will be
the study of
              reactions in the NeNa cycle which is of importance for
hydrogen shell burning
              during late stellar evolution and also for explosive
hydrogen burning in
              novae. For helium burning, the experiments will
concentrate on the measurement
              of stellar neutron sources during the
red giant phase of stellar evolution and
              in supernovae shockfronts.
The experiments are designed for using forward and
              inverse
kinematics in a complementary manner. The measurements will be
              performed using a
re-circulating gas-target system which can be operated with
              different
light and heavy target gas material (H,He,Ne). The reaction
              products
will be measured with a set of Ge-clover detectors for
              gamma-radiation
and a dedicated Si-strip detector array for particles.


