Title       : RUI: Granular Materials, Fluid Mixing, and Related Nonlinear Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0072203

Award Number: 0072203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360488             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry P. Gollub jgollub@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims at extending our understanding of nonlinear physical
              phenomena, especially those involving granular materials and fluids, using
              small scale laboratory experiments and involving undergraduate students. For
              granular materials, both macroscopic stress and microscopic motion will be
              determined utilizing sensitive force measurements and rapid tracking of large
              numbers of particles. Specific experiments include: (a) A study of rotationally
              sheared and air-fluidized granular material, to determine how momentum and
              energy are transported; (b) Studies of frictional dynamics of planar layers,
              e.g. of the influence of particle properties on static strength and motion; (c)
              Experiments on avalanching and flows in inclined layers. The behavior of
              granular materials will be compared with that of conventional solids and
              liquids.  Some of these experiments have applications to understanding
              geophysical phenomena. A second focus is the study of fluid mixing phenomena,
              especially the dramatic differences between mixing in chaotic and turbulent
              flows. Precise imaging methods will allow a determination of the factors
              controlling efficiency in mixing and transport, with and without chemical
              reaction. The project involves both undergraduate students and a postdoctoral
              trainee, who will be well prepared for a career in which both undergraduate
              teaching and research are important.
%%%
This project aims at extending our
              understanding of nonlinear physical phenomena, especially those involving
              granular materials and fluids, using small scale laboratory experiments and
              involving undergraduate students. Granular materials exhibit a transition
              between solid and fluid states that has important consequences for
              understanding earthquakes and avalanches, and for the industrial processing of
              materials such as pharmaceuticals. In the experiments to be conducted, the
              granular material will be sheared or excited in various ways, and both the
              internal forces and particle motion will be studied quantitatively. Tests of
              recent theories will be made in order to understand and predict how these
              materials flow, and the internal forces they can sustain. A second focus is the
              study of fluid mixing phenomena, where an impurity is  gradually dispersed in a
              fluid. Understanding the dramatic differences between mixing in chaotic and
              turbulent flows is an important goal. Precise imaging methods will allow a
              determination of the factors controlling efficiency in mixing and transport,
              with and without chemical reaction. The project involves both undergraduate
              students and a postdoctoral trainee, who will be well prepared for a career in
              which both undergraduate teaching and research are important.




