Title       : Directed Assembly of Metal-Cyanide Cluster Magnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0072691

Award Number: 0072691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Long jlong@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to the University of California at Berkeley supports the work of
              Professor Jeffrey R. Long, Department of Chemistry, aimed at the synthesis of
              high-nuclearity transition-metal cyanide clusters that can function as
              single-molecule magnets.  The project is supported by the Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program in the Chemistry Division
              and by the Solid State Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Science.
              A series of cubic clusters with varying metal constituents will be prepared. 
              The cluster geometry is based on a single cage excised from a Prussian Blue
              type structure and consists of a cube of metal atoms with each edge spanned by
              a linear cyanide bridge and each corner capped by a tridentate tacn
              (1,4,7-triazacyclononane) ligand.  Two variants of the cluster are presently
              known, one with eight cobalt atoms, and one with four chromium and four cobalt
              atoms.  Paramagnetic metal centers will be used to prepare additional members
              of the series, giving rise to a series of compounds with total ground state
              spin states ranging from S=0 to S=10, in even integral values.  Larger clusters
              will also be synthesized in order to achieve higher total spin states.  This
              can be accomplished by removing the capping ligand from one of the reactant
              molecules to promote cluster growth.  A related series of compounds with an
              edge-bridged cubic structure will be prepared; total spin values as high as
              S=26 are expected.  Some less symmetric prolate double-cube clusters will also
              be pursued, as well as a ferromagnetically coupled pentagonal bipyramidal
              cluster with an S=18 ground state. The clusters synthesized in this research
              will exhibit axial magnetic anisotropy as well as overall magnetic anisotropy. 
              Magnetic behavior will be examined using variable temperature susceptibility
              measurements and, when warranted, physical parameters relevant to data
              storage.
 
Cluster magnets have potential applications in high-density data
              storage and for investigation of phenomena such as quantum tunneling of
              magnetization. These compounds have somewhat simpler structures and magnetic
              exchange pathways than some systems that have been studied previously, and so
              it is anticipated that determining important design features will be more
              straightforward. Students involved in this project will learn advanced
              synthesis methods and have an interdisciplinary experience in chemistry,
              materials, and physics relevant to nanoscience and engineering.

