Title       : Dynamics of Polynomial Diffeomorphisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a0072163

Award Number: 0072163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82377              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Smillie smillie@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Some of the most impressive recent work in dynamical systems has been 
an
              outgrowth of the study of dynamics in one complex variable. The 
fundamental
              assumption motivating this proposal is that complex 
methods have an important
              role to play in dynamics when the number of 
dimensions is greater than one as
              well.  The subject of this proposal 
is a particular "model family" of
              dynamical systems, the polynomial 
diffeomorphisms in two complex dimensions.
              The complex Henon 
diffeomorphisms which are a notable special case. These are
              perhaps 
the simplest invertible holomorphic dynamical system with interesting
              
dynamics. One of the lessons of dynamics in one variable is that 
there is a
              range of dynamical behaviors starting with expanding maps 
and continuing with
              Misurewicz maps, semi-hyperbolic and 
Collet-Eckmann maps.  The two variable
              analog of the expanding 
property is hyperbolicity. This proposal is focused
              on understanding 
the two variable analog of the semi-hyperbolic condition
              which we 
call quasi-hyperbolicity. In one variable these conditions are
              
related to the recurrence properties of critical points.  In two 
variables
              the notion of critical point needs to be replaced by other 
concepts such as
              regularity of stable and unstable manifolds. An 
interesting example of
              quasi-hyperbolic diffeomorphisms are real 
polynomial diffeomorphisms of
              maximal entropy such as limits of 
horseshoes in the real Henon case. Though
              several questions about the 
behavior of such diffeomorphisms have been
              answered in previous work 
a number of open questions remain.


The
              introduction of the computer has increased the usefulness of 
simple
              deterministic mathematical models in a number of sciences. An 
illustrative
              example is the logistic map which can be used to 
describe the behavior of a
              single insect population in successive 
years. When the mathematical model is
              linear there is a well 
developed underlying theory. When the model is
              non-linear there are 
important theoretical questions which we have not yet
              been able to 
address. Recently mathematicians have made important
              breakthroughs in 
understanding the logistic map. One technique which proved
              essential 
was the consideration of an associated complex dynamical system. My
              
proposal addresses some of the problems of using similar complex 
techniques
              when the system involved has dimension greater than one 
(for example when
              there are two interacting populations.)


