Title       : SGER: Proposal for an NCEAS Workgroup: Modeling Spatially Structured Dynamics in
               Marine Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0072836

Award Number: 0072836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55513              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos D. Robles crobles@calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Los Angeles
	      5151 State University Dr
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-0111

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,9229,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Robles will use this SGER award to assemble a workgroup of colleagues to use
              innovative modeling techniques and progressive empirical approaches to model
              spatially structured dynamics in marine communities.  The workgroup will
              consist of Hal Batchelder (UC Berkeley), Doug Donalson (UC Santa Barbara),
              Roger Nisbet (UC Santa Barbara), Robert Desharnais (California State at Los
              Angeles), Mark Denny (Stanford University), and Carlos Robles along with his
              students and Post Docs.  The workgroup will utilize the NCEAS format.   

The
              paradigm that governed the thoughts of many researchers for a generation - and
              which therefore underlay explanations of such diverse phenomena as intertidal
              zonation, maintenance of diversity, and stable coexistence of predators and
              prey - has begun to be questioned as new observations and experiments have been
              made. The original paradigm consists of the keystone predator hypothesis and
              the refugia hypothesis, which emphasize the role of predation in determining
              prey population structure.  In this study, the researchers will examine the
              alternative paradigm of Spatially Structured Dynamics, in which new spatially
              explicit population models (SEPMs) must consider shifts in the relative levels
              of predation and prey recruitment over environmental gradients, rather than
              hiatuses in predation caused by physical stresses alone.  Prior attempts at
              such spatial modeling of intertidal communities have been limited in focus or
              else have been based on hypothetical conditions with no empirically based
              parameterizations.  Robles and the workgroup will construct SEPMs based on
              twenty years of experimental data that Robles has collected on mussel
              population structure at rocky shores along Pacific coast.  Two alternative
              modeling approaches will be used, a "stochastic arena model" using
              cellular-automata, and an individual-based model.  The dual thrust will allow
              the researchers to take advantage of the strengths of each approach.  The
              workgroup will validate the models in several ways including the comparison of
              predicted maps with observed GIS maps, thus pushing modeling practice to
              greater levels of realism.  This project will be a unique opportunity to bring
              together a group of PIs with strong ecological modeling expertise.  The
              incorporation of strong field data into new spatially explicit population
              models may have substantial implications 

