Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Investigations on Field-Induced Instabilities in
               Magnetic Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0072901

Award Number: 0072901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336205             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weili Luo Luo@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an experimental condensed matter physics project that will investigate
              fluid instabilities that are induced in magnetic fluids by temperature
              gradients and external magnetic fields. The instabilities are expressed by
              changes in the surface topology, magnetic density and convection processes in
              the fluids. The primary approach is to use a new technique based on laser
              heating of thin films of the magnetic fluid. This produces a temperature
              gradient which, together with a magnetic field, gives rises to body forces in
              the fluid and leads to instabilities similar to buoyancy driven
              Rayleigh-Bernard convection instabilities in binary fluids. The resulting
              deformations of the fluid lead to diffraction of the laser beam traversing the
              fluid. The resulting diffraction patterns can be analyzed to follow the
              temporal and spatial development of the fluid instabilities. The project
              includes a theoretical collaboration with Professor Jie Huang of Michigan State
              University. The research provides excellent training for graduate students. The
              magnetic and electric field induced spatio-temporal patterns and instabilities
              in the fluids will be videotaped and used as part of general education
              activities in schools and museums.
%%%
This is an experimental condensed
              matter physics project the deals with the time-varying and space-varying
              changes in ferrofluids. Ferrofluids are colloidal suspensions of microscopic
              magnetic particles that distort in complex fashion when exposed to a magnetic
              or electric field. The experiments use thin ferrofluid films exposed to a
              magnetic field. A laser beam shines on the fluid, creates a concentration
              gradient in the magnetic particle density and leads to diffraction patterns in
              the transmitted laser light. The diffraction patterns will be analyzed
              theoretically to obtain information about the complex temporal and spatial
              "instabilities" in the fluids. The research provides excellent training for
              graduate students. The magnetic and electric field induced spatio-temporal
              patterns in the fluids will be videotaped and used as part of general education
              activities in schools and museums.




