Title       : Studies of Nucleons and Nuclei Using the Electromagnetic Probe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0072404

Award Number: 0072404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $504004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Demetrius J. Margaziotis dmargaz@calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Konrad A. Aniol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin B. Epstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Los Angeles
	      5151 State University Dr
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-0111

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072404
Margaziotis
	In the proposed work we will study the
              fundamental
structure of the nucleus of the atom and the nature of
              the
constituent parts of the nucleus, the neutrons and protons.
              Measurements
will be made using the very precise, intense, and energetic
              electron
beam produced by the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator
              Facility.
Most of the experiments will study atoms whose nucleus has no
              more
than two protons and two neutrons. When electrons are used to probe
such
              relatively simple systems one can compare the results to very
accurate
              theoretical predictions. Experiments will be performed on helium
nuclei to
              investigate the structure of these systems under extreme conditions
including
              those in which the protons and neutrons are very close to each other.
Other
              experiments will bombard the hydrogen nucleus, which consists of a
single
              proton, to study particular features of the proton structure. One
experiment
              will study the structure of a the complex lead nucleus.
	In support of these
              measurements we will continue our work in developing and building the target
              devices used to contain the materials that are being bombarded by the electron
              beam. This work involves building structures that can
contain high pressure
              gases at temperatures a few degrees above absolute zero.
We will also build a
              cooled lead target that will allow us to use the high
power electron beam
              without melting the lead. In all these efforts we will
continue to place
              particular emphasis on working with students, particularly
undergraduate
              students and selected high school students and teachers. This
effort is being
              coordinated with an outreach program that we are leading directed
towards high
              schools in the local area that have large populations of minority students.


