Title       : Value Speculation for VLIW and EPIC Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0072926

Award Number: 0072926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199936             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Conte conte@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses new techniques to break pure dependencies for horizontal
              (EPIC, VLIW) microarchitectures. The ultimate limit to schedule length is the
              longest chain through the computation. The research presents techniques for
              dependence chain splitting, which attack pure dependence chains using methods
              presented earlier for superscalar microarchitectures. The techniques for
              superscalar processors are not directly applicable to VLIW or EPIC
              architectures, since such architectures have no or little dynamic speculation
              mechanisms. Essentially, they execute code that is statically speculated by the
              compiler. The core idea of this work is to break a chain at a beneficial split
              point, and then speculatively execute the second half of the chain. This
              project develops techniques to find the best split point(s) of a region of
              code, develop hardware-based very low overhead value profiling, study
              VLIW/EPIC-specific value predictor designs, investigate heuristics to address
              the penalty branches to patch-up code, look into methods for adding confidence
              prediction for VLIW/EPIC value speculation, and study the potential of
              software-only value speculation. Issues such as register pressure impact and
              branch insertion for value speculation across control flow are also being
              explored.
