Title       : Spatio-temporal Chaos in Systems of Broken Symmetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0072077

Award Number: 0072077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eberhard Bodenschatz eb22@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This experimental condensed matter physics project deals with non-linear
              phenomena and patterns appearing in gases and fluids. The research is focused
              on the influence of broken symmetries on spatio-temporal chaos in dissipative
              pattern forming systems. As a prototype system the convection of a fluid layer
              with large lateral extent will be studied experimentally.  First the
              coexistence region between thermal and shear driven instability will be
              investigated. Special attention will be given to the localized turbulent bursts
              and their relation to shear flow driven turbulence. Second the influence of
              spatial forcing on spatio-temporal chaos for convection in inclined and
              horizontal layers will be studied. Graduate students involved in the project
              receive training in fundamental experimental techniques, like high resolution
              digital image capture, digital image processing, precision temperature
              measurement and control techniques. In addition the graduate students will
              participate in the Cornell's interdisciplinary NSF IGERT program on Nonlinear
              Systems. This training will prepare them especially well for the challenging
              interdisciplinary workplace of the 21st century.
%%%
This experimental
              condensed matter physics project deals with non-linear phenomena and patterns
              appearing in gases and fluids. Ordered patterns are ubiquitous in nature. We
              can observe them on scales from a few centimeters in the ripples of the
              windblown sand to kilometers in cloud streets. In both cases the patterns are
              fueled by wind or by hot air rising from the earth's surface. Indeed such
              patterns occur in many driven systems. Usually those patterns are disordered in
              space and are changing constantly. We call such a behavior spatio-temporal
              chaotic. To date a unifying understanding of spatio-temporal chaos does not
              exist. However, an understanding of spatio-temporal chaos is very important
              since it may lead to the control of systems as complex as cardiac fibrillation
              and the generation of turbulence. We will investigate, how external modulations
              alter spatio-temporal chaos and turbulent bursts in convection of fluids.
              Graduate students involved in the project receive training in fundamental
              experimental techniques and cutting edge technologies. In addition the graduate
              students will participate in Cornell's interdisciplinary NSF IGERT program on
              Nonlinear Systems. This training will prepare them especially well for the
              challenging interdisciplinary workplace of the 21st century.





