Title       : Quartz Crystal Microbalance Studies of Atomic-Scale Friction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0072030

Award Number: 0072030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline Krim jkrim@unity.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The late 1980's marked the advent of a renewed interest in fundamental areas of
              tribology, sparked by a number of new experimental and theoretical techniques
              capable of studying the force of friction in geometries which were well defined
              at the nanometer scale.  This is an individual investigator award to a female
              PI at the North Carolina State University at Raleigh.  The research project
              involves the use of one such new technique, namely the quartz crystal
              microbalance, to probe critical issues of importance to this field, including
              (1) understanding the chemical and tribochemical reactions which occur in a
              sliding contact, and (2) understanding the energy dissipation mechanisms
              associated with friction at atomic length and time scales. If successful, the
              project will yield the first atomic-scale images of tribochemical reactions
              (obtained by combining the microbalance with a scanning tunneling microscope),
              and will also provide an understanding of the basic energy dissipative
              mechanisms associated with the recently discovered phenomena of
              superconductivity-dependent friction.  A complimentary educational component
              includes (1) ongoing participation of undergraduates in the research, and (2)
              direct dissemination of state-of-the-art information on friction to instructors
              developing curriculum on the topic, as well as to more general audiences
              through lectures and written reviews.

%%%
By most recent estimates,
              improved attention to friction and wear would save developed countries up to
              1.6% of their gross national product, or over $100 billion annually in the U.S.
              alone. It is thus not surprising that the field of tribology (the study of
              friction and wear) has long inspired interest in the engineering and materials
              communities. The late 1980's particularly marked a renaissance in fundamental
              areas of tribology, sparked by a number of new experimental and theoretical
              techniques capable of studying the force of friction in geometries that were
              well defined at the nanometer scale. This is an individual investigator award
              to a female PI at the North Carolina State University at Raleigh.  The reseach
              project involves the use of one such new technique, namely the quartz crystal
              microbalance, to probe critical issues of importance to this field.  If
              successful, the project will yield the first atomic-scale images of
              tribochemical reactions and will also provide a basic understanding of the
              recently discovered phenomenon of superconductivity-dependent friction. A
              complimentary educational component includes (1) ongoing participation of
              undergraduates in the research,  and (2) direct dissemination of
              state-of-the-art information on friction to instructors developing curriculum
              on the topic, as well as to more general audiences through lectures and written
              reviews.
***

