Title       : Optical and Far Infrared Studies of Semiconductor Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2002     
File        : a0072897

Award Number: 0072897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Dobrowolska mdobrowo@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacek K. Furdyna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project consists of three parts, all of them involving semiconductor
              heterostructures whose properties are determined almost entirely by electron
              spin. (1)  Fabricate, and carry out optical studies of self-assembled magnetic
              semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) achieved  by introducing Mn into the CdSe/ZnSe
              QD system. This effort will focus on the understanding and control of the
              self-assembly process, with emphasis on the morphology, uniformity of
              composition, and control of Mn incorporation.  Optical studies will concentrate
              on the exchange interaction in zero-dimensional systems, on the effect of a
              reduced number of magnetic nearest-neighbors in the QD geometry, and on
              determining  the (expectedly very long) spin lifetimes in such systems.  (2)
              Fabricate and perform optical studies of ferromagnetic semiconductors and their
              multilayers. The discovery of ferromagnetism in III-Mn-V alloys is a major
              breakthrough that holds out possibilities of integrating giant spin-related
              effects into III-V-based electronics and optoelectronics. The problem of the
              large density of defects that form  when Mn is introduced into the III-V
              lattice will be addressed by a series of strategies for MBE growth of III-V
              based ferromagnetics. Optical tests of these systems will focus specifically on
              improving the optical quality of these materials via defect reduction and
              optimization of p-type doping.   (3) Bragg-confining systems based on diluted
              magnetic semiconductor (DMS) multilayers will be investigated. These systems
              offer the possibility of tuning (via an applied magnetic field) the relative
              band alignment between the constituent layer materials. This tunability can be
              used for controlling the de Broglie wavelength of electrons and/or holes within
              the structure, and thus for tuning their Bragg localization.  Since in
              DMS-based systems the tunability of Bragg localization is spin-specific, the
              structures developed  in the program will serve as prototypes for
              spin-filtering devices that may find important application in spin-based
              electronics. This research will provide training for graduate students in areas
              of nanoscience and spin-based electronics, thus meeting U.S. manpower needs in
              two important and rapidly developing areas of technology.
%%% 	 
Traditional
              semiconductor electronics is based entirely on the electron charge and its
              response to applied electric signals.  The electron, however, is also
              characterized by another property: the spin.  Recent experiments have
              demonstrated that this latter property holds out certain advantages which make
              spin-based nanostructures attractive as candidates for the next generation of
              electronic devices.  Although one can already envision future applications of
              spin-based electronics ("spintronics") in detector systems, ultra-fast switches
              and quantum computing, many fundamental issues need to be resolved before such
              devices can become reality. This research deals with three inter-related areas
              involving semiconductor heterostructures whose properties are determined almost
              entirely by electron spin: Controlled fabrication of spintronics materials,
              optical characterization of these materials, and development of techniques for
              the effective identification of different spin states from one another.
              Successful completion of these tasks will be major contributions to the
              scientific understanding of spintronics processes and their incorporation in
              practical technological devices. This research will be performed with graduate
              students and postdoctoral research associates. They will receive training in
              areas of nanoscience and spin-based electronics in preparation for their entry
              into the scientific and technological workforce. 
***



