Title       : Variational Problems Associated with Models for Both Orthodox and Unorthodox
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2002  
File        : a0072816

Award Number: 0072816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor J. Mizel vm09@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072816
Mizel

The goal of the part of the present proposal involving
              unorthodox 
materials is to develop an understanding of step structure and
              step motion 
in the limit of small step free energy for crystals with surface
              defects 
consisting of monatomic height steps separated by terraces. Such
              defects 
are fundamental structures since steps--as sinks and sources for
              atoms--
influence mass transport at surfaces and therefore influence
              fundamental 
multidimensional surface processes such as nucleation and growth,
              facet 
formation and thermal roughening in crystals and their applications.
              
Consequently these defects have been studied since the 1950's and fairly
              
successful macroscopic models to describe behavior in most materials 
have
              been developed. These models express the energy of an isothermally 
wandering
              step as the integral of the (generally orientation dependent) step 
energy per
              unit length. However in the limit of vanishing step free energy, 
new physics
              [e.g. higher-order elastic interactions and step-to-step 
interactions] enters
              the picture. These higher-order effects can lead to the 
spontaneous
              development of highly periodic step structures. Such novel 
step morphologies
              are members of an increasingly important class of self-
organizing systems:
              systems that spontaneously form atomic scale 
periodic patterns.  A recent
              (1997) pathbreaking experiment on Boron-
doped Silicon in which the isothermal
              wanderings in question, contrary to 
the simple models cited, are periodic and
              increase with a decrease of the 
steady state temperature in an interval
              presents a significant challenge to 
the development of appropriate
              macroscopic models for this branch of 
crystal theory. It reveals that there
              is a major gap in the current technical 
understanding of defects in crystals
              of this nature, since detailed analysis 
of the dynamics of these fluctuating
              step edges is incompatible with 
current theories of step energetics. 
              Resolving this issue is important for 
near term attainment of non-routine
              applications involving crystals with 
small step free energy, since it has
              direct impact on understanding the 
atomic-scale structures they develop. In
              turn, this understanding is needed 
for the development of materials with
              uniformly closely spaced and nearly 
congruent self-organized [quantum dot]
              defects--such self-organizing 
materials being crucial to the development of
              monochromatic lasers and 
quantum wires, for example, as device scales shrink.
              The goal of that part 
of the present proposal involving orthodox materials is
              focussed on 
clarifying an as yet unresolved issue in the theory of
              nonlinearly elastic 
materials.  Equilibria for such materials subjected to
              specified boundary 
displacements correspond to deformations which minimize a
              stored energy 
integral whose integrand associates to each deformation a
              nonnegative real 
valued function.  Such stored energy integrands are subject
              to various 
constraints in order to correctly represent possible physical
              materials.  In 
the last decade a previously unnoticed issue has been raised.
              Namely in 
view of a little known one-dimensional variational phenomenon
              
(originally established in 1926) that for certain variational integrands the
              
minimizing functions can differ depending on the smoothness of the class 
of
              deformations under consideration -- even though the smoother class of
              
functions is dense in the larger class. In fact there can be a nonzero
              
difference between the infima of the integrals associated with such classes
              
[Lavrentiev's gap phenomenon].  A corresponding gap between classes of
              
continuous deformations in three dimensional nonlinear elasticity would
              
imply that the global equilibrium deformation in the larger class would be
              
energy minimizing and more singular than the energy minimizing global
              
deformation in the smaller class--whereby structures devised on the basis
              
of the less singular deformations could develop flaws [fractures], contrary
              
to the evidence provided by calculations based on standard methods. 

To
              summarize, the PI proposes in the case of the unorthodox type of 
crystalline
              material exemplified by Boron doped Silicon to devise 
variational models that
              will shed light on the entirely nonstandard physical 
behavior of such
              materials.  Such models will involve devising what are 
known as Landau-de
              Gennes type order parameter terms for the free 
energy of such materials to
              reflect the particularly delicate atomic 
interactions governing the nanatomic
              structure of such crystals. On the 
other hand, in the case of orthodox
              materials the PI intends to clarify 
whether in the well-established theory of
              nonlinear elasticity there can 
occur materials which for certain classes of
              boundary conditions can 
exhibit an energy gap between the minimum energy on
              one class of 
continuous smooth deformations and the minimum energy on a
              smaller 
class.  The occurrence of such an energy gap could lead to cases in
              which 
structures devised on the basis of computations associated with the
              smaller 
class could develop flaws because the actual energy minimizing
              
deformation is more singular than the computations suggest.

