Title       : Synthesis, Characterization, and Modeling of the Mn+1AXn Layered Ternary
               Carbides and Nitrides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0072067

Award Number: 0072067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michel W. Barsoum barsoumw@post.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tamer El-Raghy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, the PI has identified a new class of ceramic material best
              described as polycrystalline nanolaminates.  These solids are ternary layered
              hexagonal carbides and nitrides with the general formula, M n+1 AX n , where n
              = 1 to 3, M is an early transition metal, A is an A-group element and X is
              either carbon and/or nitrogen.  To date 15 of the roughly 50 phases known to
              exist have been synthesized and characterized.  These phases share many of the
              advantageous attributes of their respective stoichiometric binary metal
              carbides or nitrides: they are elastically stiff, electrically and thermally
              conductive.  Mechanically, however, they cannot be more different: they are
              readily machinable, relatively soft, resistant to thermal shock and unusually
              damage tolerant.  They combine ease of machinability with good mechanical
              properties, especially at T > 1000 degrees C.  Furthermore, they couple thermal
              isotropy with mechanical anisotropy.  This unusual combination of properties is
              traceable to their layered structure, the metallic-covalent nature of the MX
              bonds that are exceptionally strong, together with M-A bonds that are
              relatively weak, especially in shear.  The best-characterized ternary to date
              is Ti3 SiC2.  Despite clear progress in understanding these solids several
              fundamental issues remain unresolved.  Primary amongst them are:  i) the
              physical origin of the brittle-to-plastic transition that occurs at
              approximately 1100 degrees C in many of these systems; ii) the nature of a
              solid-solution softening effect observed at higher temperatures in Ti 2
              AlN0.5C0.5 ; iii) the relationship between the bonding and the single crystal
              elastic constants and the electrical and thermal properties.  This research
              project will synthesize and characterize most of the 35 or so ternaries that
              have never been synthesized before in an attempt to understand their
              structure-properties-bonding relationships.  The fabrication and
              characterization will take place in the PI's laboratory at Drexel.  To carry
              out the theoretical modeling of the structure, the PI has teamed with the
              Russian team headed by Dr. Nadia Medvedeva who recently published an excellent
              paper on the full potential linear-muffin-tin orbital calculations of Ti3 SiC2
              and its solid solutions.  The ultimate goal is to refine the theoretical model
              to allow for the prediction of the elastic, thermal and electrical properties.
              

A new class of ceramic material that can be classified as nano-laminates
              has been explored by the PI. These materials combine some of the better
              thermal, chemical, electrical and elastic characteristics of ceramics, with few
              of their drawbacks, such as brittleness.  Because of these unusual properties,
              these ceramic materials are likely to have a broad technological impact. 

