Title       : Extensions of Percolation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2000      
File        : a0072398

Award Number: 0072398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84178              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander E. Holroyd holroyd@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Dr Holroyd is working on several natural extensions of the percolation model in
              mathematical probability.  These are: entanglement, rigidity, random surfaces,
              and percolation on transitive graphs.  In the areas of entanglement and
              rigidity, Holroyd's previous work provided the first rigorous mathematical
              treatment of the subjects, and Holroyd is now pursuing some of the remaining
              unsolved problems.  For entanglement, Holroyd hopes to answer questions about
              the sizes of finite entangled graphs, the effect of boundary conditions, and
              the value of the critical probability.  For rigidity, Holroyd is investigating
              the effect of boundary conditions, and the continuity of the percolation
              probability.  Also, Holroyd is investigating the appearance of random surfaces
              in the so-called plaquette percolation model (which has mathematical
              connections with entanglement).  Holroyd hopes to answer questions about the
              values of the critical probabilities for the appearance of infinite surfaces,
              and about the geometry of such surfaces.  Finally, Holroyd is studying the
              percolation model on general graphs, such as transitive graphs.  There has been
              much recent progress in this field, but many fundamental questions remain
              unanswered.  Holroyd is focusing on proving strict inequalities between
              critical probabilities for different graphs, and between the critical points
              for uniqueness and for percolation.
	Percolation is a branch of probability
              theory concerned with the large-scale properties of infinite collections of
              independent random objects.  The original motivation for the subject was the
              study of fluid flow in porous materials, but the mathematical models which
              arise have many other applications, for example in material science,
              statistical physics, biology and epidemiology.  The models are relatively
              simple to describe, yet lead to challenging mathematical problems.  Percolation
              is a well-developed and active area of mathematical research, boasting hundreds
              of papers and several books, yet several of the most fundamental questions
              remain unanswered. Holroyd's work focuses on several relatively new extensions
              of percolation.  Two of these, entanglement and rigidity, have particularly
              close connections with physical applications in the science of materials, and
              have been studied previously by physicists. Some of Holroyd's earlier work
              provided the first mathematical treatment of these two subjects, and Holroyd is
              now pursuing some of the remaining unsolved problems in these and other areas.
