Title       : FRG/GOALI: Degradation Mechanisms, Micromechanics, and Microstructural
               Engineering of Thin Film Electrodes for High Permittivity Dielectrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0072134

Award Number: 0072134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1222503            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. McIntyre pcm1@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Nix  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce M. Clemens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Krishna C. Saraswat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,1589,1682,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This FRG/GOALI project is a collaborative effort between researchers at Stanford
              U., Lehigh U., and Applied Materials, Santa Clara, CA. The project addresses
              microstructural stability, micromechanics, and electrical properties of
              materials used in the fabrication of on-chip capacitors incorporating
              dielectrics such as BaxSr1-xTiO3 (BST) and PbZrxTi1-xO3 (PZT). The aim is to
              improve understanding of thin film micromechanics, on-chip capacitor electrical
              performance, and how both electrical and mechanical properties may be modified
              through thin film microstructural control. Emphasis is on development of a
              mechanistic understanding of stress relaxation, surface roughening, and film
              debonding processes occurring during processing of thin film electrodes and
              diffusion barriers for high-K capacitor applications. Degradation of
              interfacial contact resistivity and dielectric reliability using patterned
              capacitor test structures will also be studied. Thermal stress relaxation of
              electrodes, which affects both adhesion and roughness, will be modified by
              alloying electrode layers and producing two phase microstructures through
              internal oxidation. It is anticipated that the research will lead to new
              strategies for improving the reliability and processing stability of on-chip
              capacitors that use perovskite-structure high permittivity dielectrics.
              Research will be performed by a multi-disciplinary, multi-investigator team at
              Stanford University and Lehigh University. Students and faculty will
              collaborate with materials researchers and process-integration specialists at
              Applied Materials, Inc. Joint research activities with AMAT will include
              sharing of research resources and samples, joint planning of experiments and
              regular meetings to review progress, visits by students to Applied Materials'
              laboratories, and mentorship of students by AMAT personnel.
%%%
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with
              high technological relevance. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from
              the research is expected to contribute to improving electronic materials
              performance in current and future device and circuit applications. An important
              feature of the program is the integration of research and education through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
              The multidisciplinary (materials science, electrical engineering) and
              industrially-connected nature of this FRG/GOALI program offers unique
              educational opportunities for students to experience a teamwork-oriented
              research environment from both academic and industrial perspectives. The
              project is co-funded by the Electronic Materials(EM) and Metals(MET) programs
              in DMR, the Mechanics And Structures of Materials program in ENG/CMS, and the
              ENG GOALI office.
***

