Title       : Experiment-Based 3-D Computational Studies of Blood Flow in Stenotic Carotid
               Arteries with Dynamic Wall Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0072873

Award Number: 0072873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dalin Tang dtang@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Homer F. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9200,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  The principal investigator and his colleagues use an
experiment-based
              computational approach to model blood flow in
large stenotic arteries and
              investigate critical flow and artery
wall behaviors that may lead to artery
              compression, plaque cap
rupture, stroke and heart attack.  Dynamic properties
              of the
stenotic arteries with plaque stiffness and geometry variations
are
              determined experimentally using hydrogel tubes whose
mechanical properties are
              close to those of bovine carotid
arteries.  This leads to a series of 3-D
              nonlinear computational
models with fluid-wall interactions based on the
              experimental
measurements.  Arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian formulation is
              used
to deal with free moving boundaries.  Implicit methods including
the
              SIMPLER algorithm and fully coupled methods based on
mesh-free generalized
              finite differences with staggered grids,
upwind techniques, and a consistent
              physical interpolation
technique are used to solve the fluid model.  A
              sequence of
experiment-based thin- and thick-wall models are introduced
              to
model the dynamic nonlinear properties of the stenotic tube wall
with
              large strain, deformation, compression and collapse.  An
incremental boundary
              iteration method and an under-relaxation
technique are used to handle the
              fluid-wall interactions.
Validated by experimental data, results obtained
              are
physiologically relevant and may provide information helpful for
early
              detection, diagnosis and prevention of related
cardiovascular diseases.  The
              models and numerical methods
developed are applicable to a wide range of
              problems with
fluid-structure interactions and can be extended to include
              mass
transfer, structures of arteries and plaques, endothelial
responses, and
              arterial remodeling.
     Stenosis, a constriction in blood vessels, is one of
              the
leading causes of death in the western world.  The investigators
and
              their colleagues couple experiments with computations to
model blood flow in
              large stenotic arteries and investigate
critical flow and artery wall
              behaviors that may lead to artery
compression, plaque cap rupture, stroke and
              heart attack.  The
problem is difficult because of the high complexity of
              artery
structure and its nonlinear mechanical properties, strong blood
and
              artery interactions, and critical flow conditions caused by
severe stenosis. 
              Dynamic properties of the stenotic arteries are
determined experimentally
              using bovine carotid arteries and
hydrogel tubes, whose properties are close
              to those of bovine
carotid arteries.  A series of 3-D nonlinear computational
              models
with fluid-wall interactions, based on the experimental
measurements,
              are solved by a novel numerical method to quantify
conditions under which
              artery compression and plaque cap rupture
may occur.  Validated by
              experimental data, these results can be
helpful for early detection, diagnosis
              and prevention of related
cardiovascular diseases.  The models and numerical
              methods
developed are applicable to a wide range of problems
              with
fluid-structure interactions and complex geometries.  The models
can be
              extended to include mass transfer, structures of arteries
and plaques, grafts
              and stents, endothelial responses and
arterial remodeling.  As applications of
              biotechnology, the
results obtained can be used to improve the design of
              medical
devices such as grafts and stents.
