Title       : Selected Problems in Medium Energy Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0072466

Award Number: 0072466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Danagoulian danagu@jlab.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Abdellah Ahmidouch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072466
Danagoulian
	This proposal requests support for development and
              interpretation of two experimental programs at Jefferson Lab: neutral pi-meson
              lifetime precise measurement, experiment "PrimEx" and measurement of the
              electric and magnetic form factors of the neutron, experiments "Gen".
	The
              experiment "PrimEx" will perform a high precision measurement of the lifetime
              of the neutral pi-meson. The theoretical description of the process of meson
              decay results in one of the most accurate predictions in QCD, the quantum field
              theory that describes the properties of the strong interaction between quarks. 
              The present experiment will measure the lifetime with an accuracy of ~1.4%
              which is consistent with the theoretical uncertainties. It is one of the
              fundamental experiments in nuclear physics.
	The neutron is an electrically
              neutral particle. Nevertheless it 
possesses an electromagnetic structure. The
              "Gen" experiments address the fundamental issue of the electromagnetic
              structure of the neutron by performing precise measurements of the neutron
              electric and magnetic form factors, Gen and Gmn. The knowledge of the internal
              structure of the neutron is needed for benchmark calculations in nuclear
              structure and QCD. Despite its fundamental importance, Gen is still poorly
              known, and stands as a significant challenge for the
              experimentalists.
	Besides its scientific importance the proposed research 
              program will provide our students with unique research opportunities in
              experimental nuclear physics, and therefore will have a very strong impact on
              their training and education.

