Title       : Microscopic Process and Macroscopic Behavior of Material: Modeling, Simulation,
               and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0072958

Award Number: 0072958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75743              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bo Li bli@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dear Dr. Pang, 

Attached is the plain file of an abstract of my proposal in
              the requested
format. Please let me know if you think that further revision is
              needed. 

Best regards,
Bo
              Li
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Proposal number:        DMS-0072958. 
Principal investigator: Bo Li, Univ. of Maryland, College Park. 
Title of proposal:      Microscopic Process and Macroscopic Behavior of Material: 
                        Modeling, Simulation, and Analysis

Proposal Abstract

This project concerns the modeling, simulation, and analysis of a variety
of microscopic processes and macroscopic behaviors of materials that in
common involve phase transitions, multiple components and multiple scales,
and moving interfaces. They include the epitaxial growth of semiconductor
thin films, microstructural evolution of elastically stressed solids, and
macroscopic properties of martensitic microstructures. The proposer will
first continue and extend his work initiated during his participation in
a DARPA/NSF VIP project to develop and improve continuum models for the
epitaxial growth of thin films. In particular, he will carefully examine the
effect of edge diffusion and kink convection as well as that of crystalline
asymmetry and anisotropy to the thin film morphology and growth scaling laws.
He will then develop hybrid numerical techniques that incorporate finite
element methods and multigrid algorithms into level set formulations to
simulate the three-dimensional evolution of stressed microstructures. He
will finally expand his previous research to further investigate complex
martensitic microstructures with an emphasis on the effect of applied stress
to their formation, evolution, and stability.

The design of innovative, intelligent, and high quality materials such as
those to be studied in this project is essential to the advance of modern
technologies. The success in such design demands greatly a deep understanding
of the fundamental principles and basic mechanisms of the underlying physical
processes and material behaviors. It is therefore the goal of this research
to systematically develop rational scientific concepts and novel research
techniques to accomplish such an understanding. The fulfillment of such a
goal will potentially provide experimentalists with detailed information on
controllable physical data, making possible the development of new and improved
materials for applications in many modern technologies and industrials ranging
from communication to aerospace to medicine. Highlighted by its nature of
scientific integrity, on the other hand, this project will naturally foster
and promote an interdisciplinary research that involves materials science,
physics, applied mathematics, and high-performance computing.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


