Title       : Efficient Estimation in Semiparametric Time Series Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0072174

Award Number: 0072174
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anton Schick anton@math.binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Semiparametric models play a major role in many fields and have been extensively
              studied over the last two decades. Great emphasis has been placed on models
              with independent (and identically) distributed observations and quite some
              progress has been made in this case.  Models with dependent observations,
              however, been mainly neglected up to now from an efficiency point of view.  The
              proposed research will tackle open issues in the construction of efficient
              estimates and tests in semiparametric models with an emphasis on models with
              dependent observations.  Such models include stationary and ergodic Markov
              chains and other time series models which are plentiful in many fields such as
              econometrics and financial mathematics.  Efficient estimation of the
              finite-dimensional component as well as aspects of the infinite-dimensional
              component will be addressed.  The latter include innovation distributions in
              time series models, invariant distributions of ergodic Markov chains, and
              stationary distributions of several consecutive observations.

The main
              emphasis of the proposed research will be to develop a methodology for the
              construction of efficient estimates in semiparametric models with dependent
              observations.  In the process the proposed research will have to develop
              methods that deal with the difficulties associated with an efficient score
              function that cannot be calculated explicitly, a problem that is also of great
              interest for models with independent observations.  Finally, the proposed
              research will continue the work of the principal investigator in semiparametric
              regression models with an emphasis on improving existing methods of
              constructing root-n consistent and efficient estimates.


