Title       : Logic-based Modeling Analysis, and Implementation of Workflow Management Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  2002   
File        : a0072927

Award Number: 0072927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $479852             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Kifer kifer@cs.stonybrook.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. R. Ramakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              I. V. Ramakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A workflow is a collection of cooperating, coordinated activities designed to
              carry out a well-defined complex process, such as trip planning, graduate
              student registration procedure, or a business process in a large enterprise. A
              human, a device, or a program might perform an activity in a workflow. Workflow
              management systems (WfMS) provide a framework for capturing the interaction
              among the activities in a workflow and are recognized as a new paradigm for
              integrating disparate systems, including legacy systems. Automated workflow
              management is becoming increasingly important, as it is one of the enabling
              technologies for business-to-business e-commerce. Ideally, a WfMS should be
              able to help the user in analyzing and reasoning about complex business
              processes. Unfortunately, present-day systems do not provide sufficient support
              for this activity and the virtual lack of analysis and reasoning facilities in
              current workflow management systems is considered a serious problem. To tackle
              this problem, a formal specification model with a well-defined semantics is
              needed. The objective of this project is to conduct research in workflow
              management and to develop a robust and expressive model for dynamic workflows
              (i.e., workflows where tasks and their interrelationships change over time) as
              well as a technological infrastructure (prototypes) for implementing verifiable
              workflow management systems. The techniques will be validated in the area of
              supply chain management in collaboration with industry partners. The research
              is expected to result in the development and distribution of an open source
              tool for building and managing dynamic workflows. 
Relevant
              links:
http://xsb.sourceforge.net/
http://www.cs.sunysb.edu/~lmc/
http://www.cs.sunysb.edu/~workflow/


