Title       : Role of Disorder in Determining the Vortex Phase Diagram in High Temperature
               Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a0072880

Award Number: 0072880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa M. Paulius Paulius@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a young female professor at Western
              Michigan University for a project that focuses on manipulating the defect
              content in high temperature superconductors to resolve the role of disorder in
              determining the phase diagram of the vortex matter.  In these materials, the
              vortex lattice undergoes a melting transition to a vortex liquid state that
              occupies a large portion of the phase diagram.  This melting transition is a
              serious impediment to many technological applications because vortices in the
              liquid state are much more difficult to pin.  Any understanding of the role of
              defects in reducing the vortex liquid regime will help facilitate the
              technological viability of these materials.  The vortex matter phase diagram is
              also of fundamental interest, and it remains an amazingly rich and complex area
              of study. The main reason for this complexity is the abundance of parameters
              that define the system, such as the temperature, the magnetic field, the
              anisotropy, and the disorder. These parameters can be systematically varied in
              a controlled manner, making these systems a powerful medium in which to study
              phase transitions.  The graduate students involved in this project will receive
              training in a wide range of experimental techniques.  They will also gain
              valuable international professional experience early in their careers,
              increasing their adaptability and placing them in an excellent position to
              pursue careers in industry, national laboratories, or academia. 
%%%
This
              individual investigator award is to a young, female professor at Western
              Michigan University for an experimental research project that focuses on
              understanding the role of disorder in determining the phase diagram of the
              vortex matter in high temperature superconductors. Vortices are quantized
              bundles of magnetic flux which penetrate a Type-II superconductor in the
              presence of high magnetic fields.  The interaction of these vortices with
              defects is of great technological importance because defects can greatly
              increase the amount of current these materials can carry without energy losses.
               Since most applications of superconductors rely on zero-resistance, developing
              optimized pinning sites to prevent the vortex motion is crucial to advancing
              their technological impact.  These systems are also a powerful medium in which
              to study phase transitions, an area of fundamental interest.  The vortex matter
              phase diagram is a rich area of study because of the abundance of parameters
              that define the system, for example the temperature, magnetic field,
              anisotropy, and disorder. These parameters can be varied in a controlled manner
              over a much greater range than in typical solids.  The collaborative nature of
              this project will train graduate students in both academic and national lab
              research settings, teaching them in a variety of state-of-the art-techniques. 
              The international experience the students gain will enhance their ability to
              compete in the increasingly global market place.
***

