Title       : Analytical and Computational Studies of Boundary Value Problems for PDE's.
               Direct and Inverse Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0072556

Award Number: 0072556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Vogelius vogelius@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072556
Mathematical Sciences: Analytical and
              Computational Studies of Boundary Value Problems for Partial Differential
              Equations: Direct and Inverse Problems

Abstract

0072556 
              Vogelius


This project uses a mixture of analytical and computational
              techniques to  carry out modeling and nondestructive inspection for various
              problems of continuum mechanics. The research investigates the use of magnetic
              as well as electric data to identify small objects (or defects) inside an
              otherwise known medium. The qualitative and quantitative behavior of solutions
              to nonlinear boundary value problems that arise in connection with corrosion
              modeling is also investigated.  The goal is to develop imaging techniques that
              permit effective assessment of (inaccessible) corrosion damage. Optimization of
              the imposed currents for electrodeposition is also under study. The work on
              inverse problems includes a study of the identifiability of nonlinear current
              densities that appear in semilinear boundary value problems related to
              magnetohydrodynamics.  Work will continue on characterization of the
              (effective) boundary layer behavior encountered in composite materials; the
              focus will first be on polygonal domains with irrational slopes, but it is
              expected that the techniques developed there will ultimately lead to a deeper
              understanding of boundary layers for arbitrary domains.  Another important
              activity will be the study of the qualitative and quantitative behavior of
              stresses in (laminated or fiber-reinforced) composites with extremely close
              interfaces. 

One goal of this research is to significantly increase the
              effectiveness of electric and electromagnetic imaging techniques by
              incorporating into the mathematical algorithms information about the behavior
              of the associated fields in the presence of various defects and
              inhomogeneities. Examples of such defects and inhomogeneities range from cracks
              in a mechanical component, or corrosion spots inside a pipe, all the way to
              anti-personnel mines buried in a field.  The second main area of research is
              study of composite materials, which, through its emphasis on stress
              concentrations and boundary layers, is expected to lead to a better
              understanding of the relationship between microscopic phenomena and macroscopic
              failures.  

