Title       : Quantum Dynamics at High Frequencies of Electrons in Mesoscopic Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a0072022

Award Number: 0072022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Prober daniel.prober@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This experimental condensed matter physics project will explore the dynamics at
              high frequencies, 10-100 GHz, of electrons in mesoscopic conductors and
              superconductors. The studies will focus on noise, dephasing due to microwave
              photons, photon-stimulated energy distributions and enhanced super currents in
              superconducting/normal/superconducting structures. The project will also
              explore the effect of a superconducting phase difference on the quantum
              statistics of the noise, via cross-correlation measurements. The goal is to
              understand the dynamical behavior of these mixed superconductor-normal systems.
              The project will provide students with training in state-of-the art measurement
              techniques, and will prepare them for careers in academe, industry and
              government.
%%%
An important fundamental and technical issue connected with
              quantum mechanical systems,  such as superconductors, is how fast they respond
              to external electric and magnetic fields. These problems become more difficult
              when the quantum systems are very small in size. Thus the continual downsizing
              of microelectronic device structures to smaller and smaller sizes presents
              substantial measurement challenges, particularly at high frequencies, in the
              microwave region. This experimental condensed matter physics project will
              explore the dynamics at high frequencies, 10-100 GHz, of electrons in
              mesoscopic conductors and superconductors. The project will explore current
              flows in superconducting loops and across barriers through which electrons
              tunnel via quantum mechanical motion. The goal is to understand the dynamical
              behavior of these mixed superconductor-normal systems. New measurement
              techniques are being developed to reach these goals. The project will provide
              excellent training for students and post-docs in state-or-the are measurement
              methods. It will prepare them for careers in academe, industry and
              government.


