Title       : Molecular Dynamics and Relaxation of Entangled Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a0072101

Award Number: 0072101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald G. Larson rlarson@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0072101
Larson
Following the introduction in 1971 of de Gennes' reptation
              theory of polymer diffusion and relaxation in entangled polymers, gradual
              progress has been made in quantitatively predicting the relaxation of simple
              polymers by recognizing the importance of the additional mechanisms of
              primative path fluctuations and constraint release.  Theoretical concepts
              introduced by McLeish and co-workers suggest that these same basic mechanisms
              can allow prediction of the viscoelastic properties of more complex molecular
              systems, such as melts of molecules with multiple branch points.  Heretofore,
              however, theories have been specialized to particular systems, such as purely
              linear molecules, or monodisperse or bidisperse stars.  Furthermore, the
              concept of constraint release has taken on two different simplified
              descriptions, one called tube reorganization and the other tube dilation.  In
              the special case of polydisperse linear polymers, a version of tube
              reorganization called double reptation appears to successfully describe
              relaxation data, while for star polymers, constraint release must be manifested
              in terms of a tube dilation model known as dynamic dilution.

In the present
              grant, a theoretical framework will be developed that is general in scope,
              which can account for all known mechanisms of slow relaxation in entangled
              polymers, and unify the concepts of tube reorganization and tube dilution.  To
              develop such a model, the so-far successful notion will be exploited that in
              many cases entanglements in concentrated polymeric systems can be viewed as a
              set of pair-wise interactions between two chains.  Each entanglement disappears
              when either chain in the pair moves its chain end through the entanglement
              position.  Thus, the hypothesis is that qualitative and perhaps quantitative
              predictions of polymer relaxation can be made even for complex mixtures of
              different topology, by keeping track only of chain ends, chain branch points,
              and discrete entanglements or slip links that couple pair-wise the relaxation
              of different chains.  A computational algorithm, called the dual slip link
              algorithm, will be developed that can in principle describe relaxation of any
              molecular mixture of linear or arbitrarily branched polymers.  In preliminary
              work, for linear polymers, the model reduces to the double reptation theory,
              which is known to be accurate for many polydisperse linear polymers, while for
              star polymers, it predicts behavior similar to that of the Ball-McLeish dynamic
              dilution theory.  This preliminary work will be extended by allowing motion of
              branch points which will then permit simulation of polymer mixtures of
              arbitrary topolgy and composition.  Predictions of this model will be compared
              with analytic theories and with experimental data for linear molecules, stars
              and pom-poms, and mixtures thereof, and with simulation results to gain deeper
              insights into relaxation processes in both simple and complex polymer
              systems.
%%%    
This grant supports theoretical research on fundamental
              relaxational properties of mixtures of polymers.  Using a newly developed
              computational algorithm, various other theories of these systems will unified. 
              Besides being of fundamental interest, understanding relaxation in polymer
              mixtures has wide ranging industrial applications.
***


