Title       : Detection, Estimation and Optimization Problems in Stochastic Systems, Genetics
               and Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0072523

Award Number: 0072523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tze L. Lai lait@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David O. Siegmund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: Statistical Problems in Quality control, Stochastic Systems and
              Genetic Analysis

This project will address a number of related statistical
              problems having applications in (i) industrial quality control and complex
              engineering systems, (ii) in molecular biology and genetics, and (iii) in
              financial economics.  (i) One objective of the proposed research is to develop
              a unified methodology of sequential change-point detection in industrial
              quality control and of automated fault detection in complex engineering
              systems.   Relatively simple algorithms that are not too demanding in
              computational and memory requirements for on-line implementation and yet are
              nearly optimal from a statistical viewpoint will be developed for a variety of
              practical applications.   This methodology will not only address the recognized
              discrepancies between the assumptions underlying conventional control charts
              and today's industrial processes, but it will also provide methodological
              advances for on-line detection and diagnosis of faults and potential failures
              of automated engineering systems. In this connection, estimation and
              forecasting problems in time series models and stochastic dynamical systems
              having parameters that may change with time will also be investigated. Although
              in practice abrupt parameter changes usually occur infrequently, the unknown
              times of their occurrence have led to detection algorithms of prohibitive
              complexity.  By using parallel recursive algorithms and combining new ideas in
              change-point detection with empirical Bayes methodology, it is anticipated that
              asymptotically efficient estimation and prediction schemes of manageable
              complexity will be developed.  (ii) Another direction of research involves
              fixed sample change-point problems and their applications to biomolecular
              sequence analysis and other problems of signal detection.  A comprehensive
              statistical methodology will be developed for genome scanning to map anonymous
              genes using data based on crosses of pure strains in experimental genetics or
              based on regions of identity by descent of related individuals in human
              genetics.  Related mathematical problems in boundary crossing probabilities of
              random fields will be investigated.  (iii) A third direction of research is
              financial time series and stochastic control problems of financial economics.
              New statistical models, computational algorithms, and methods for data analysis
              and forecasting  will be developed to address a variety of sequential decision,
              portfolio selection, and pricing problems in investments and financial
              markets.

The interdisciplinary research in financial economics and molecular
              biology not only leads to the development of new stochastic models and
              statistical methods, but it also provides valuable research opportunities for
              graduate and undergraduate students in these rapidly developing fields.

