Title       : Resampling Methods for Temporal and Spatial Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0072571

Award Number: 0072571
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142630             (Estimated)
Investigator: Soumendra N. Lahiri snlahiri@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The project consists of two parts, viz., (1) Developing a class
              bootstrap methods, called the  "Transform Based Bootstrap", for long-range
              dependent data and studying their properties; and (2) Developing a class
              resampling methods, called the "Varying Probability Spatial Block Bootstrap"
              and "Varying Probability Spatial Subsampling" for spatial data under some 
              (nonstandard) spatial sampling designs.  Although a number of resampling
              methods have been proposed and shown to be effective in dealing with weak
              dependence in time series data, an  earlier work of the PI reveals that these
              methods have only limited success under long range dependence. Since long-range
              dependent data appear naturally and frequently in many scientific studies (cf.
              Kuensch, H.R., Beran, J., and Hampel, F. (1993; Annals of Statistics)),
              developing effective resampling methods for such data is important. The
              transform-based-bootstrap, proposed here, holds some promise.  The other part
              of the project deals with spatial data.  Unlike the time-series case where the
              random process evolves only in one direction, processes with a continuous
              spatial index allow for more than one evolution pattern. This leads to
              different types of (often nonstandard) asymptotics for spatial data.  The
              proposed project seeks to develop new resampling methods for spatial data in
              such cases, particularly for irregularly spaced data-sites.

The emphasis of
              the proposed project is on development of suitable resampling methods for
              time-series and spatial data having a complex structure and on investigating
              their properties. Current statistical methodology for dependent data are
              predominantly parametric model based and are sensitive to model
              misspecification. The proposed research seeks to address this need and is aimed
              at removing some of the limitations of the current methodology.

