Title       : Computationally Aggressive Approaches to Adaptive Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0072910

Award Number: 0072910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Quentin F. Stout qstout@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janis P. Hardwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract

This project involves interdisciplinary research in which
              algorithmic
approaches are developed to design and analyze adaptive
              experiments. An
adaptive (sequential) design is one whose characteristics
              change in
accordance with information arising from the ongoing experiment, as
              
opposed to classical statistical designs where such characteristics are
set
              in advance and remain fixed throughout. Adaptive designs have a wide
range of
              application in clinical trials, destructive testing, behavioral
ecology,
              computer performance prediction, adaptive control, etc., where
they have the
              potential to reduce the expenditure of experimental 
``resources'' such as
              time, money, or quality of life. Unfortunately,
adaptive designs are difficult
              to analyze and optimize. Exact analytic
solutions are rarely available, and
              thus, historically, such designs have
been predominantly approached via
              asymptotic methods and ad hoc
approximations. Computationally, adaptive
              designs require significant
time and space that has often made exact
              calculations infeasible.

This project will expand the size and scope of
              solvable problems by
developing new computational approaches for creating and
              evaluating
designs and utilizing state of the art computational
              facilities.
Attention is directed to problems that are important in
              applications,
with a major emphasis on supplying researchers greater
              flexibility in
modeling their statistical and cost objectives. For many of
              these
problems, exact optimality will be unattainable, and thus techniques
              for
producing near-optimal designs will also be pursued. Several of
              these
techniques are based on optimizing smaller or simpler problems
              and
extrapolating their solution structure to larger or more
              complex
problems. This compliments analytical, asymptotic work and provides
              new
insights into the structure of solutions. In other cases, a shift
              from
serial algorithms to parallel ones will be used to address
              the
additional complexity.
