Title       : Polymer Electrolytes Based on Poly(ethylenimine)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0072544

Award Number: 0072544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger E. Frech rfrech@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel T. Glatzhofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award focuses on the development of a new family of polymer electrolytes
              with extraordinary mechanical properties and high ionic conductivities.  This
              plan has two distinct components. (1) a series of fundamental studies of
              simple, precursor polymer electrolytes that focus on the critical factors
              controlling ionic conductivity, and (2) the development of a commercializable
              polymer electrolyte with optimized mechanical and electrical properties.  The
              fundamental studies address a serious problem in the field of ion-conducting
              polymers, namely that the mechanism of ion transport in these system is as yet
              poorly understood at the molecular level.  The polymer electrolytes proposed
              for study are based on poly(ethylenimine), PEI.  In the fundamental phase of
              work, attention will be restricted to electrolytes prepared with simple linear
              PEI and alkyl-substituted PEI, examining the important factors underlying ionic
              transport such as cation-anion interaction, ion-polymer interactions, and
              polymer interactions, and polymer segmental motion.  These materials will be
              studied by a variety of techniques, primarily Raman and infrared vibrational
              spectroscopy, complemented by measurements of ionic conductivity using
              impedance methods.  In addition, thermal characterization with DSC and
              structural characterization with x-ray diffraction techniques will also be
              used.  The right synthetic versatility available with PEI-based systems allows
              an extraordinary range of possibilities for the optimization of desirable
              mechanical and conductivity properties.

The results of these studies may
              lead to the development of a new family of ion-conducting polymers for
              application as electrolytes in "next generation" high energy density lithium
              rechargeable batteries.

