Title       : Ergodic Theory of Weakly Hyperbolic Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a0072623

Award Number: 0072623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dmitry Dolgopyat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dmitry Dolgopyat.

Ergodic theory of weakly hyperbolic dynamical
              systems.

Smooth ergodic theory deals with long time asymptotic of autonomous
              systems which can be described by finite number of parameters. An amazing fact
              is that even though the evolution of such systems is completely deterministic
              sensitive dependence on initial conditions (that is exponential divergence of
              nearby trajectories)often leads the random behavior in the sense that there is
              asymptotic
measure (equilibrium state) such that most orbits become
              distributed in the phase space according to this measure.  During past decades
              powerful methods for proving the existence of the asymptotic measure have been
              developed. This theory already has found spectacular applications in many areas
              of pure mathematics most notably number theory and Lie theory. It is less clear
              if it can be applied
to real life problems because in practise the assumption
              that the system can be described by a finite number of parameters is merely an
              idealization which is harmless in short time range but may be crucial in the
              long run. 

The aim of this project is to combine recent advances in the
              fields of non-uniformly hyperbolic and partially systems in order to develop
              effective and reliable tools
for solving the following problems. 

(1)
              Determining the rate of convergence to equilibrium;

(2) Describing the
              change of equilibrium under various perturbations of the system.

At first
              the theory developed in this project would be of perturbative nature describing
              small perturbations of well understood systems in particular of transversely
              
hyperbolic systems with compact symmetry group but eventually it should be
              applicable to a large class of dynamical systems. This research will be of
              interest in any field of science where ordinary differential equations are
              used.








