Title       : Applied dynamical systems and singular perturbation theory for patterns, bubbles
               and chemical reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2000      
File        : a0072596

Award Number: 0072596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171314             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tasso J. Kaper tasso@math.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072596
Mathematical Sciences: Applied Dynamical
              Systems and Singular Perturbation Theory for Patterns, Bubbles, and Chemical
              Reactions

Abstract

0072596  Kaper


This research project encompasses
              problems in chemical pattern formation, chemical kinetics, and nonlinear
              dynamics of gas bubbles.  Self-replicating pulses have recently been discovered
              as new chemical patterns, and a central role in self-replication is played by
              strong, nonlinear pulse interactions.  Pulses, such as bumps, annular rings,
              and circular spots in one and two dimensions, are localized large-amplitude
              perturbations of globally stable homogeneous states in the governing coupled
              reaction-diffusion equations.  Specific aims include locating the hierarchies
              of saddle-node (disappearance) bifurcations that govern splitting, for example,
              when a ring solution splits into two rings, two rings into four, etc., and
              determining the underlying splitting mechanisms in two dimensions.  Another
              aspect of this research focuses on stability of these patterns.  Control over
              the stabilization of pulses in physically important systems of coupled
              reaction-diffusion equations is achieved by varying the strength of the
              coupling of the slow inhibitor field to the faster activator field, and by
              exploiting a recently discovered zero-pole cancellation in the nonlocal
              eigenvalue problems.  In chemical reaction theory, this project focuses on
              large-scale systems involving many species and reactions and on the development
              of reduction methods that decrease the number of effective species and
              reactions that need to be modeled.  The project investigates iterative
              numerical methods to find low dimensional manifolds in systems of
              reaction-diffusion equations using geometric singular perturbation theory. 
              Finally, the project develops and analyzes a fully nonlinear model of the
              interactions of gas bubbles in liquids.

The fields of chemistry and fluid
              mechanics have long had a strong influence on the development of mathematics;
              and in turn, mathematics has led to many useful developments in both chemistry
              and fluid mechanics.  This research project uses mathematical theory,
              specifically applied nonlinear dynamical systems theory, to gain new insights
              and make quantitative predictions for fundamental problems in pattern formation
              and large-scale reaction systems in chemistry and for nonlinear interactions
              between gas bubbles in fluid mechanics.  A nonlinear control mechanism for
              stabilizing patterns in which the concentrations of the
reacting compounds are
              maintained at desirable levels in localized regions is under development.  In
              addition, the project designs, implements, and tests reduction methods, known
              to be essential for modeling the large-scale systems of chemical reactions that
              arise in combustion, reacting flows, and other technologically important
              problems.  Finally, the project carries out fundamental theoretical research on
              the nonlinear interaction of gas bubbles in liquids.  Over the long term, this
              work will lead to deeper understanding of the complex problems of bubble clouds
              that generate noise behind submarines and damage turbine blades.

