Title       : Statistics in Drug Discovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a0072809

Award Number: 0072809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38378              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline M. Hughes-Oliver hughesol@stat.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jye-Chyi Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students who are supported solely by industry are typically so involved with
              solving the company's daily problems that they do not have opportunities for
              conducting research to aid their understanding of the basic problems
              encountered. This project provides funding for two students so that half their
              time will be devoted to research on new opportunities identified through
              company projects and the remaining time will be devoted to working on the
              company's daily problems. The company identified for this project is Glaxo
              Wellcome (GW), with Dr. S. Stanley Young serving as industry mentor. Specific
              goals include developing methods for: (a) variable selection in the context of
              pooled data on compound potency; (b) using pooled data for elucidating the
              relationship between the chemical structural features of individual compounds
              and the probabilities that the compound will be biologically potent or will
              restrict biological potency; and (c) predicting the potency
of an individual
              compound solely based on its chemical structural features.

Students will
              gain experience in formulating research problems, evaluating project impacts on
              the company's operation and on scientific research, and making oral and written
              presentations to individuals from different disciplines.  This proposal will
              also impact GW's operations.  Because company scientists are involved in the
              program, the procedures developed will be more suitable for their applications
              and there is a potential for the company to invent profitable products
              resulting from these studies.  This GOALI project is jointly supported by the
              MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of 
              Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
