Title       : Interfacial Structure and Processes in Lamellar Titanium Aluminide Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0072721

Award Number: 0072721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431813             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Aindow m.aindow@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0072721
Aindow

This research develops a fundamental understanding of the
              effects of interfacial structure on the evolution of the lamellar
              microstructure in TiAl-based alloys and on the subsequent mechanical behavior
              of alloys that exhibit this microstructure.  The lamellar gamma/alpha2
              interfaces have been studied in great detail both by conventional transmission
              electron microscopy (TEM) and by high-resolution electron microscopy (HREM). In
              a recent HREM study of a low-misfit lamellar alloy, this investigator has shown
              that the steps on these interfaces can exhibit a greater diversity of heights
              and Burgers vectors than has been reported previously. Moreover, he found that
              the Burgers vectors exhibited by the steps varied with both the height and
              sense of the step. In each case these Burgers vectors were consistent with the
              steps being perfect interfacial disconnections as described by Pond's
              topological theory of interfacial defects, not Shockley partial dislocations as
              proposed previously. These observations have wide-ranging consequences for any
              defect-mediated interfacial processes in such alloys since one would expect the
              behavior of perfect disconnections to be radically different from that of
              Shockley partials in the same interface. In this research, defect-mediated
              interfacial processes in lamellar TiAl-based alloys are investigated by
              measuring changes in the interfacial defect configurations as a function of
              thermomechanical history. The character of the defects are determined by using
              the topological theory of interfacial defects to interpret detailed TEM and/or
              HREM observations, and the associated flux analysis are used to identify the
              factors controlling line defect motion. This approach addresses four key
              topics: (1) The mechanism for the formation of gamma lamellae; (2) The
              interaction of interfacial step defects; (3) Slip transmission through
              gamma/alpha2 interfaces; and (4) Introduction of misfit dislocations at
              gamma/alpha2 interfaces.
%%%
It is anticipated that by elucidating the
              mechanisms for the defect-mediated interfacial processes in TiAl intermetallic
              alloys the program will have broad technological impact for high temperature
              structural applications, particularly in the aerospace sector.  This
              understanding is essential in determining alloy development strategy for the
              next generation of lamellar TiAl-based alloys. This program is the first
              instance where the topological theory is used to interpret detailed TEM/HREM
              data from engineering alloys. Thus, it is anticipated that the work will have
              broader scientific impact in that it will constitute a model study to
              demonstrate the efficacy of the approach. This program provides integrated
              training for two graduate students and combines the fundamental rigor of
              crystallographic analyses with transferable experimental skills. It also
              provides the students with the opportunity to participate in an international
              collaboration with scientists in England. 
***

