Title       : Patterns in Continuous Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0072444

Award Number: 0072444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar Knobloch knobloch@tardis.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072444
Mathematical Sciences:  Patterns in Continuous
              Systems

Abstract

0072444  Knobloch



This project studies
              bifurcations and pattern formation in systems with symmetry.  Such systems
              arise naturally in a variety of applications.  The project focuses on the
              dynamical consequences of weak forced symmetry-breaking perturbations, and
              seeks thereby to identify those aspects of equivariant dynamics that are (i)
              insensitive to such perturbations, and (ii) due to them.  In many cases such
              perturbations are responsible for the creation of global bifurcations, and
              these in turn may introduce chaotic dynamics into the system.  Applications to
              a number of continuum systems will be worked out, focusing on the generation of
              burst-like behavior in hydrodynamical systems such as convection and the
              Faraday instability, and the dynamics of acoustically driven shape oscillations
              of drops and bubbles.

This project investigates how the patterns set up in
              various physical systems change as the parameters specifying the system vary,
              with emphasis on systems having various spatial and temporal symmetries.  The
              approach can identify new types of complex behavior and the mechanisms
              responsible for it.  Applications include, for example, the behavior of water
              waves in regions of different shapes.  The project investigates the effects of
              slight changes in the shape of the region, and seeks to identify which aspects
              of the behavior are insensitive to such perturbations, and which are due to
              them.  In many cases such perturbations are responsible for the introduction of
              chaotic dynamics into systems that would otherwise behave in a simple manner. 
              A number of additional applications will be worked out, including burst-like
              behavior in hydrodynamical systems and oscillations of drops and bubbles.

