Title       : Probing Nucleon Structure and the Nucleon-Nucleon Force
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0072226

Award Number: 0072226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1020000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Hicks hicks@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Lucas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allena K. Opper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel S. Carman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072226
Hicks
The general goal of our research is to study the structure of
              the 
nucleon and the nucleon resonances in terms of quarks and gluons. 
The
              fundamental interaction between quarks and gluons is the theory 
of quantum
              chromodynamics (QCD), which is generally accepted to be 
the correct
              underlying theory of the strong force.  However, practical 
calculations using
              QCD are extremely difficult at energies near the 
mass of the nucleon.  Hence,
              experimental data is needed to guide 
theoretical models of nucleon structure.
               In addition, we are 
interested in experimental tests of charge symmetry in
              the strong interaction between two nucleons.
Our research is centered on
              experimental work at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (TJNAF)
              and the Laser-Electron Gamma Source (LEGS) at Brookhaven National Laboratory. 
              Both of these 
facilities provide electron or photon beams of sufficient
              energy 
to excite the nucleon into intermediate resonances which then decay.
              
In Hall B at TJNAF, our group is focussed on measurements of kaons 
which
              are largely due to decay of various nucleon resonances.  In 
Hall C at TJNAF,
              one member of our group is working on a measurement 
of the electric and
              magnetic form factor of the neutron.  At LEGS, 
two members of our group are
              working on measurements of pions 
produced with polarized beams and targets,
              which test theoretical 
sum rules (related to static properties of the
              nucleon). All three 
experiments will provide guidance to QCD-inspired
              theoretical work.

