Title       : Hydrodynamics of bubble motion and oscillatory flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0072228

Award Number: 0072228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86088              (Estimated)
Investigator: Demetrios T. Papageorgiou depapa@aphrodite.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072228
Papageorgiou

This work addresses computationally and analytically
              two classes of fluid 
dynamics problems. The motion of bubbles through fluids
              containing 
soluble surfactants is considered first. Experiments show that
              even trace 
amounts of surfactants can increase the drag on moving bubbles
              
significantly. Through careful modeling, asymptotic analysis and direct
              
numerical simulations of the Navier-Stokes equations coupled with the
              
surfactant equations in the bulk and on the interface, we address both the
              
steady and unsteady problems and in particular evaluate the effect of
              
surfactants on wake size and control. Such controls are desirable in
              
enhanced interphase mass transfer systems. In parallel, we will also study
              
a class of exact Navier-Stokes solutions which emerges in models of
              
lubrication bearing flows. We have found that such exact solutions can
              
describe the viscous flow between two plates when one or both of the 
plates
              move normal to themselves. When this boundary motion is periodic, 
chaotic
              solutions can emerge at sufficiently high but order one Reynolds 
numbers.
              These flows are underlying flows whose stability to wavelike 
disturbances is
              highly complicated since the baseflow is chaotic to begin 
with. We consider
              such local flows when they are embedded into finite 
geometries. Direct
              Navier-Stokes computations will be performed in many 
geometries and high
              frequency limits analyzed asymptotically, in order to 
predict transitions to
              chaos.

This work studies mathematical problems in fluid dynamics leading to
              
scientific computations and analytical problems. The models arise from
              
applications concerned with enhancing technological processes such as
              
materials processing in microgravity, environmental and chemical 
processes,
              biomedical applications and lubrication technologies. We use a 
combination of
              mathematical and computational tools and intensive 
computations to elucidate
              and identify regimes and mechanisms that can 
enhance the efficiency of the
              applications mentioned above. For example, 
we identify, using simulations,
              situations where flow in squeeze bearings 
can stay laminar rather than become
              chaotic. Chaotic flows can cause the 
equipment to fail with disastrous
              effects on machinery. Modeling and 
simulations have the advantage, over
              experiments, of allowing wide 
parameter studies and hence help identify
              critical experiments and design 
strategies. The research is valuable in both
              benchmarking large scale 
simulations as well as providing direct comparisons
              with experiments.

