Title       : Dynamics At or Near Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0072898

Award Number: 0072898
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter F. Green green@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In thin polymer films, effects due to confinement and to interfacial
              interactions are responsible for different physical phenomena not generally
              encountered in bulk materials.  These effects include changes in the glass
              transition temperatures of polymers with decreasing film thickness and changes
              in the critical phase separation temperatures of A/B polymer blends with film
              thickness.  This proposal has two general goals.  In the first, an
              understanding of the nature of the interactions between polymers and surfaces
              and the manner in which these interactions affect properties such as local
              friction, viscosity and translational dynamics of chains is developed.  Long
              and short-range intermolecular forces can have a destabilizing effect on
              polymer thin films and these effects, together with enthalpic and entropic
              interactions, influence the stability of thin film polymer blends in ways that
              are not well understood.  The second part of this proposal examines these
              effects in homopolymer/homopolymer blends and in copolymer/homopolymer
              blends.

In the future, polymer thin films will play an increasingly
              important role in technologies that, historically, have not involved the use of
              "soft" materials.  Technologies include organic light emitting diodes, sensors,
              such as electronic noses, and whole cell adhesion sensors.  In each of these
              technologies, specific properties of the polymer are critical.  For example, in
              organic light emitting diodes the electronic and optical properties of the
              polymer are important whereas for the whole cell adhesion sensors the ability
              to "tune" adhesive properties of the polymer is critical.  The advantage of
              using polymer thin films over non-polymeric materials in some technologies is
              that polymers are cheap and easy to fabricate.  Moreover, it is potentially
              easier to "tailor" properties of polymers because of the wide range of
              molecules that can be synthesized.  A fundamental understanding of the
              properties of polymer thin films will be necessary for the overall success of
              the use of "soft" materials in many future technologies.

