Title       : Design and Analysis of Experiments for Screening, Optimization and Robustness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0072489

Award Number: 0072489
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. F. Jeff Wu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9147,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:

The goal of this proposal is to study three important aspects of
              experimentation: screening, optimization and robustness. Section I proposes a
              novel approach to factor screening and response surface exploration by using a
              single design and experiment to achieve both objectives. This differs from the
              standard response surface methodology, which employs separate designs for
              factor screening and for response surface exploration.  New concepts, theory
              and analysis are proposed, which include a two-stage analysis and a
              projection-efficiency criterion.  Four problems are to be studied: (i) a theory
              for eligible projections in regular designs, (ii) combinatorial and algorithmic
              construction of optimal nonregular designs, (iii) connection with the maximum
              estimation capacity criterion, (iv) sensitivity of response surface exploration
              to errors in factor screening and a Bayesian alternative to the two-stage
              analysis. Section II addresses a fundamental and practically important issue of
              optimal assignment of factors to columns of a design matrix. Existing work can
              only be applied to regular fractional factorial designs and nonregular designs
              with two-level factors. By defining a B-contamination criterion and employing
              the Kronecker calculus, we propose an approach that can handle very general
              designs.  Three problems are to be studied: (i) Finding expressions for the
              contamination terms, (ii) characterization in terms of complementary designs,
              (iii) extensions to blocked designs. Section III addresses the issue of optimal
              selection of experimental plans for robust parameter design.  When the
              experimental cost is proportional to the total run size, the cross array format
              can be quite costly and the single array format becomes an attractive option. 
              An important question is how to select single arrays optimally and according to
              what criteria? By using an effect ordering principle, we propose to define new
              criteria and use them to select optimal single arrays.    

Statistical
              design and analysis of experiments is an effective and commonly used tool in
              scientific and engineering investigation. It has made significant impact in
              many areas of research and development such as manufacturing, electronics,
              materials, agriculture and energy. It will continue to make important
              contributions by innovation in methodological and theoretical development and
              applications in new areas such as biotechnology, drug discovery, and
              information technology. Potential gains from using the proposed new methods
              include savings in experimental runs, experimentation time, and discovery of
              new/better engineering designs and products. The results on factor assignment
              will provide clear guidelines on the assignment of factors and a substantial
              improvement over the prevailing practice of making arbitrary and often
              suboptimal assignment.  Parameter design has become a major tool for variation
              reduction and product and process improvement. The proposed work will develop
              new and more economical and efficient techniques for conducting such
              experiments. 

 

