Title       : Confidence Regions for Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0072569

Award Number: 0072569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75510              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan P. Holmes susan@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9263,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research proposal uses geometry and statistics to build meaningful
              confidence regions for tree structured parameters.  Binary trees appear as
              parameters in: (1) Hierarchical clustering problems, for instance for
              micro-array data from contemporary genetics; (2) Methods that use decision
              trees such as the Classification and Regression trees (CART); (3) Estimation of
              phylogenetic trees built from DNA data for the taxonomy of species, but also
              for building `gene trees'.  The embedding of tree estimation in a statistical
              framework allows one to see trees as a special type of parameter to be
              estimated.  However the estimation procedures have been developed without the
              ability to construct confidence regions for these paramters or ways of
              comparing various estimators of these parameters.  Currently biologists
              validate the tree estimated by perturbing the data through a simple bootstrap
              of the DNA sequences and then summarizing the collection of trees obtained by
              associating p-values to the branches of a consensus tree.  This reduces the
              problem to a collection of binomial simulations, losing much of the
              multivariate information of which groups appear simultaneously.  This new
              constructive geometrical approach uses the tools available from topology and
              algebraic combinatorics.  Collaboration with a combinatorialist, Louis Billera,
              and a topologist, Karen Vogtmann, on a more mathematical understanding of tree
              space allows a more natural definition of distances between points in the `tree
              polytope'.  This topological study of tree space is crucial in the definition
              of a notion of neighborhood that then allows a definition of continuity of the
              estimation function.  The space of trees is a space with negative curvature. 
              It is also possible to define geodesics on this space and convex hulls.  The
              notion of confidence region can be defined, and it is possible to combine trees
              from built from different datasets or to combine trees obtained from different
              genes or even compare trees with other data (biogeographic, for
              instance).

Understanding the geometry of "tree space" helps understand how
              to combine and compare trees.  Whether they are hierarchical clustering trees
              built for micro-array DNA data or family trees built from DNA sequences, binary
              tree data are abundant in today's genome era.  The current proposal aims to
              consider trees as a whole, instead of breaking them down into just sibling
              relationships as is done currently.  This problem uses recent results from
              topology and the geometry of spaces with negative curvature, like the surface
              of a hyperboloid.  In these spaces notions of average and distance have to be
              redefined, the hardest being ways of representing what is not naturally
              representable in our usual euclidean space.  The challenges are both
              computational and geometric.

