Title       : Stochastic Processes in Ecology and Population Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0072262

Award Number: 0072262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia M. Neuhauser cneuhaus@cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072262
Neuhauser
	This research of Dr. Neuhauser covers three areas: (1)
              community ecology, (2) evolutionary ecology, and (3) population genetics.
              Mathematical tools will be developed to address questions of (i) the causes and
              effects of spatial structure on plant communities, in particular the question
              of how explicit space affects diversity and stability of plant communities;
              (ii) the evolution of resistance to insecticide and the spread of resistant
              alleles, in particular for a genetically engineered crop that expresses
              chemicals that are toxic to its insect pests; (iii) how mating structure
              affects spatial structuring in gynodioecious plants; and (iv) how temporal
              variability affects genealogies. The spatial processes will be modeled using
              the framework of interacting particle systems, which are continuous time Markov
              processes on the infinite D dimensional lattice, characterized by local
              interactions between sites. The genealogical processes will be investigated
              using the ancestral selection graph as a modeling framework.
	The motivation
              for the proposed research is to gain a better understanding of how spatial and
              temporal factors affect the outcome of interactions in plant communities. Most
              of ecological and agricultural modeling traditionally did not take into account
              effects of explicit space due to the difficulties encountered in the analysis
              of such models. More recently, tools have been developed that allow rigorous
              analysis of spatial models. This research of Dr. Neuhauser is intended to shed
              light on how space affects plant communities; this is important in
              understanding the structure of both natural and managed (agricultural)
              communities. Her results should help devise management strategies for
              maintaining biodiversity in natural communities and for slowing the spread of
              resistance genes in crop systems of genetically engineered crop.


