Title       : Mathematical Modeling of Materials Interfacial Motions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0072471

Award Number: 0072471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96963              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nung Kwan Yip   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Yip plans to investigate the motion of interfaces in solid materials 
from
              a mathematical point of view. He will concentrate on two topics.
The first one
              concerns the modeling of epitaxial thin film growths. 
These films can have
              important semi- or super-conducting properties. 
The goal of this work is to
              accurately describe the thin film 
evolutions at large length scales. The
              investigator plans to capture the 
surface diffusion and nucleation phenomena
              on the film surface at the 
continuum level. Both of these mechanisms can have
              profound effects on
the film growth and the resultant film properties. The
              starting point of the 
research is the Burton-Cabrera-Frank model for the
              behavior of atomic layers 
and its generalizations. The mathematical content
              of this work involves 
nonlinear partial differential equations and numerical
              simulations.
The second topic is to investigate the effects of noise on motion
              by
mean curvature in the case of non-uniqueness. Such type of motion is
a
              simplified model for surface evolutions in solidification processes. 
It is
              well known that the equations can possess more than one solution. 
The
              question arises which is the physically relevant one. This non-uniqueness
is a
              major obstacle to a better mathematical understanding of the interface
              
motion. In particular, if the solutions are not unique, it is not clear which
              limiting 
solution will be picked by approximation schemes. Dr. Yip plans to
              investigate 
the selection effects brought out by the presence of noise, that
              is small random 
perturbations. Such an approach has potential applications in
              many other 
types of nonlinear evolution problems.

The mathematical
              modeling of materials growth phenomena has long been
an active research area.
              New materials are being continuously searched
for and manufactured. A correct
              mathematical model can predict and 
control in positive ways the outcome of
              the production processes. 
This research has two goals. The first is to bridge
              in an 
accurate manner the microscopic and macroscopic descriptions in
              
epitaxial thin film growths. These films have great applications 
in
              electronic materials. The second is to investigate the effects of 
"noise"
              (that is, random perturbative effects) in the modeling of the motion 
in
              interfaces in materials, such as the interface between different components
              
in alloys. Even though such noise is known to be present in materials
              growths, 
its consequences still have not been understood completely. Both
              topics will 
involve mathematical analysis and physical intuition.

