Title       : Dynamical Effects in Mesoscale Electronic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0072777

Award Number: 0072777
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Marcus marcus@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research is an experimental study of dynamic mesoscopic transport phenomena
              in semiconductor microstructures and hybrid metals/superconductor systems.  The
              unifying theme is the interplay between three elements: quantum coherence,
              disorder or chaos, and dynamics in the form of a time-dependent potential.  The
              proposed experiments also have in common the theme of dc pumping of charge
              using cyclic oscillating potentials, extending recent work on adiabatic quantum
              pumping to include the role of decoherence, dissipation, and nonadiabatic time
              dependence.  Besides shape-deformable quantum dots, two novel pumping devices
              are proposed: a pump that operates in the fractional quantum Hall regime,
              allowing a pumping of fractionally charged quasiparticles, and a hybrid
              metal-superconductor that uses the ac Josephson effect to produce a cycling
              time evolution of boundary conditions.  This research will be carried out in a
              new laboratory at Harvard University.  The project will support a graduate
              student as well as materials and supplies needed for the experiments.  Other
              students on these projects will be supported by independent fellowships. The
              students will be trained in state-of-the-art nanoelectronics techniques and
              will be well prepared for careers in academe, industry or government.
              
%%%
Trends in microelectronics have two clear directions, smaller and
              faster. The study of quantum mechanical effects in electronic
              devices-particularly disorder or chaotic systems-is known as mesoscopic
              physics, where "meso" indicates intermediate in size between atoms (where
              quantum physics is well understood) and the realm of large, classical
              electronics, governed by Ohm's law and other familiar classical laws.
              Mesoscopic physics has seen rapid development in the last decade, predominantly
              as a result of advances in the fabrication of clean semiconductors devices. By
              comparison, little work has been done on the high-speed side, and most of what
              is known about quantum-coherent devices is restricted to dc.  The proposed
              experimental work aims to investigate quantum coherent electronic devices
              fabricated from semiconductors and hybrid metal/superconductor devices, at high
              frequencies, when effects of time evolution can lead to the destruction of
              quantum coherence effects, but can also lead to new effects such as the pumping
              of electrons due to cyclic, periodic changes in the effective shape of the
              device.  These results will impact our understanding and development of
              high-speed nanoelectronics.  The project will support one graduate student as
              well as provide materials and supplies for the project.  Other students working
              on these experiments will have outside funding from the NSF and other sources. 
              The students will be trained in state-of-the-art nanoelectronics techniques and
              will be well prepared for careers in academe, industry or government. 

