Title       : Finite Element Approximation of Problems in Solid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0072480

Award Number: 0072480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Falk falk@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Dear Jong-Shi:

I was very pleased to receive your email saying that you
              plan to recommend
funding of my NSF proposal as a 36 month standard award of
              $150,710.

As you requested, here is an abstract of the project.  Please let
              me know
if this is acceptable.

Regards,
Rick Falk

Abstract: Finite
              Element Approximation of Problems in Solid Mechanics

The finite element
              approximation of mathematical models of thin plates and
shells is studied. 
              For the Reissner-Mindlin plate model, there are many
proven "locking-free"
              methods (i.e., no accuracy loss for smaller thickness)
using triangular and
              rectangular elements. It is proposed to analyze
quadrilateral elements for
              this problem and study important but unresolved
issues about these elements in
              more general contexts.  In addition to the
shear locking which causes problems
              in the approximation of plate models,
shells also suffer from the problem of
              membrane locking.  The goal is to
improve on the shell elements so far
              proposed and provide a rigorous analysis
of convergence. Variational methods
              used previously for the derivation and
analysis of plate models will be
              extended to the derivation and analysis of
shell models.  Discontinuous
              Galerkin finite element methods are promising
candidates for a robust
              approximation method for both convection-dominated and
diffusion-dominated
              convection-diffusion problems.  Further analysis is
proposed to demonstrate
              their effectiveness more conclusively. Computational
and analytical techniques
              are proposed to understand the predictions of 2-D
mathematical models
              concerned with stress driven instability, expanding on
previous grant work
              done on a simpler 1-D model.

This proposal is concerned with the use of
              mathematical models to study
several problems in solid mechanics. The use of
              mathematical models offers a
cost-effective way to make quantitative
              predictions about how mechanical
systems will change when external forces are
              applied and serves as an
alternative to the use of costly or difficult
              experiments.  Typically, when
realistic mathematical models are formulated,
              they are in terms of equations
whose solutions, which represent physical
              quantities of interest to engineers
and scientists, are not able to be
              determined analytically, i.e., in a simple
form one can easily write down. 
              However, by employing numerical methods, good
approximations to the physical
              quantities which are described by the
mathematical models may still be found.
              Typically, high performance computing
is needed to do the large number of
              calculations involved.  This project is
concerned with the design and analysis
              of numerical approximation schemes for
a number of important mathematical
              models used in mechanics.  These include
models of elastic plates and shells
              (used for example to design the roof of a
building to avoid collapse) and
              models of nano-scale solid crystals (which
can be used to study instabilities
              in certain materials).



