Title       : Moment maps and J-holomorphic curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a0072267

Award Number: 0072267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82587              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kai Cieliebak kai@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0072267
Kai Cieliebak

The focus of this project is the investigation of
              a new system 
of nonlinear partial differential equations. These equations
              
arise naturally in the study of J-holomorphic curves in 
symplectic
              manifolds with a Hamiltonian group action. Instances 
of these equations
              include the vortex equations, the 
anti-self-dual Yang-Mills equations, and
              the Seiberg-Witten 
equations. Solutions of the equations give rise to
              invariants 
of Hamiltonian group actions. These invariants are related via
              
an adiabatic limit to the Gromov-Witten invariants of the 
symplectic
              quotient by the group action.  This project pursues 
the following goals: (1)
              achieving a deeper understanding of 
known connections between invariants; (2)
              establishing new correspondences between invariants; (3) using the
              correspondences between invariants to compute invariants. Invariants that can
              be addressed in this way include: Donaldson invariants and
Seiberg-Witten
              invariants of certain smooth 4-manifolds; 
instanton Floer homology and
              Seiberg-Witten Floer homology 
of certain smooth 3-manifolds; Gromov-Witten
              invariants, 
quantum cohomology and Floer homology of symplectic manifolds.  
              

A symplectic manifold is a generalisation of the phase space
in classical
              mechanics. Geometric properties of this space 
influence the behavior of
              mechanical systems. For example, 
compactness of the space forces mechanical
              systems to admit 
periodic motions. This project focuses on geometric
              properties 
of symplectic manifolds with symmetries. Symmetries of a
              
mechanical system lead to conserved quantities represented 
by a moment map.
              Classical examples of moment maps are linear 
and angular momentum. This
              project lies in the intersection 
between two large branches of symplectic
              geometry: the study of J-holomorphic curves, and the study of Hamiltonian group
              
actions. These branches have traditionally had little overlap.
Moreover, the
              project touches several areas adjacent to 
symplectic geometry: Hamiltonian
              dynamics, quantum field
theory, low-dimensional topology, and algebraic
              geometry.



