Title       : University-Industry Cooperative Research in the Dynamics of High-Speed
               Machining: Senior Research Fellowship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0072908

Award Number: 0072908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72201              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily F. Stone stone@math.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project supports the PI's sabbatical year at The Boeing Company.  The
              research involves investigations of the chatter instability in high-speed
              machining.  Chatter is a self-excited oscillation between the machining tool
              and the workpiece that limits productivity of machining operations, reduces the
              quality of the product and shortens machine tool life.  Up until recently all
              models of chatter have been linear, with delay effects in the case of
              regenerative chatter.  These models only partially explain the instabilities
              observed in the machining process.  Nonlinear models are currently being
              developed, and have had some success in predicting behavior that may be
              described in part by low dimensional systems.  In the aircraft industry this
              problem has received intense scrutiny, and the work of the P.I.'s collaborator
              at Boeing (Dr. E. Askari) has been in the development of finite element models
              for metal cutting. A union of two techniques, large scale numerical simulation
              and low dimensional models, is the goal of the research.

This project should
              be viewed as part of the department's efforts to build an industrial math
              program, and support its newly created Master of Science in Industrial
              Mathematics.  The lynch pin of the new degree is an industry project and summer
              internship, where students are brought into existing industry/faculty
              collaborations.  The development of such collaborations will be enhanced by the
              PI's involvement with the scientists at The Boeing Company.

This project is
              jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and
              the Division of Mathematical Sciences.
