Title       : Topics in Projective and Hyperbolic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0072607

Award Number: 0072607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Schwartz res@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS-0072607
PI: Richard Schwartz

Abstract:  Schwartz proposes to
              continue his research in the following general areas: Complex Hyperbolic
              Geometry, Dynamics in Projective Geometry, and Computer-Aided
              Mathematics.

The first topic can be described informally as follows. 
              Suppose one suspends a finite number of mirrors in space, and places an object
              in the vicinity of the mirrors.  Looking at the object through the mirrors, one
              might see an infinite, regular pattern, like trees in an orange grove.  On the
              other hand, one might see a confused and chaotic pattern, full of partial and
              overlapping images.  The first case corresponds roughly to what s called a
              discrete group and the second corresponds roughly to what is called an
              indiscrete group.  The basic question one would like to study is: which
              positions of the mirrors lead to the discrete alternative?  In the case of
              Schwartz's research, the space in which the mirrors are suspended is a curved
              4-dimensionaluniverse called complex hyperbolic space.  This space is an exotic
              cousin of the famous non-Euclidean spaces constructed by Gauss and Lobachevsky
              more than a hundred years ago.

The second topic involves simple
              constructions in straight-line geometry.   The classical theorems in projective
              geometry, such as Pappus's theorem and Desargues theorem, can sometimes be
              applied over and over again, rather than just once.  The result is a kind of
              dynamical system, involving an infinite family of points and lines.  The
              mathematics behind the dynamical system usually transcends the mathematics
              behind the original result.  For instance, one example studied by Schwartz
              leads to connections with integrable partial differential equations, 
              determinental identities,  and alternating sign matrices.  Schwartz proposes to
              continue investigating these dynamical systems.

The third topic involves
              computer aided mathematics.   One frequently encounters a situation where the
              computer says that a certain result is true, but a proof is nowhere insight. 
              Schwartz plans to investigate several situations where it might be possible to
              use the output of the computer directly as the basis of a proof that the result
              is true.  In other words, the computation itself becomes the justification of
              the result.  More concretely, Schwartz would like to try to deduce the entire
              orbit structure of certain kinds of dynamical systems based on a finite amount
              of information on the orbit.  Obviously such a goal would only work in special
              situations. 

