Title       : Synthesis, Structure and Dynamics of Block Copolymer Based Organic Inorganic
               Hybrid Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0072009

Award Number: 0072009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ulrich B. Wiesner ubw1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this research the synthesis, structure, structur-formation and dynamic
              mechanical behavior of block-copolymer-based, nano-structured organic-inorganic
              hybrid materials from organically modified ceramic (ORMOCER) precursors will be
              studied. To this end first a whole range of poly(isoprene-block ethyleneoxide)
              (PI-b-PEO) diblock copolymers with varying PEO volume fraction and narrow
              molecular weight distribution will be synthesized by anionic polymerization.
              These will be used as structure directing agents in the sol-gel process of a
              mixture of two metal alkoxides, added to the block copolymers in different
              amounts. In this way the full phase space for the mixture of PI-b-PEO diblock
              copolymers of various compositions with the inorganic materials will be
              explored. Special emphasis will be put on the synthesis of organic-inorganic
              hybrid materials with the bicontinuous gyroid morphology, a particularly
              interesting structure in block copolymers. The resulting structures will be
              analysed by small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and transmission electron
              microscopy (TEM) measurements. Results of this part will lead to a phase
              diagram comparable to that of diblock copolymer/homopolymer mixtures. Analysis
              of details of the phase diagram will be facilitated by the possibility to look
              at frozen-in, local transition domains in biphasic regions of the phase diagram
              simply by dissolution of block copolymer rich bulk samples. Furthermore, the
              large variability in the polymer as well as the sol-gel chemistry will be
              explored to synthesize hybrid materials with unknown property profiles. For
              particular compositions of the mixtures of organic and inorganic precursors the
              structure formation process during evaporation of the solvent under heating
              will be investigated using in-situ SAXS. By correlating these results with
              solid-state NMR measurements on silicon and aluminum, insights into the
              interplay between sol-gel chemistry and phase separation as well as into the
              pathways towards the final morphologies will be obtained. Finally, the present
              study will allow for a systematic investigation of the dynamic mechanical
              behavior of the resulting organic-inorganic hybrid materials. 

These
              materials can be looked at as model systems for the understanding of the
              mechanical behavior of commercially important polymer-clay nanocomposites. It
              is expected that this program will lead to advances in the fundamental
              understanding of the mechanisms of formation and behavior of structured block
              copolymer-silica hybrid materials. At the same time it will provide student
              training and learning at the interface between polymer science and inorganic
              chemistry.

