Title       : Asymptotic Expansions, Inverse Problems and Homogenization of Boundary Values
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a0072511

Award Number: 0072511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62542              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shari L. Moskow moskow@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072511
Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotic Expansions,
              Inverse Problems, and Homogenization of Boundary
              Conditions

Abstract

0072511   Moskow



We will use the technique of
              asymptotic expansions to solve two types of problems. The first is the accurate
              detection of the location and shapes of small inhomogeneities from boundary
              measurements. Asymptotic expansions of the solution with respect to the size of
              the inhomogeneity will be developed where they are not yet known. A new
              procedure will be introduced which uses these expansions to find information
              about the holes. The procedure will be tested for different types of equations
              and shapes of inhomogeneities. The second problem involves the homogenization
              of boundary values for equations where the medium has an underlying periodic
              structure. Asymptotic analysis will aid in finding the limiting or effective
              equations. This analysis requires examining boundary layer functions which are
              solutions on a half space with periodic or almost periodic boundary conditions.
              

Many equations that arise from material science and electromagnetics
              involve some small parameter. This parameter could represent, for example, the
              diameter of a small imperfection inside an airplane wing. We will analyze
              mathematically the effects of such imperfections on electric potentials. From
              this analysis we will develop and test numerically a new method to find the
              sizes and locations of imperfections.  In practice, this method would require
              inducing electrical currents and measuring the resulting electric potential
              only on the exterior of the object.  We will also analyze the macroscopic
              behavior of two materials mixed together at the microscopic level. The small
              parameter in this case represents the size of the microscopic scale.  We will
              use our analysis to model more accurately the propagation of waves through
              mixed media, for use in oil exploration and materials science.

