Title       : Quenched Tails and Almost Sure Limit Laws
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0072331

Award Number: 0072331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amir Dembo amir@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0072331
Dembo

	This research is in the area of large deviations and its
              applications.  In particular, the PI will study situations where the rare
              behavior conditioned on a fixed (= quenched) realization of one element of
              randomness is the key to determine and understand the typical phenomena.  One
              unifying theme is that the evaluation of probabilities of rare events leads to
              an understanding of the mechanisms by which they can occur, and when many
              different rare events are possible, it leads to the identification of the
              mechanism causing one of them to actually occur.  Two specific lines of
              research are planned: (i) Mathematical study and understanding of "aging"
              phenomenon in the large time behavior of dynamical systems for statistical
              physics models out of equilibrium; and (ii) Study of exceptional points on the
              sample path of stochastic processes such as Brownian motion, random walks and
              stable processes.  Emphasis is put on points defined by means of the
              corresponding occupation measures of sets of shrinking diameters.  Other
              directions of proposed research involving these ingredients are applicable
              among other things to universal lossy coding, a problem of relevance and much
              interest for communication theory and to biomolecular data analysis.

	The
              theory of large deviations is mainly concerned with rare events or tail
              estimates on an exponential scale.  This theory has proven to be successful as
              a tool for deriving almost sure asymptotic limits when two levels of randomness
              are present.  Of particular interest are problems in which large deviations
              estimates and ideas play a decisive role in determining a limit law that holds
              with probability one.

