Title       : Stochastic Models in Population Genetics and Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0072198

Award Number: 0072198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165608             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Joyce joyce@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Krone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              These research projects fall within the areas of mathematical population
              genetics and interacting particle systems. The unifying thrust is the study of
              mathematical models of biological systems at the population level. The
              interplay between various genetic influences such as mutation, selection, and
              population structure can sometimes confound one's ability to draw valid
              inference. The first goal is to develop methods of estimation and inference for
              complex molecular genetic data arising from populations with various kinds of
              structure. The investigators explore sampling distributions and likelihood
              methods in the presence of these confounding effects. The second goal involves
              the study of genealogical processes (i.e., coalescent theory) for populations
              which are subject to various selective forces, geographical segregation, or
              other hierarchical structuring. Both sampling theory and coalescent methods
              provide a framework for computational methods such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo
              and Importance Sampling. The third goal is to study spatial interactions which
              arise in ecology and epidemiology using interacting particle systems. The
              problems addressed include several new nonlinear voter models with a
              cluster-breaking feature and new work on the two-stage contact process, with
              applications to metapopulation models.
	Previous models of the ecology and
              genetics of natural populations have been based on many simplifying
              assumptions. It is now important to produce more realistic models to address
              ecological and evolutionary problems that impact society. In addition to the
              inherent randomness in real biological systems, spatial structure is often of
              critical importance. Examples of these problems include the evolution and
              spread of infectious diseases, invasions of exotic species, and survival of
              species in fragmented habitats. Furthermore, the technical revolution in gene
              sequencing is producing huge data sets that can only be deciphered in a
              sophisticated mathematical framework. The new field of bioinformatics relies
              heavily on an evolutionary perspective. This interdisciplinary work is part of
              an ongoing effort to develop and employ new mathematical methods for the
              purpose of addressing these complex biological problems at the population
              level. 

