Title       : Surface Structure-property Relationships for Ceramics with Unusually High
               Photochemical Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0072151

Award Number: 0072151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory S. Rohrer gr20@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0072151
Rohrer

When illuminated with ultraviolet light, some ceramic oxides
              can dissociate water to form hydrogen and oxygen.  In principle, it is
              therefore possible to directly convert solar energy to a clean burning,
              replenishable fuel.  This goal has not been realized because the efficiency
              with which the best photocatalytic materials convert light and water to
              hydrogen and oxygen is too low for practical, large-scale energy conversion. 
              Therefore, the central challenge for a materials researcher in this area is to
              identify compounds that will catalyze the dissociation of water more
              efficiently.  The search has been hindered by the absence of a surface
              structure-property relationship that could be used to identify potentially
              useful compounds.  However, in June of 1999, a publication from a group in
              Korea demonstrated that certain ternary niobates and titanates
              photocatalytically dissociate water with an efficiency that is one to two
              orders of magnitude greater than conventional materials.  These observations
              provide us with a unique opportunity to develop a surface structure-property
              relationship that can be used in the search of oxides with higher photochemical
              activities.  All of the materials with high photochemical activity (including
              Sr2 Nb2 O7 and La2 Ti2 O7 promoted with Ni) can be visualized as being built
              from layers of the perovskite structure sliced along (110) planes.  Based on
              this observation, it is hypothesized that there are specific structural
              components, common to these phases, that are mechanistically linked to the high
              photochemical activity.  Furthermore, the presence of these components on
              certain surface planes will lead to anisotropic reactivity.  It is the
              objective of this research project to test this hypothesis.  The orientation
              dependence of the photochemical reactivity of Sr2 Nb2 O7, La2 Ti2 O7, and Ba
              Ti4 O9 will be measured to determine the most reactive surfaces.  The location
              of the Ni promoter will also be determined by direct microscopic inspection
              using transmission electron and atomic force microscopy.  To confirm that the
              structure-property relationship resulting from these characterization
              experiments applies to particulate materials in the environment of interest, H2
              and O2 evolution rates will be measured from Sr2 Nb2 O7 particles with
              different habits and aspect ratios.  These samples will expose different
              fractional areas of specific facets.  If the hypothesis is correct, these
              experiments will make it possible to identify the surfaces and structural
              components responsible for the high photochemical activity.  With knowledge of
              the functional structural components, it will be possible to select candidate
              materials that can be tested for high photochemical activity.  Further, based
              on knowledge of the most reactive surface planes, photochemically active
              ceramics can be textured to have high reactivity microstructures.  As part of
              the proposed project, a new undergraduate lab unit will be developed for a
              course on defects in materials. The lab's goal will be to estimate relative
              surface energies from measurements of surface facet orientation and geometry
              using atomic force microscopy and back scattered electron diffraction patterns.
              

When illuminated with ultraviolet light, some ceramic oxides can dissociate
              water to form hydrogen and oxygen.  In principle, it is therefore possible to
              directly convert solar energy to a clean burning, replenishable fuel.  This
              goal has not been realized because the efficiency with which the best
              photocatalytic materials convert light and water to hydrogen and oxygen is too
              low for practical, large-scale energy conversion.  If the project is
              successful, it will provide the information necessary to design and produce
              materials that will enable the commercial production of a clean burning fuel,
              thus having an immense impact on society and the environment.

