Title       : Stochastic Analysis on Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0072387

Award Number: 0072387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48023              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xue-Mei Li xmli@math.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The proposed research falls into the following broad areas of stochastic
              analysis: stochastic dynamical systems on manifold, the geometry of stochastic
              flows and Hormander type second order differential operators, analysis on path
              spaces, and the interplay between the dynamical behavior of stochastic
              dynamical systems and the geometry and topology of the underlying spaces. The
              investigator shall concentrate on (1) L^2 theory for differential forms on path
              and loop spaces; (2) linear connections associated to Hormander type second
              order elliptic operators; (3) stochastic flows and in particular stochastic
              differential equations associated to Hamiltonian systems. The study of lattice
              models with spin variable in a manifold is also included, as is the study of
              bounded and L^2 harmonic forms on finite dimensional manifolds. The
              investigator will study these problems using techniques from stochastic
              differential equations. This work would lead to a better understanding of
              random perturbation of dynamical systems and geometric analysis of infinite
              dimensional spaces.
	The proposed project concentrates in the areas of
              stochastic dynamical systems and analysis on path spaces. Path spaces are the
              spaces of trajectories of particles or other physical objects. Methods from
              stochastic analysis, especially the techniques arising from the study of
              stochastic differential equations, shall be employed. Stochastic differential
              equations are themselves very important objects to study as they arise
              naturally from physics, engineering, biology, and finance, to model the
              influence of white noise. The study of such equations on a variety of geometric
              objects such as spheres in connection with the curvature of such spaces arises
              naturally from the mathematics and also in applications, for example in the
              computation of recovering data by filtering out the white noise in the
              transmission.
