Title       : Polyamorphism and Structural Transitions during Glass Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a0072258

Award Number: 0072258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334998             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Kieffer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay D. Bass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0072258
Kieffer
There is increasing evidence that the glassy and liquid states
              are structurally and thermodynamically distinct, although both amorphous.  This
              implies that the glass transition is a "polyamorphic" transformation. 
              Furthermore, a tendency of the substance to undergo structural transitions in
              the glassy state could affect materials properties such as non-linear optical
              responses and mechanical behaviors.  This project comprises the investigation
              of the structural evolution in glass-forming materials as a function of
              pressure and temperature.  The extent to which structural relaxation during
              glass formation involves polyamorphic structural transitions, as opposed to a
              viscous slowing within an invariant structure, will be determined.  Structural
              characterization in supercooled melts will be accomplished using a combination
              of Brillouin and Raman light scattering and molecular dynamics simulations,
              which will allow one to identify the mechanical response of the structure and
              the nature of structural building blocks.  Brillouin light scattering will be
              used to determine the high-frequency complex mechanical modulus of
              glass-forming melts at the molecular scale.  The real component, or storage
              modulus, provides information on the structural integrity and network
              connectivity, while the imaginary component corresponds to the energy
              dissipated in aperiodic motions of small structural constituents (e.g., atomic
              hopping).  Simultaneous Raman scattering will allow one to establish a direct
              correlation between this visco-elastic behavior and the symmetries and
              abundance of molecular building blocks.  Molecular dynamic simulations will be
              used to reconcile the experimentally determined Raman spectra and visco-elastic
              properties with a detailed geometric description of the molecular structure. 
              The manifestation of polyamorphism will be revealed by examining a series of
              glass-forming systems, chosen to systematically sample a wide range of
              glass-forming attributes, such as the valences, bonding types of the network
              elements, and melt fragility.  Systems will include germanates, phosphates,
              tellurites, and chalcogenides. The relationship between the nature of the
              network former and the mechanisms of transitions between different
              non-crystalline polymorphs will be established by studying the effects of
              simultaneous pressure and temperature on the transition processes using heated
              diamond anvil cells.

The objective of this project is to clarify the concept
              and manifestations of polyamorphism. With this clarification, our understanding
              of important issues in glass science will be advanced, since a tendency of a
              material to undergo structural transitions in the glassy state could affect its
              properties, such as non-linear optical responses and mechanical behaviors,
              which are important for high tech applications. Expanding the range of
              applicability of glasses will enable new technologies, including photonics,
              optical telecommunication and computing, drug and radiation delivery,
              bio-medical implants, sensors, energy storage and generation, nuclear waste
              containment, and light-weight metallic alloys. 

